PLAINWELL, MICHIGAN
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-12 Supplement contains:
Local legislation passed through Ordinance 401, adopted July 14, 2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
CHARTER
PREAMBLE
We, the people of the City of Plainwell, County of Allegan, State of Michigan,
pursuant to the authority granted by the constitution and the statutes of the
State of Michigan, In order to secure the benefits of self-government, and to
provide for the public peace and health and for the safety of persons and
property, do hereby ordain and establish this Charter of the City of Plainwell,
Michigan.
CHAPTER I — NAME AND BOUNDARIES
Section 1.1 NAME:
   (a)   The municipal corporation now existing and known as the City of
Plainwell shall continue as a body corporate and shall include the territory
constituting the city of Plainwell on the effective date of this charter,
together with all territories that may be added in a manner prescribed by law.
   (b)   The clerk shall maintain and keep available in his office for public
inspection the official description and map of the current boundaries of the
city.
Section 1.2 - WARD:
The city shall consist of one ward.
CHAPTER II — POWERS
Section 2.1 - GENERAL MUNICIPAL POWERS GENERAL POWERS:
The City of Plainwell and its officers shall be vested with any and all powers
and immunities, expressed and implied, which cities and their officers are, or
hereafter may be permitted to exercise or to provide for in their charters
under the constitution and laws of the state of Michigan, including all the
powers and immunities which are granted to cities and officers of cities as
fully and completely as though those powers and immunities were specifically
enumerated in and provided for in this charter. In no case shall any
enumeration of particular powers or immunities in this charter be held to be
exclusive.
Section 2.2 - INTERGOVERNMENTAL COOPERATION:
The city may join with any municipal corporation or with any other unit or
agency of government, whether local, state or federal, or with any number or
combination thereof, by contract or otherwise, as may be permitted by law, in
the ownership, operation, or performance, jointly or by one or more on behalf
of all of any property, facility or service which each would have the power to
own, operate, or perform separately.
Section 2.3 - EXERCISE OF POWERS:
Where no procedure is set forth in this charter for the exercise of any power
granted to or possessed by the city and its officers, resort may be had to any
procedure set forth in any statute of the state of Michigan which was passed
for the government of cities, or in any other statute of the state of Michigan.
If alternate procedures are to be found in different statutes, then the council
shall select that procedure which it deems to be most expeditious and to the
best advantage of the city and its inhabitants. Where no procedure for the
exercise of any power of the city is set forth, either in this charter or in
any statute of the state of Michigan, the council shall prescribe by ordinance
a reasonable procedure for the exercise thereof.
CHAPTER III — ELECTIONS
Section 3.1 - QUALIFICATION OF ELECTORS:
The residents of the city having the qualifications of electors in the state of
Michigan shall be eligible to vote in the City.
Section 3.2 - ELECTION PROCEDURE:
The general election laws shall apply to and control all procedures relating to
city elections, including qualification of electors, establishment of
precincts, verification of petitions, registration of voters, and voting hours.
The clerk shall give public notice of general elections in the state.
Section 3.3 - PRECINCTS:
The election precincts of the city shall remain as they existed on the
effective date of this charter unless altered by the city election commission
in accordance with statutes.
Section 3.4 - ELECTION COMMISSION:
An election commission is hereby created, consisting of the clerk, assessor,
and one other appointive city officer whom the council shall designate, and
such person shall serve at the pleasure of the council. The clerk shall be
chairman. The commission shall have charge of all activities and duties
required of it by state law and this charter relating to the conduct of
elections in the city. The compensation of election personnel shall be
determined in advance by the council.
Section 3.5 - REGULAR ELECTIONS:
A regular city election shall be held on the first Tuesday following the first
Monday of November in each even-numbered year.
Section 3.6 - SPECIAL ELECTIONS:
Special city elections shall be held when called by resolution of the council
at least sixty (60) days in advance of such election, or when required by law.
Any resolution calling a special city election shall set forth the purpose of
such election.
Section 3.7 - ELECTIVE OFFICERS AND TERMS OF OFFICE:
For elections, reference Section
4.11 of this charter. The term of office of the council members shall commence
at the second regularly scheduled city council meeting following the election.
Section 3.8 NOMINATIONS PROCEDURE:
   (a)   The candidates for elective office shall be nominated from the city at
large by petitions, blanks for which shall be furnished by the city clerk. Each
such petition shall be signed by not less than thirty (30) nor more than sixty
(60) registered electors of the city, and shall be filed at the clerk’s office
before four o’clock P.M. local time, on the Tuesday following the first Monday
in August in each even-numbered year.
   (b)   Each elector signing shall add his residential street and number and
the date of signature. No electors shall sign petitions for more candidates for
any office than the number to be elected to such office, and should he do so,
the signatures bearing the most recent date shall be invalidated, and if he
should sign more than one on the same date neither shall be validated. No
petition shall be left for signatures in any public place unless accompanied by
the circulator of the petition. When a petition is filed by persons other than
the person whose name appears thereon as a candidate, it may be accepted only
when accompanied by the written consent of the candidate.
Section 3.9 APPROVAL OF PETITIONS:
   (a)   The clerk shall accept only nomination petitions which conform
substantially with the forms required by statute and which contain the required
number of valid signatures for candidates having those qualifications required
for the respective elective city offices as set forth in this charter. The
clerk shall forthwith, after the filing of the petitions notify in writing any
candidates whose petition is then known not to meet the requirements of this
section, but the failure to so notify any candidate shall in no way prevent a
final determination that the petition does not meet such requirements.
   (b)   Withdrawal of a candidate’s name from consideration on the ballot must
be made in writing and in conformance with the time allowed by statute.
Section 3.10 - FORM OF BALLOT:
The ballots for all elections under this charter shall conform to the printing
and numbering of ballots as required by statute, except that no party
designation or emblem shall appear on any city ballot.
Section 3.11 - CANVASS OF VOTES:
The board of canvassers designated by statute as being permitted to cities for
canvass of votes on candidates and issues shall canvass the votes of all city
elections in accordance with statute.
Section 3.12 - TIE VOTE:
If in any city election there shall be no choice between candidates by reason
of two (2) or more candidates having received an equal number of votes, then
the determination of the election of such candidate by lot will be as provided
by statute.
Section 3.13 - RECOUNT:
A recount of the votes cast at any city election for any office, or upon any
proposition, may be had in accordance with the general election laws of the
state.
Section 3.14 - RECALL:
Any elective official may be removed from office by the electors of the city in
the manner provided by the general laws of the state. A vacancy created by the
recall of any elective official shall be filled in the manner prescribed by
state law.
CHAPTER IV — THE ELECTIVE OFFICERS OF THE CITY
THE CITY COUNCIL
Section 4.1 - ELECTIVE OFFICERS:
The legislative power of the city, except as reserved by this charter, shall be
vested in a council consisting of five (5) council members elected at large on
a non-partisan basis. The council shall have power and authority to adopt such
ordinances and resolutions as it shall deem proper in the exercise of its
powers.
Section 4.2 - QUALIFICATIONS:
Each elective city official must be a duly registered elector in the city, and
shall have been a resident of the city for four (4) months immediately prior to
the election at which he is a candidate for office.
Section 4.3 - NOTICE OF ELECTION:
Notice of the election of any officer of the city shall be given by the clerk,
in writing, within seven (7) days after the canvass of the vote in which he was
elected. If within ten (10) days from the date of notice such officer shall not
take, subscribe, and file with the clerk his oath of office, such neglect shall
be deemed a refusal to serve and the office shall thereupon be deemed vacant,
unless the council shall, for good cause, extend the time in which such officer
may qualify as above set forth.
Section 4.4 - OATH OF OFFICE:
Each elective or appointive officer of the city, before entering upon the
duties of this office and within the time specified in this charter, shall take
and subscribe to the oath of office prescribed by the state constitution, which
shall be filed and kept in the office of the clerk.
Section 4.5 - SURETY BONDS:
Any city officer may be required to give a bond, to be approved by the council,
for the faithful performance of the duties of his office in such sum as the
council shall determine. All officers receiving or disbursing city funds shall
be bonded. All official bonds shall be corporate surety bonds and the premiums
thereon shall be paid by the city. All official bonds shall be filed with the
clerk, except that of the clerk, which shall be filed with the treasurer.
Section 4.6 - VACANCY DEFINED:
In addition to other provisions of this charter, a vacancy shall be deemed to
exist in any elective office on the day when the officer dies, files his
resignation with the city clerk, is removed from office, moves from the city,
is convicted of a felony, or of misconduct in office under this charter, is
judicially declared to be mentally incompetent, or, in the case of the mayor
and council members, is absent from three (3) consecutive regular meetings of
the council, unless excused by the council for cause to be stated in the record
of council proceedings.
Section 4.7 - VACANCIES:
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any vacancy occurring in any
elective office shall be filled within thirty (30) days after such vacancy
shall have occurred by the concurring vote of at least three (3) members of the
council. The person appointed by the council shall serve for the remainder of
the unexpired term. If the council fails to do so within the thirty (30) days
following the occurrence of the vacancy, the election commission shall call a
special election to fill the vacancy, to be held not sooner than ninety (90)
days and not later than one hundred twenty (120) days following the occurrence
of the vacancy and to be otherwise governed by the election provisions of the
charter and state statutes.
Section 4.8 RESTRICTIONS CONCERNING OFFICERS:
   (a)   Except where authorized by law, no council member shall hold any other
city office or city employment during the term for which he was elected to the
council, and no former council member shall hold any compensated appointive
city office or city employment until one (1) year after the expiration of the
term for which he was elected to the council. This shall not apply to appointed
city boards or commissions.
   (b)   No member of the council shall in any manner dictate the appointment
or removal of any city or administrative officer or employee whom the
administrator or any of his subordinates are empowered to appoint. The member
may express his views, and fully and freely discuss with the administrator
anything pertaining to the appointment and removal of such officers or
employees.
   (c)   Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations, the council or
its members shall deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the
direction and supervision of the administrator solely through the
administrator, and neither the council nor its members shall give orders to any
such officer or employee, either publicly or privately.
Section 4.9 SALARIES OF MEMBERS OF THE COUNCIL:
   (a)   Each member of the council shall receive, as remuneration for service
to the city, the sum of ten dollars ($10) per regular or special city council
meeting payable quarterly. No member shall be compensated for more than six
hundred dollars ($600) per annum and then only for actual attendance at
meetings. The Mayor shall receive an additional stipend of one hundred dollars
($100) payable annually.
   (b)   Provisions of this section shall be subject to the review of a
compensation commission, to be established by ordinance in accordance with
statute. Said ordinance shall be adopted within six (6) months of the adoption
of this charter.
Section 4.10 - JUDGE QUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS:
The council shall be the judge of the election and qualifications of its
members and of the grounds of forfeiture of their office, and for that purpose,
shall have power to subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, and require
production of evidence. A member charged with conduct constituting grounds for
forfeiture of his office shall be entitled to a public hearing on demand, and
notice of such hearing shall be published in one or more newspapers for general
circulation in the city at least one (1) week in advance of the hearing.
Decisions made by the council under this section shall be subject to review by
the courts.
Section 4.11 - ORGANIZATION OF THE COUNCIL:
For the Election of November, 2006, two (2) City Council seats shall be filled
for terms of two (2) years each and three (3) City Council seats shall be
filled for terms of four (4) years each. Each subsequent elected term shall be
for a period of four (4) years.
At the first City Council meeting following the election of November, 2006, the
Council shall select a Mayor from the Council’s members. The Mayor’s term of
office shall be for two (2) years. A ballot shall be conducted at which Council
Members shall vote publicly. Any person receiving three (3) or more votes shall
be elected Mayor. If no person receives at least three (3) votes, then the
person receiving the highest number of votes shall be elected Mayor. If two (2)
or more persons receive the same number of votes, then the City Council shall
engage in debate on the subject in open session and shall vote again.
The Mayor shall be elected in the same manner identified above. If two (2) or
more persons receive the same number of votes again, then the same procedure
will be followed until a Mayor is elected or successive ballots result in
identical results. At that point, the Mayor shall be elected by lot as provided
by statute.
Following the election of a Mayor, the same procedure shall be followed for the
election of a Mayor pro-tem.
Editor’s note:
   This section was added to the charter by an amendment passed 9-13-2004 and
replaces all prior language.
Section 4.12 - MAYOR:
The mayor shall be the executive officer of the city. He shall preside at all
its meetings and shall speak and vote in such meetings as any other member of
the council. He shall be the official head of the city for ceremonial purposes
and for the purpose of military law and in the service of legal process upon
the city.
Section 4.13 - REGULAR MEETINGS OF THE CITY COUNCIL:
The council shall by resolution provide for the time and place of its regular
meetings and shall hold at least two (2) such meetings each month.
Section 4.14 - SPECIAL MEETINGS OF THE CITY COUNCIL:
Special meetings of the council may be called by the clerk on the written
request of the mayor, city administrator or any two (2) members of the council
on eighteen (18) hours notice to each member of the council designating the
purpose of such meeting, and served personally or left at his usual place of
residence by the clerk or someone designated by him. Notice of such meetings
including time, date, place and topic shall be posted in accordance with
statute.
Section 4.16 - BUSINESS AT SPECIAL MEETINGS:
All regular and special meetings of the council shall be open to the public.
The rules of order of the council shall provide that the citizens shall have
reasonable opportunity to be heard at any such meeting on matters within the
jurisdiction of the council.
Section 4.17 - QUORUM:
Three (3) members of the council shall be a quorum for the transaction of
business, but in the absence of a quorum, two (2) or more members may adjourn
any regular or special meeting to a later date.
Section 4.18 - RULES OF ORDER:
The council shall determine its own rules and order of business and keep the
written or printed journal of all its proceedings in the English language,
which shall be signed by the clerk. The vote upon the passage of all ordinances
and upon the adoption of all resolutions shall be taken by “yes” and “no” votes
and entered upon the record, except that where the vote is unanimous it shall
only be necessary to so state in such record. Each member of the council who
shall be recorded as present at any meeting, shall be required to vote on all
questions decided by the council at such meeting unless excused by three (3) of
the members present of any case where the matter personally affects the member
not voting. The member not excused can be considered in violation of this
charter when so determined by the council.
Section 4.19 - VOTE REQUIRED:
Except as otherwise provided in this charter, no ordinance or resolution shall
be adopted or passes except by affirmative vote of at least three (3) members
of the council.
Section 4.20 RESTRICTIONS OF THE POWERS OF THE COUNCIL:
   (a)   The council shall make no contract with any person who is in default
to the city.
   (b)   There shall be no standing committees of the council.
Section 4.21 DISCIPLINE:
   (a)   The council may by a vote of not less than three (3) of its members
demand the attendance of its members at its regular meeting and enforce orderly
conduct therein. Any member of the council who refuses to attend such meetings
and to conduct himself in an orderly manner thereat shall be deemed guilty of
misconduct in office. The council may require attendance of any elected or
appointed officer of the city for the purpose of securing from them any
information upon the affairs of the city within their jurisdiction.
   (b)   Removals by the council at elective or appointive officers or members
of boards or commissions may be made for any of the following reasons: (I) for
any reason specified by law for removal of city officer by the governor; (II)
for any act constituting a violation of this charter. Such removals by the
council shall be made only after a hearing of which such officer has been given
notice by the clerk at least ten (10) days in advance, either personally or by
delivering the same at his last known place of residence according to the
records of the city. Such notice shall include a copy of the charges against
the officer. The hearing shall afford an opportunity to the officer, in person
or by attorney, to be heard in his defense, to cross examine witnesses and to
present testimony. If such officer shall neglect to appear at such hearing and
answer such charges, his failure to do so may be deemed cause for his removal.
A majority vote of the members of the council in office at the time, exclusive
of any member whose removal may be considered, shall be required for any such
removal.
Section 4.22 - PUBLICATION OF COUNCIL PROCEEDINGS:
Minutes of the council shall be published within (15) days after the passage
thereof. A synopsis of such minutes, prepared by the clerk showing the
substance of each separate proceeding of the council, shall be a sufficient
compliance with the requirements of this section.
Section 4.23 - INVESTIGATIONS:
The council may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, and compel the production
of books, papers and other evidence, to conduct formal investigation into the
conduct of any department, office or officer of the city and make
investigations as to malfeasance, nonfeasance, or irregularities in municipal
affairs. Failure to obey such subpoena or produce books, papers, or other
evidences ordered under the provision of this section shall constitute
misconduct in office.
Section 4.24 - PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY:
The council shall see that provision is made for public peace and health, and
for the safety of persons and property. Unless and until a board of health is
established for the city by ordinance, the council shall constitute the board
of health of the city, and it and its officers shall possess all powers,
privileges and immunities granted to boards of health by statute.
Section 4.25 - LICENSES:
The council shall by ordinance prescribe the terms and conditions upon which
licenses may be granted, suspended, or revoked; and may require and collect
payment of such reasonable sums for any licenses that it may deem proper.
Section 4.26 - RIGHTS AS TO PROPERTY:
The council shall have the power to acquire by purchase, gift, condemnation,
lease, construction, or otherwise, either within or without its corporate
limits, private property, for any public use or purpose within the scope of its
powers, whether herein specifically mentioned or not, and to maintain and
operate the same to promote the public health, safety and welfare.
Section 4.27 - CEMETERIES:
The council shall have the power to enact all ordinances deemed necessary for
the establishment, maintenance, and protection of cemeteries, together with
improvements thereon and appurtenances there to owned or hereinafter acquired
by the city either within or without its corporate limits.
Section 4.28 - TRUSTS:
The council may at its discretion receive and hold any property in trust for
parks, cemeteries, or other municipal purposes. Any trust now existing of
benefit to the city of Plainwell shall be continued in full force and in
accordance with the cy pres doctrine.
Section 4.29 - TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU:
The council shall have the power and authority to establish by ordinance a
traffic violations bureau, as provided by law, for the handling of such
violations of ordinances and regulations of the city, or parts thereof, as
prescribed in the ordinance establishing such bureau. Any person who has
received any notice to appear to a charge of violating any such ordinances may,
within the time specified, answer at the traffic violations bureau to the
charges set forth in such notice. Acceptance of the prescribed fine by the
bureau shall be deemed to be complete satisfaction for the violation, and the
violator shall be given receipt which so states.
The creation of such a bureau shall not operate as to deprive any person of a
full and impartial hearing in court should a person so choose.
Section 4.30 - ADVISORY COMMITTEES OR BOARDS:
The mayor or city administrator, with the advice and consent of the city
council, may from time to time appoint such committees or boards as are deemed
appropriate to advise and consult with him, and with the appropriate
departments, regarding a municipal activity. Such committees or boards shall
serve temporarily and without compensation.
CHAPTER V — LEGISLATION
Section 5.1 - LEGISLATIVE POWERS:
The legislative power of the city of Plainwell is vested exclusively with the
city council, except as otherwise provided by law.
Section 5.2 - PRIOR LEGISLATION:
All valid ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the city of
Plainwell, which are not inconsistent with this charter and which are in force
and in effect on the effective date of this charter, shall continue in full
force and effect until repealed or amended. Those provisions of any effective
valid ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation which are inconsistent with
this charter are hereby repealed.
Section 5.3 - ORDINANCES:
The style of all ordinances shall be “The City of Plainwell ordains.” No
ordinance shall be revised, altered or amended by reference to its title only,
but the section or sections of the ordinance revised or altered shall be
published in full, except as otherwise provided in this charter. An ordinance
may be repealed by reference to its number and title only. The effective date
of any ordinance shall be prescribed therein, and shall not be less than ten
(10) days after its adoption and publication unless the council shall, upon
attaching a declaration of emergency affecting the public peace, health and
safety, fix an earlier date. No ordinance shall take effect until after
publication thereof and no measure making or amending a grant, renewal, or
extension of a franchise or other special privilege shall ever be passed as
emergency measure.
Section 5.4 - PUBLICATION AND RECORDING OF ORDINANCE:
All ordinances when enacted shall be recorded by the clerk in a book called
“The Ordinance Book” and shall be the duty of the clerk to authenticate such
record by his official signature. Before any ordinance may become operative it
shall be published. Any ordinance may be published by setting it forth in full
as a part of the published proceedings of the council for either the meeting at
which it was introduced or at which it was adopted, or as a part of the summary
of the proceedings at either of such meetings.
Section 5.5 - PENALTIES:
The council may provide in any ordinance for the punishment of those who
violate its provisions. The punishment for any violation of any city ordinance
shall not exceed a fine of five hundred dollars ($500) or the imprisonment for
more than ninety (90) days, or both at the discretion of the court.
Section 5.6 - INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM:
Any ordinance may be initiated by petition. A referendum on an enacted
ordinance may be had by petition, as hereinafter provided.
Section 5.7 - PETITIONS:
An initiatory or a referendary petition shall be signed by qualified electors
registered in the city in a number equal to fifteen percent of the active
registration file of voters at the preceding even-numbered year general
election prior to the filing of the petition. All signatures on said petitions
shall be obtained within thirty (30) days before the filing date of the
petition with the clerk. Before being circulated for signatures, all such
petitions shall be approved as to form by the clerk. Any such petition shall be
addressed to the city council and may be the aggregate of two (2) or more
petition papers identical as to the contents and simultaneously filed by one
person. An initiatory petition shall set forth in full the ordinance it
proposes to initiate, and no petition shall propose to initiate more than one
ordinance. A referendary petition shall identify the ordinance, or the part
thereof it proposes to have repealed.
The signer of a petition shall sign his name, his place of residence by street
and number, and the date of signature. To each petition paper there shall be
attached a sworn affidavit by the circulator thereof, stating the number of
signers thereof and that each signature thereon is the genuine signature of the
person whose name it purports to be and that it was made in the presence of the
affiant. Such petition shall be filed with the clerk who shall, within fifteen
(15) days verify the signature thereon. If the petition does not contain a
sufficient number of registered electors of the city, the clerk shall notify
forthwith, by certified mail, the person filing such petition and fifteen (15)
days from such notification shall be allowed for filing of supplemental
petition papers. When a petition with sufficient signatures is filed as
required and allowed by this section, the clerk shall present the petition to
the council at the next regular meeting.
Section 5.8 - CITY COUNCIL PROCEDURE ON INITIATORY AND REFERENDARY PETITIONS:
Upon receiving a certified initiatory or referendary petition from the clerk,
the council shall within thirty (30) days, unless otherwise provided by statute
either:
   (a)   Adopt the ordinance as submitted by the initiatory petition.
   (b)   Repeal the ordinance or part thereof referred to by a referendary
petition.
   (c)   Determine to submit the proposal provided for in the petition to the
electors. The result shall be determined by a majority vote of electors voting
thereon, except in cases where otherwise required by law or this charter.
Section 5.9 - SUBMISSION TO ELECTORS:
Should the council decide to submit the proposal to the electors, it shall be
submitted at the next election held in the city for any other purpose, or at
the discretion of the council at a special election called for that specific
purpose.
Section 5.10 - GENERAL PROVISIONS:
Presentation to the council by the clerk of a valid referendary petition shall
automatically suspend the operation of the ordinance in question pending repeal
by the council or final determination by the electors.
An ordinance adopted by the electorate through initiatory proceedings may not
be amended or repealed by the council for a period of two (2) years after the
date of the election at which it was adopted, and then only by the affirmative
vote of not less than four (4) council members. Should two (2) or more
ordinances adopted at the same election have conflicting provisions the one
receiving the highest vote shall prevail.
CHAPTER VI — ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE
Section 6.1 ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS:
   (a)   The administrative officers of the city shall be the city
administrator, city attorney, clerk, treasurer, superintendent of public works,
assessor, police chief, and such additional administrative officers as may be
created by ordinance. The duties of one or more of the administrative officers
of the city may be performed by one person when determined by the council. The
city administrator and city attorney shall be appointed by the council for an
indefinite period, shall be responsible to and serve at the pleasure of the
council, and shall have their compensation fixed by the council.
   (b)   All administrative officers of the city, except the city administrator
and city attorney, shall be appointed by the city administrator for indefinite
terms of office, subject to the confirmation of the council. Such officers’
compensation shall be fixed by the city administrator in accordance with budget
appropriations and subject to approval by the council.
   (c)   All personnel employed by the city who are not elected officers of the
city, or declared to be administrative officers, or under the authority of this
charter, shall be deemed to be employees of the city. The head of each
department shall have the authority to hire and discharge the employees of his
department upon the advice and consent of the city administrator, subject to
the provisions of any merit or civil service system.
Section 6.2 CITY ADMINISTRATOR:
   (a)   The city administrator shall be the chief administrative officer of
the city government. He shall be selected by the council on the basis of
training and ability. He shall serve at the pleasure of and be subject to
removal by the council, but he shall not be removed from office during a period
of sixty (60) days following any regular city election except by the
affirmative vote of four (4) members of council. His compensation shall be
fixed by the council.
   (b)   The council shall appoint the city administrator within ninety (90)
days after any vacancy exists in such position and they may appoint an acting
administrator during the period of vacancy in the office. The city
administrator with the consent and approval of the council, may designate an
administrative officer or employee of the city to act as city administrator, if
he is temporarily absent from the city or unable to perform the duties of his
office. No person who holds or has held elective office in the city of
Plainwell shall be eligible for appointment as city administrator or acting
city administrator during a vacancy in that office until two (2) years have
elapsed following the expiration of the term for which he was elected. The city
administrator shall become a resident of the city, unless this requirement is
waived by the majority of the council.
Section 6.3 CITY ADMINISTRATOR - FUNCTIONS AND DUTIES:
   (a)   The city administrator shall be responsible to the council for the
proper administration of the affairs of the city. It shall be his
responsibility to recommend appointments and removals of administrative
officers, except the City Attorney, subject to the confirmation of the council.
He shall establish administrative officers’ and employees’ compensation in
accordance with budget appropriations. He shall supervise and coordinate the
work of the administrative officers and departments of the city, except the
work of the city clerk in keeping the council records and as clerical official
of the council.
   (b)   He shall see that all laws and ordinances are enforced. He shall
prepare and administer the annual budget under the policies formulated by the
council and shall keep the council advised as to the financial condition and
needs of the city. He shall furnish the council with information concerning
city affairs and prepare such reports as may be required, or which the council
may request, including an annual report encompassing the activities of the
several departments. Subject to any employment ordinance of the city formulated
by the council, he shall be responsible for the employment of all city
employees and supervise and coordinate personnel policies and practices of the
city. He shall establish and maintain a central purchasing service for the city
and he or his authorized representative shall be the purchasing agent for the
city.
   (c)   He shall attend all meetings of the council, with the right to be
heard in all council proceedings but without the right to vote. He shall
possess such other responsibilities and perform such additional duties as may
be granted to or be required of him by the council, so far as may be consistent
with the provision of law. He shall establish any rules necessary to carry out
any of the foregoing duties.
Section 6.4 CITY CLERK:
   (a)   The clerk shall be the clerical officer of the council and shall keep
its journal. He shall keep a record of all action of the council at its regular
and special meetings. He shall certify all ordinances and resolutions adopted
by the council.
   (b)   He shall have the power to administer all oaths required by the law
and by the ordinances of the city. He shall be the custodian of the city seal
and shall affix the same to documents required to be sealed. He shall be the
custodian of all papers, documents, and records pertaining to the city, unless
otherwise provided by this charter. He shall give the proper officials ample
notice of the expiration or termination of any official bonds, franchises,
contracts or agreements to which the city is a part. He shall notify the
council of the failure of any officer or employee required to take an oath of
office or furnish any bond required of him. The clerk shall perform such other
duties in connection with his office as may be required by law, the ordinances,
or resolutions of the council, or by the city administrator.
Section 6.5 - CITY TREASURER:
The treasurer shall have the custody of all monies of the city, the clerk’s
bond, and all evidences of value or indebtedness belonging to or held in trust
by the city. He shall keep and deposit all monies or funds in such a manner and
only in such places as the council may determine, and shall report the same to
the city administrator.
Section 6.6 CITY ASSESSOR:
   (a)   The assessor shall possess all the powers vested in and shall be
charged with the duties imposed upon assessing officers by law. He shall make
and prepare all regular and special assessment rolls in a manner prescribed by
law or ordinances of the city.
   (b)   He shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by law, the
ordinances of the city, or by the city administrator.
Section 6.7 CITY ATTORNEY:
   (a)   The council shall appoint and fix the salary of the city attorney, who
shall hold office at the pleasure of the council, and who need not be a
resident of the city. The city attorney shall be legal advisor and counsel for
the city and for all the officers and departments thereof in all matters
related to their official duties, and shall file with the city a copy of all
written opinions given by him. He shall prepare or review all ordinances,
regulations, contracts, bonds and other such instruments as may be required by
this charter, the council, or the city administrator, and shall promptly give
his opinion as to the legality thereof.
   (b)   The city attorney shall prosecute ordinance violations and shall
represent the city in cases before the courts and other tribunals. In such
instances as the council shall direct, he shall defend officers and employees
of the city in actions arising out of the performance of their official duties.
   (c)   Upon the recommendation of the attorney, or upon its own initiative,
the council may retain special legal counsel to handle any matter in which the
city has an interest, or to assist in counsel with the attorney therein.
   (d)   He shall perform such other duties in connection with his office as
may be prescribed by law, by this charter, or the council.
Section 6.8 ADDITIONAL ADMINISTRATIVE POWERS, DUTIES, AND RESTRICTIONS:
   (a)   The council shall by ordinance establish departments of city
government and determine and prescribe the functions and duties of each
department. Upon the recommendation of the city administrator, the council may
by ordinance prescribe additional powers and duties and diminish any powers and
duties in a manner not inconsistent with the charter, to be exercised and
administered by appropriate officials in department of the city.
   (b)   Anti-nepotism. Unless the council shall determine by unanimous vote,
which vote shall be recorded as part of its official proceedings, that the best
interests of the city shall be served, the following relatives of any elected
or appointed officer are disqualified from holding any appointive office or
employment during the term of which said elective or appointive officer is
elected or appointed: spouse, child, parent, grandchild, grandparent, brother,
sister, half-sister, half-brother, or the spouses of any of them. All
relationships shall include those arising from adoption. This section shall in
no way disqualify such relatives or their spouses who are bonafide appointive
officers or employees of the city at the time of the election or appointment of
said official.
Section 6.9 - CITY PLANNING:
The council shall provide for and maintain a city planning commission, which
shall possess all powers and perform the functions of planning commissions as
set forth by statute. The members of the planning commission shall be appointed
by the mayor subject to the confirmation of the council. The members of the
commission shall serve without compensation, except for necessary expenses in
connection with their work.
Section 6.10 - ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS:
The council shall provide for and maintain a zoning board of appeals, which
shall possess all powers and perform all functions of zoning boards of appeal
as set forth by statute. The members of the zoning board of appeals shall be
appointed by the mayor subject to the confirmation of the council. The members
of the board shall serve without compensation, except for necessary expenses in
connection with their work.
Section 6.11 - LIBRARY BOARD:
The council shall provide for and maintain a library board, which shall possess
all powers and perform all functions of library boards as set forth by statute.
The members of the library board shall be appointed by the mayor and subject to
the confirmation of the council. The members of the board shall serve without
compensation, except for necessary expenses in connection with their work.
Section 6.12 - MERIT SYSTEM OF PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT:
The council shall provide by ordinance a merit system of personnel management
for the city.
Section 6.13 - COMPENSATION AND EMPLOYEE BENEFITS:
The council shall have the power to make available to the administrative
officers and employees of the city and its departments, an annually funded
pension plan by ordinance, and any recognized group plan of life, hospital,
health, or accident and income protection service, or anyone or more thereof.
CHAPTER VII — GENERAL FINANCE
Section 7.1 - FISCAL YEAR:
The fiscal year of the city shall begin on July 1 of each year.
Section 7.2 - BUDGET PROCEDURE:
On or before the second Monday in March of each year, each officer, department
and board of the city shall submit to the city administrator an itemized
estimate of its expected income, if any, and expenditures for the next fiscal
year, for the department or activities under its control. The city
administrator shall compile and review such budget requests and shall then
prepare his budgetary recommendations and submit them to the city council at
its meeting nearest to the first Monday in May of each year.
Section 7.3 - BUDGET DOCUMENT:
The budget document shall present a complete financial plan for the ensuing
year and provide for a uniform chart of accounts and reports as required by
statute. It shall include at least the following information:
   (a)   Detailed estimates of all proposed expenditures for each department
and office of the city, showing expenditures for each department and office of
the city, showing expenditures for corresponding items for the current and
pertinent preceding fiscal years, with reasons for increases and decreases
recommended as compared with appropriations for the current year.
   (b)   Statements of the bonded and other indebtedness of the city, showing
the debt redemption and interest requirements, the debt authorized and unmissed
and the condition of sinking funds if any.
   (c)   Detailed statements of estimates of all anticipated income of the city
from taxes and sources other than current taxes and borrowing, compared with
the amounts received by the city from each of the same or similar sources for
the last preceding year and the current year.
   (d)   A statement of the estimated unencumbered balances or deficits at the
end of the current fiscal year.
   (e)   An estimate of an amount of money to be raised from current and
delinquent taxes, and the amount to be raised from bond issues, which together
with income from other sources will be necessary to meet the proposed
expenditures.
   (f)   Such other supporting schedules as the council may deem necessary or
may require.
Section 7.4 - BUDGET HEARING:
Before its final adoption, a public hearing on the budget proposal shall be
held as provided by law. Notice of the time and place of holding such hearings
shall be published in a newspaper having general circulation in the city at
least one (1) week in advance thereof. A copy of the proposed budget shall be
on file and available to the public during office hours at the office of the
clerk for a period not less than one (1) week prior to such public hearing.
Section 7.5 - ADOPTION OF THE BUDGET:
The council shall, not later than the second regular meeting in June, adopt by
resolution a budget for the ensuing fiscal year and make appropriations
therefore. After consideration of probable other revenues, the council shall
determine and declare the amount of money necessary to be raised by property
taxation, which amount shall not be greater than otherwise limited in this
charter or by law.
Section 7.6 - TRANSFER OF APPROPRIATIONS:
After the budget has been adopted, no money shall be drawn from the treasury of
the city, nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of the money be
incurred, except pursuant to the budget appropriation. The council may transfer
any unencumbered appropriation, balance or any portion thereof from one
department, fund, or agency to another. The balance in any appropriation which
has not been encumbered at the end of the fiscal year may be reappropriated
during the next fiscal year as determined by Council.
Section 7.7 - BUDGET CONTROL:
The city administrator shall submit to the council quarterly financial reports
showing the relationship between the estimated and actual income and expenses
to date, and if it shall appear that the income is less than anticipated, the
council may reduce appropriations except amounts required for debt and interest
charges, to such a degree as may be necessary to keep expenditures within the
cash income. If the revenues exceed the amounts estimated in the budget, the
council may make supplemental appropriations. Expenditures shall not be charged
directly to the contingency account, except in those cases where there is no
other logical account to which expenditures can be charged; instead, a
necessary part of the appropriation from the contingency account shall be
transferred to the logical account, and expenditure charged to such account.
Section 7.8 - DEPOSITORY:
The council shall designate the depository or depositories for city funds and
shall provide for the regular deposit of all city monies.
Section 7.9 - INVESTMENTS:
Idle monies may be invested in obligations issued by the city and obligations
of the United States or any state thereof, in other municipal bonds or other
highly rated securities, or investments as the council may determine in
accordance with statute.
Section 7.10 - INDEPENDENT AUDIT:
An independent audit shall be made of all accounts of the city government
annually, and more frequently if deemed necessary by the council. Such audit
shall be made by qualified accountants experienced in municipal accounting. The
results of such audit shall be made public in such manner as the council may
determine. An annual report of the city business shall be made available to the
public in such form as will disclose pertinent facts concerning the activities
and finance of the city government.
CHAPTER VIII — TAXATION
Section 8.1 - POWER TO TAX:
The city shall have power to assess, levy and collect taxes, rents, tolls, and
excises. The subject of ad valor taxation shall be the same as for state,
county, and school purposes under general law. Except as otherwise provided by
this charter, city taxes shall be levied, collected and returned in the manner
provided by statute.
Section 8.2 - TAX LIMITS:
Exclusive of any levy for the payment of principal of and interest on
outstanding general obligation bonds, and exclusive of any other levies
authorized by law to be made beyond charter tax rate limitations, the levy of
ad valor taxes for general municipal purposes shall not exceed 1.6 mills (1.6
per cent) on the assessed value of all real and personal property in the city.
Section 8.3 - EXEMPTIONS:
No exemptions from taxation shall be allowed, except as expressly required or
permitted by law.
Section 8.4 - TAX DAY:
Subject to the exceptions provided or permitted by statute, the taxable status
of persons and property shall be determined as of December 31, or such other
day as may subsequently be required by law, which shall be deemed “Tax Day”.
Section 8.5 ASSESSMENT ROLL:
   (a)   On or before the first Monday in March of each year, the assessor
shall, in accordance with the state law, make and certify an assessment roll of
all persons and property in the city liable to taxation.
   (b)   On or before the first Monday in March, the assessor shall, by first
class mail, give notice of any increase in the previous year in the assessed
value of any property, or of the addition of any property to the roll to the
owner as shown by such assessment roll. The failure to give such notice, or of
the owner to receive it, shall not invalidate any assessment roll or assessment
thereon.
Section 8.6 BOARD OF REVIEW:
   (a)   The board of review shall consist of three (3) qualified electors of
the city but not city officers or employees. The assessor is to be the clerk of
the board of review and non-voting. The board shall be entitled to such
remuneration as shall be fixed by the council.
   (b)   The first such board of review appointed under the provisions of this
charter shall be made up of three (3) qualified members appointed for one, two
and three year terms. The council shall appoint a new member for a three (3)
year term at the first regular council meeting in February of each succeeding
year.
Section 8.7 - DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS OF THE BOARD OF REVIEW:
For the purpose of revising and correcting assessments, the board of review
shall have the same powers and perform like duties in all respects as are
conferred by law and required of boards of review in townships, except as
otherwise provided by this charter. It shall hear the complaints of all persons
considering themselves aggrieved by assessments, and if it shall appear that
any person or property has been wrongfully assessed or omitted from the roll,
the board shall correct the roll in such manner as it deems just. In all cases,
the roll shall be reviewed according to the facts existing on the tax day and
no change in the status of any property after that day shall be considered by
the board in making its decision. Except as otherwise provided by law, no
person, other than the board of review, shall make or authorize any change upon
or addition or correction to the assessment roll. It shall be the duty of the
assessor to keep a permanent record of all the proceedings of the board and to
enter therein all resolutions and decisions of the board. Such proceedings
shall be filed in the office of the clerk not later than the first day of
August following the meeting of the board of review.
Section 8.8 - NOTICE OF MEETINGS:
Notice of the time and the sessions of the board of review shall be published
by the city clerk at least ten (10) days prior to the first Monday in March of
each year.
Section 8.9 - MEETINGS OF THE BOARD OF REVIEW:
The board of review shall first convene on the first Tuesday following the
first Monday in March of each year to review and correct the assessment roll.
The second meeting of the board of review shall be on the second Monday in
March and shall remain in session for not less than two (2) days. It shall
choose its own chairman and a majority of its members shall constitute a
quorum. On or before the first Monday in April, the board of review shall
endorse the assessment roll as provided hereafter.
Section 8.10 - CERTIFICATION OF ROLL:
After the board of review has completed its review of the assessment roll, and
not later than the first Monday in April, the majority of its members shall
endorse thereon and sign a statement to the effect that the same is the
assessment roll for the city for the year in which it has been prepared. The
omission of such endorsement shall not affect the validity of such roll.
Section 8.11 - CLERK TO CERTIFY TAX LEVY:
Within three (3) days after the council has adopted the budget for the ensuing
year, the clerk shall certify to the assessor the total amount which the
council determines shall be raised by the general ad valor tax. The clerk shall
also certify all amounts of current or delinquent special assessments, and all
other amounts which the council requires or orders to be assessed, reassessed,
or charged upon said roll against any property or any person, in accordance
with the provisions of this charter or ordinances of the city.
Section 8.12 - CITY TAX ROLL:
After the board of review has completed its review of the assessment roll, the
assessor shall prepare a copy of the assessment roll to be known as the “City
Tax Roll” Upon receiving the certification of the several amounts to be raised,
as provided for in Section 8.11, the assessor shall spread upon said tax roll
the several amounts determined by the council to be charged, assessed, or
reassessed against persons or properties. He shall also spread thereon the
amounts of the general ad valor city tax according to and in proportion to the
several evaluations set forth in said assessment roll. To avoid fractions in
computation of any tax roll, the assessor may add to the amount of the several
taxes to be raised no more than the amount prescribed by law. Any excess
created thereby on any tax roll shall belong to the city.
Section 8.13 - TAX ROLL CERTIFIED FOR COLLECTION:
After spreading the taxes, the assessor shall certify the tax roll and shall
annex his warrant thereto, directing and requiring the treasurer to collect,
prior to March 1 of the following year, from the several persons named in said
roll, the several sums mentioned therein opposite their respective names as a
tax, charge or assessment, and granting to him, for purpose of collecting the
taxes, charges and assessments of such roll, all the statutory powers and
immunities possessed by township treasurers for the collection of taxes.
Section 8.14 - TAX LIEN:
On July 1 of each year, the taxes thus assessed shall become a debt due to the
city from persons to whom assessed. The taxes and all interest and charges
thereon and all personal taxes shall become a first lien on all personal
property of such persons so assessed. Such lien shall take precedence over all
other claims, encumbrances, and liens to the extent provided by law, and shall
continue until such taxes, interests, and charges are paid.
Section 8.15 - TAXES DUE NOTIFICATION THEREOF:
City taxes shall be due on July 1 of each year. The treasurer shall not require
to call upon persons named in the city tax roll, nor make personal demand for
payment of taxes, but shall publish between June 15 and July 1 notice of the
time when said taxes will be due for collection and of the penalties and fees
for the late payment thereof, and mail a tax bill to each person named in said
roll. In cases of multiple ownership of property only one bill need be mailed.
Failure on the part of the treasurer to publish said notice or mail such bills
shall not invalidate such taxes on said tax roll, nor release the person or
property assessed from the penalties and fees provided in this chapter in the
case of late or nonpayment of same.
Section 8.16 - COLLECTION FEES AND INTEREST:
No penalty shall be charged for city taxes paid on or before August 15. After
August 15 a collection fee of four percent (4 per cent) shall be added to taxes
paid after that date. Should August 15 fall on a Saturday, Sunday or holiday,
the next business day for the city shall be considered the last day for payment
without penalty. Taxes remaining unpaid after October 1 shall be subject to
penalty interest of one per cent (1 per cent) per month (12 per cent per annum)
added until paid. Such penalty charges shall belong to the city and constitute
a charge, and shall be a lien against the property to which the taxes apply,
collectible in the same manner as taxes to which they are added.
Section 8.17 - COLLECTION OF DELINQUENT TAXES:
All city taxes on real property remaining uncollected by the treasurer on March
1, or such date established by statute, following the date when said roll was
received by him, shall be returned to the county treasurer in the same manner
and with like effect as returned by township treasurers of township, school and
county taxes. Such return shall be made upon a delinquent tax roll to be
prepared by the treasurer, and shall include all the additional charges and
assessments herein before provided. Such charges shall be added to the amount
assessed in said tax roll against each description. Taxes thus returned shall
be collected in the same manner as other taxes returned to the county
treasurer, in accordance with the provisions of the general laws of the state,
and shall be and remain a lien upon the property against which they are
assessed until paid.
Section 8.18 - FAILURE OR REFUSAL TO PAY PERSONAL PROPERTY TAX:
If any person, firm or corporation shall neglect or refuse to pay any personal
property tax assessed to him or them, the treasurer shall collect the same by
seizing the personal properties of such person, firm or corporation, to an
amount sufficient to pay such tax, fees and charges for subsequent sale,
wherever the same may be found in the state, and from which seizure no property
shall be exempt. He may sell the property seized to an amount sufficient to pay
the taxes, and all charges, in accordance with statutory provisions. The
treasurer may, if otherwise unable to collect a tax or, personal property, sue
the person, firm or corporation to whom it is assessed, in accordance with the
statute.
Section 8.19 - STATE, COUNTY AND SCHOOL TAXES:
The levy, collection and return of state, county and school taxes shall be in
conformity with the general laws of the state.
CHAPTER IX — BORROWING AUTHORITY
Section 9.1 - GENERAL BORROWING:
Subject to the applicable provisions of state law and this charter, the council
may by ordinance or resolution authorize the borrowing of money for any purpose
within the scope of powers vested in the city and permitted by law, and may
authorize the issuance of bonds or other evidences of indebtedness therefore.
Such bonds or other evidences of indebtedness shall include but not be limited
to the following types:
   (a)   General obligation bonds which pledge the full faith, credit and
resources of the city for repayment of such obligations.
   (b)   Notes issued in anticipation of collection of taxes but the proceeds
of such notes to be spent only in accordance with appropriations as provided in
Section
7.6.
   (c)   In cases of fire, flood or other calamity, emergency loans due in not
more than five (5) years for the relief of the inhabitants of the city and for
the preservation of municipal property.
   (d)   Special assessment bonds used in anticipation of the payment of
special assessments made for the purpose of defraying the cost of any public
improvement, or in anticipation of the payment of any combination of such
special assessment. Such special assessment bonds may be obligation of the
special assessment district or districts alone, or may be both an obligation of
the special assessment district or districts and general obligation of the
city.
   (e)   Mortgage bonds for the acquiring, owning, purchasing, construction,
improving, or operation of any public utility which the city is authorized by
this charter to acquire or operate.
   (f)   Bonds for the refunding of the funded indebtedness of the city.
   (g)   Revenue bonds authorized by law which are secured only by the revenues
from a public improvement or public utility and do not constitute a general
obligation to the city.
   (h)   Budget bonds which pledge the full faith, credit and resources of the
city, in an amount which, in any year together with the taxes levied for the
same year, will not exceed the limit of the taxation authorized by this
charter.
   (i)   Bonds issued in anticipation of future payments from the motor vehicle
highway fund, or any other fund of the state, which the city may be permitted
by law to pledge for the payment of the principle and interest thereof.
Section 9.2 LIMITS OF BORROWING AUTHORITY:
   (a)   The net bonded indebtedness incurred for all public purposes shall not
at any time exceed the maximum percentage permitted by statute, provided that
in computing such net bonded indebtedness there shall be excluded money
borrowed on notes issued in anticipation of the collection of taxes, special
assessments bonds, even though they are a general obligation to the city,
mortgage bonds, revenue bonds, bonds in anticipation of state returned revenues
to the extent permitted by law, and any other bonds or indebtedness excluded by
law from such limitations. The amount of funds accumulated for the retirement
of any outstanding bonds shall also be deducted from the amount of bonded
indebtedness.
   (b)   The amount of emergency loans which may be made under the provisions
of this charter may not exceed the maximum amount permitted by law, and such
loans may be made even if it causes the indebtedness of the city to exceed the
limit of the net bonded indebtedness fixed by this charter or by law.
   (c)   No bond shall be sold to obtain funds for any purpose other than that
for which they were specifically authorized, and if such bonds are not sold
within three (3) years after the authorization, such authorization shall be
null and void.
   (d)   The issuance of any bonds not requiring approval of the electorate
shall be subject to the applicable requirements of law with reference to public
notice in advance of the authorization of such issues, filing petitions for a
referendum on such issuance, holding such referendum, and other applicable
procedural requirements.
Section 9.3 - PREPARATION AND RECORD OF BONDS:
Each bond or other evidence of indebtedness shall contain on its face a
statement specifying the purpose for which it is issued, and it shall be
unlawful for any officer of the city to use the proceeds thereof for any other
purpose. Any officer who shall violate this provision shall be deemed guilty of
violation of this charter, except that whenever the proceeds of any bond issue
or part thereof shall remain unexpended and unencumbered for the purpose which
said bond issue was made, the council may authorize the use of said funds for
retirement of bonds of such issue or for any other purpose permitted by law.
All bonds or other evidences of indebtedness issued by the city shall be signed
by the mayor and countersigned by the clerk under the seal of the city.
Interest coupons may be executed with the facsimile signature of the mayor and
clerk. A complete and detailed record of all bonds and other evidences of
indebtedness issued by the city shall be kept by the clerk or other designated
officer. On the payment of any bond or other evidence of indebtedness the same
shall be cancelled.
Section 9.4 - DEFERRED PAYMENT CONTRACTS:
The city may enter into installment contracts for the purchase of property or
capital equipment. Each such contract shall not extend over a period greater
than that permitted by law. The total amounts of principle payable under all
such contracts shall not exceed a sum permitted by law. All such deferred
payments shall be included in the budget for the year in which the installment
is payable.
CHAPTER X — SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS
Section 10.1 - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS - GENERAL POWERS:
The council shall have the power to determine that the whole or any part of the
cost of any public improvement shall be defrayed by special assessment upon
property in a special district and shall so declare by resolution. Such
resolutions shall state the estimated cost of the improvement, what proportion
of the cost thereof shall be paid by special assessment, what part, if any,
shall be a general obligation of the city, the number of installments in which
the assessment shall be levied, and whether the assessment shall be based upon
special benefits, frontage, area, valuation or factors permitted by law, or a
combination thereof. The council shall also have power of reassessment with
respect to any such public improvement.
Section 10.2 - PROCEDURE FIXED BY ORDINANCE:
The council shall prescribe by ordinance the complete special assessment or
reassessment procedure governing the initiation of projects, preparation of
plans and cost estimates, notice of hearings on necessity and on confirmation
of the assessment rolls, and making and confirming of the assessments, and any
other matters concerning the making and financing of improvements by special
assessment.
Section 10.3 - OBJECTIONS TO IMPROVEMENT:
If, at or prior to the meeting of the city council sitting to review the
assessment, the owners of more than one-half (1/2) of the property to be
assessed shall object in writing to the improvement, the assessment shall not
be made without a four-fifths (4/5) vote of the members of the council.
Section 10.4 - CONTEST OF ASSESSMENT:
No suit or action of any kind shall be instituted or maintained for the purpose
of contesting or enjoining the collection of any special assessment or
reassessment unless, within thirty (30) days after confirmation of the special
assessment roll, written notice is given to the clerk for the attention of the
council indicating an intention to file such suit or action stating the grounds
on which it is claimed that such assessment is illegal; and unless such suit or
action shall be commenced within sixty (60) days after the confirmation of the
roll. If the city attorney submits a written opinion finding said roll illegal,
in whole or in part, the council may revoke its confirmation, correct the
illegality if possible, and reconfirm same as amended, provided that no
property which is not involved in the illegality shall be assessed more than
was imposed upon the original confirmation without further notice and hearing
thereon.
CHAPTER XI — UTILITIES
Section 11.1 - GENERAL POWERS RESPECTING UTILITIES:
The city shall possess, and hereby reserves to itself, all the powers granted
to cities by law to acquire, construct, own, operate, improve, enlarge, extend,
repair and maintain, either within or without its corporate limits, including
but not by way of limitation, public utilities for supplying water, light,
heat, power, gas, sewage treatment, transportation, and garbage and refuse
disposal facilities, and also to sell and deliver these and other public
utility services within or without its corporate limits, as authorized by law.
Section 11.2 - ACQUISITION OF PRIVATE PROPERTY:
Private property may be taken and appropriated, either within or without the
city, for any public use in connection with any acquisition, enlargement, or
extension of public utilities.
   (a)   For supplying water, light, heat, power, gas, sewage treatment, and
garbage and refuse disposal facilities, or any of them.
   (b)   For the purpose of opening, widening, altering and extending streets,
alleys, avenues or the construction of bridges.
   (c)   For public buildings and other public structures.
   (d)   For public grounds, parking spaces, parks, market places and spaces.
   (e)   For the improvement of waters and water courses within the city, the
sewers, drains, and ditches.
   (f)   For public hospitals and public cemeteries, and for other lawful and
necessary public uses.
The ownership of such property shall be acquired by the city by negotiation and
purchase, or in any other manner permitted by the general laws by the state for
the taking of private property for public use.
Section 11.3 - CONTROL OF UTILITIES:
The council may enact such ordinances and adopt such resolutions as may be
necessary for the care, protection, preservation, control, and operation of any
public utilities which the city may, in any manner acquire, own, or operate,
and all fixtures, appurtenances, apparatus, buildings, and machinery connected
therewith or belonging thereto, and to carry into effect the powers conferred
upon the city by the provisions of this charter and by statute.
Section 11.4 - MANAGEMENT OF UTILITIES:
All municipally owned or operated utilities shall be administered as a regular
department of the city government under the management and supervision of the
city administrator.
Section 11.5 - RATES AND CHARGES:
The city council shall have the power to tax, from time to time, such just and
equitable rates and charges as may be deemed advisable for supplying the
inhabitants of the city and others with such utilities and services as the city
may acquire or provide.
Section 11.6 - UTILITY CHARGES - COLLECTION:
The council shall provide by ordinance for the collection of all public utility
charges made by the city, and for such purposes shall have all the powers
granted to cities by statute. When any person or persons, or any firm or
corporation, shall fail or refuse to pay to the city any sums due on utility
bills, which are not covered by deposit, the utility service or services upon
which such delinquency exists may be shut off or discontinued, and suit may be
instituted by the city for collection of the same in any court of competent
jurisdiction.
Section 11.7 - ACCOUNTS:
Separate accounts shall be kept for each public utility owned or operated by
the city, distinct from other city accounts, and in such manner as to show true
and complete financial result of such city ownership of operation, or both,
including all assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses. These accounts shall
show the actual cost to the city of each such public utility, the cost of all
extensions, additions, improvements, all expenses of maintenance, the amount
set aside for sinking fund purposes, and all operation expenses. They shall
show, as nearly as possible, the value of any service furnished to or rendered
by any such public utility by or to any other city department. They shall also
show a proper allowance for depreciation and insurance. The council shall
annually cause to be made, and printed for public distribution, a report
showing the audit and results for such city ownership or operation or both
which report shall give for each utility the information specified in this
section and such further information as the council shall deem necessary.
Section 11.8 - DISPOSAL OF PLANTS AND PROPERTY:
The city shall not sell, exchange, lease or in any way dispose of the property
easements income or other equipment, privileges or assets belonging to and
appertaining to any utility which it may acquire unless and except the
proposition for such purpose shall have been submitted, at a special election
held for such purpose in the manner provided for in this charter, to the
qualified voters of the city and approved by them by a majority vote of the
electors voting thereon. All contracts, negotiations, grants, leases, or other
forms of transfer in violation of this provision shall be void and have no
effect as against the city. The provisions of this section shall not, however,
apply to the sale or exchange of any article or equipment of any city-owned
utility as are worn out or useless, or which could, with advantage to the
service, be replaced by new and improved machinery or equipment.
CHAPTER XII — BIDS, CONTRACTS, PURCHASES,
FRANCHISES AND PERMITS
Section 12.1 - CONTRACTING AUTHORITY OF COUNCIL:
The power to authorize the making of contracts on behalf of the city is vested
in the council, and shall be exercised in accordance with the provisions of the
law. All contracts, except as otherwise provided by ordinance in accordance
with the provisions of this charter, shall be authorized by the council, and
shall be signed on behalf of the city by the mayor and the clerk.
Section 12.2 - PURCHASE AND SALE OF PROPERTY:
The council shall establish by ordinance the procedures for the purchase or
sale of personal property for the city for the direction of the city purchase
or sale of personal property for the city for the direction of the city
administrator. The ordinance shall provide a dollar limit within which
purchases of property may be made without the necessity of securing competitive
bids, and the dollar limit within which the purchases may be made without the
necessity of prior council approval. No purchases or personal property shall be
made unless a sufficient, unencumbered appropriation balance is available
therefore.
Section 12.3 LIMITATIONS ON CONTRACTUAL POWER:
   (a)   The council shall only have power to enter into contracts which, by
the terms thereof, will be fully executed within a period of ten (10) years,
unless such contract shall first receive the approval of the majority of the
qualified electors voting thereon at a regular or special election. This
qualification shall not apply to any contract for services with a public
utility, or one or more other governmental units, nor to contracts for debt
secured by bonds or notes which are permitted to be issued by the city by law.
   (b)   Except as provided by ordinance authorized in this charter, each
contract for construction of public improvements, or for the purchase or sale
of personal property, shall be let after opportunity for competitive bidding.
   (c)   All bids shall be opened and read aloud in public by the city
administrator authorized representative at the time designated in the notice of
letting and shall be reported by him to the council at its next regular
meeting. The council may reject any or all bids if deemed advisable. If, after
ample opportunity for competitive bidding, no bids are received, or such bids
as are received are not satisfactory to the council, the council may either
endeavor to obtain new competitive bids or authorize the city administrator or
other proper officials of the city, to negotiate or contract on the open
market. No contract shall be made with any person, firm or corporation in
default to the city.
Section 12.4 - OFFICIAL INTEREST IN CONTRACTS:
No person holding any elective or appointive office of the city shall take any
official action on any city contract in which he shall have a direct personal
interest in the profits to be derived therefrom, or be a bondsman or surely on
any contract or bond given to the city. Any officer violating the provisions of
this section shall be deemed guilty of misconduct in office and upon conviction
shall forfeit his office.
Section 12.5 FRANCHISES:
   (a)   No franchise ordinance, which is not revocable at the will of the
council, shall be granted or become operative until same shall have been
referred to the people at a regular or special election and has received the
approval by a majority of the electors voting thereon at such election or as
required by statute.
   (b)   All irrevocable public utility franchises, and all renewals,
extensions and amendments thereof, shall be granted only by ordinance. No such
ordinance shall be adopted before thirty (30) days after application therefore
has been filed with the council, nor until a full public hearing has been held
thereon. No such ordinance shall become effective until it has been submitted
to the electors and has been approved by a majority of the electors voting
thereon. No such ordinance shall be submitted to the electors at a general
election to be held less than sixty (60) days after the grantee named therein
has filed its unconditional acceptance of all terms of such franchise, and it
shall not be submitted to a special election unless the expense of holding the
election, as determined by the council, shall have been paid to the city
treasurer by the grantee.
   (c)   No exclusive franchise shall ever be granted, and no franchise shall
be granted for a longer term than thirty (30) years.
   (d)   No such franchise shall be transferable, directly or indirectly,
except with the approval of the council expressed by ordinance.
   (e)   Purchase of a franchised utility by the city shall require the
approval of three-fifths (3/5) of the electors voting thereon.
Section 12.6 - RIGHT OF REGULATION:
All public utility franchises whether it be so provided in the granting
ordinance or not, shall be subject to the right of the city to:
   (a)   Repeal the same for misuse or nonuse or failure to comply with
provisions thereof.
   (b)   Require proper and adequate extension of plant and service and
maintenance thereat, at the highest practicable standard of efficiency.
   (c)   Establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products and
prevent unjust discrimination of service or rates.
   (d)   Make independent audit and examination of accounts at any time, and to
require reports annually.
   (e)   Require continuous and uninterrupted service to the public, in
accordance with the terms of the franchise throughout the entire period
thereof.
   (f)   Impose such other regulations as may be determined by the council to
be conducive to the safety, welfare, and accommodation of the public.
Section 12.7 - RATES OF FRANCHISED UTILITIES:
The rates charged by public utilities under the supervision of state regulatory
agencies shall be fixed by such agencies. Those rates not pre-empted by the
state for public utilities shall be set, after public hearing, by the city
council.
Section 12.8 - REVOCABLE PERMITS:
Temporary permits for public utilities, revocable at any time at the will of
the council, may be granted by the council by resolution on such terms and
conditions as it shall determine, provided that such permits shall in no event
be construed to be franchises or amendments to franchises.
Section 12.9 - USE OF STREET BY UTILITY:
Every public utility franchise shall be subject to the right of the city to
use, control and regulate the use of streets, alleys, bridges and public places
as shall arise from its use thereof, and shall protect and hold the city
harmless from all damages arising from said use. The council shall by ordinance
establish the terms and conditions for such joint use of public right-of-way
and compensation to be paid therefore.
CHAPTER XIII — MUNICIPAL RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES
Section 13.1 - RIGHTS, LIABILITIES, REMEDIES:
All rights and properties of any kind and description which were vested in the
city at the time of the adoption of this charter shall continue, and no rights
or liabilities, either in favor of or against the city at the time of the
adoption of this charter, and no suit or prosecution of any kind shall in any
manner be affected by the adoption of this charter, but the same shall stand or
progress as if no such change had been made. All debts and liabilities of the
city, and all taxes levied and uncollected at the time of the adoption of this
charter, shall be collected the same as if such change had not been made
provided that when a different remedy is given in this charter which can be
made applicable to any rights existing at the time of the adoption of this
charter, the same shall be deemed cumulative to the remedies before provided
and may be used accordingly.
Section 13.2 - LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES:
The City shall not be liable for unliquidated damages for injuries to person or
property unless the person or persons claiming such damages, or someone in his
or their behalf, shall file a claim in writing with the clerk. Such claim shall
be verified by the claimant or claimants, or some person having knowledge of
the fact, who shall specify the time, place, nature, and extend of the injuries
sustained, the manner in which it occurred, the specific grounds upon which the
claim of liability on the part of the city shall be asserted, name of the
attending physician, if any, and an itemized statement to the amount claimed.
Upon filing of such claim, the city shall investigate the same and may require
the claimant to produce all witnesses for examination under oath. No action
shall be maintained in any case, unless the same shall be brought within the
statutory period stated under the laws of the state, after such injury or
damages shall have been received.
Section 13.3 - STATEMENT OF CITY OFFICERS:
No officer of the city shall have power to make any representation or recital
of fact in any franchise, contract, document, or agreement which is contrary to
any public record of the city. Any such representation shall be void.
CHAPTER XIV — MISCELLANEOUS
Section 14.1 - PUBLIC RECORDS:
All records of the city shall be public and in the English language.
Section 14.2 - HEADINGS:
The chapter and section headings used in this charter are for convenience only
and shall not be considered to be a part of this charter.
Section 14.3 - DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS:
Except as otherwise specifically provided or indicated by the context of this
charter:
   (a)   The word “state” shall mean the State of Michigan.
   (b)   The word “city” shall mean the City of Plainwell.
   (c)   The word “council” shall mean the City Council of the City of
Plainwell.
   (d)   The word “officer” shall include, but shall nor be limited to, the
mayor, the members of the council, and as herein provided, the administrative
officers, deputy administrative officers, members of city boards and
commissions created or pursuant to this charter.
   (e)   The word “person” may extend and be applied to bodies politic and
corporate and to partnerships and associations, as well as to individuals.
   (f)   The words “printed” and “printing” shall include printing, engraving,
stencil, duplicating, lithographing, typewriting, and teletype and telegraphic
communications.
   (g)   The words “publish” or “published” shall include publication of any
matter required to be published in the manner provided by law, or where there
is no applicable law, in one (1) or more newspapers of general circulations in
the city, qualified by law for publication of legal notices.
   (h)   The words “public utility” shall include all common carriers in the
public street and water, sewage disposal, electric light and power, gas,
telephone and telegraph lines and systems, cable television, garbage and refuse
collection and disposal facilities, transportation, and such other different
enterprises as the council may determine or designate.
   (i)   All words indicating the present tense shall not be limited to the
time of the adoption of this charter, but shall extend to and include the time
of happening of any event or requirement to which any provision of this charter
is applied.
   (j)   The singular shall include the plural and plural shall include the
singular, the masculine gender shall extend to and include the feminine gender
and the neuter.
   (k)   All references to statute shall be considered to be references to such
statutes as amended.
Section 14.4 - AMENDMENTS:
This charter may be amended at any time in the manner provided by statute.
Should two (2) or more amendments adopted at the same election have conflicting
provisions, the one receiving the highest vote shall prevail as to those
provisions.
Section 14.5 - EFFECTIVE LEGALITY OF ANY PART OF THIS CHARTER:
Should any provision or section, or portion thereof, of this charter be held by
a court of competent jurisdiction be invalid, illegal, or unconstitutional,
such holdings shall not be construed as affecting the validity of this charter
as a whole or of any remaining portion of such provision of section.
CHAPTER XV — SCHEDULE
Section 15.1 - PURPOSE AND STATUS OF SCHEDULE CHAPTER:
The purpose of this schedule chapter is to inaugurate the government of the
City of Plainwell under this charter and provide the transition of the
government of the city under the previous charter to that under this charter.
It shall constitute a part of this charter only to the extent and for the time
required to accomplish that end.
Section 15.2 - ELECTION TO ADOPT CHARTER:
The charter shall be submitted to a vote of the qualified electors of the
territory comprised of the City of Plainwell at a special election to be held
on Tuesday, November 3, 1981, between the hours of 7:00 A.M. and 8:00 P.M. All
provisions for the submission of the question of adopting this charter at such
election shall be made within the manner provided by law. If, at such election,
the majority of the electors voting thereon shall vote in favor of the adoption
of this charter, then the city clerk shall perform all other acts required by
law to carry this charter into effect.
Section 15.3 - FORM OF BALLOT:
The form of the question of submission of this charter shall be as follows:
“Shall the proposed charter of the city of Plainwell, drafted by the Charter
Commission, elected November 7, 1978, be adopted?”
Section 15.4 ELECTIVE OFFICERS OF THE CITY:
   (a)   The elected officers of the city holding office on the effective date
of this charter shall continue to hold the offices to which they were elected
for the balance of the terms for which they were elected, and shall conduct
their several offices subject to the provisions of this charter. When the terms
of these elected officials shall expire, they shall be selected in accordance
with the provisions of this charter.
   (b)   For the November 1982 election only, the office of mayor shall be
filled by a majority vote of the council. The purpose of this provision is to
provide the two incumbent members equitable opportunity to serve as mayor, and
applies only to the 1982 General Election.
   (c)   At the election regarding adoption of this charter, the city clerk for
the city of Plainwell shall perform the duties required by law respecting such
election inspectors for said election.
   (d)   The board of canvassers of the county of Allegan, as established by
law, shall canvass the votes cast at such election.
Section 15.5 - EFFECTIVE DATE OF CHARTER:
If the canvass of votes upon the adoption of this charter shows it to have been
adopted, it shall take effect and become law as the charter of the city of
Plainwell for all purposes at the next regularly scheduled city council meeting
following receipt of an affirmative declaration of the county board of
canvassers
Section 15.6 - COUNCIL ACTION:
In all cases involving the transition of city government from that under the
previous charter to that under this charter, which are not covered by this
schedule, the council shall supply the necessary details and procedures and may
adopt such rules, regulations and ordinances as may be required therefore.
Section 15.7- CONTINUATION OF APPOINTIVE OFFICERS:
Except as otherwise provided herein, after the effective date of this charter,
all appointive officers and all employees of the city shall continue in city
offices or employment which they held in the city prior to the effective date
of this charter, and they shall be subject in all respects to the provisions of
this charter.
Section 15.8 - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS:
The present boards and commissions now established shall continue under their
terms of the ordinance establishing them.
RESOLUTION OF ADOPTION
At a Regular Meeting of the Charter Commission of the city of Plainwell,
Michigan held on July 22, 1981, at the usual meeting place of the Commission,
the following Commissioners were present:
At such meeting the following Resolution was offered by Commissioner Gradwell
and supported by Commissioner Popp:
RESOLVED, THAT THE Charter Commission of the City of Plainwell, Michigan does
hereby adopt the foregoing instrument as the Proposed Charter of the City of
Plainwell, and the Clerk of this commission is hereby instructed to transmit
the same to the Governor of the State of Michigan, in accordance with the
provisions of Act 279 of the Public Acts of 1909, as amended, for his approval.
The vote on the adoption of the resolution was as follows:
AYES - Commissioners Gauthier, Gradwell, Gren, Hartleb, Johnson, Popp,
Rosenberger, Slunick.
NAYS - None.
ABSENT - None.
Richard J. Leland.
City Clerk City of Plainwell
ATTESTED by the following Commissioners:
S/Brendan Gauthier
S/Gordon Gradwell
S/Robert Gren
Chairman S/Rochelle Hartleb
S/Roland Johnson
S/Arthur Popp
S/Sandra Rosenberger
S/Thomas Siunic
Richard Madison resigned May 23, 1979, replaced by Rochelle Hartleb on June 4,
1979; William McClintic resigned November 4, 1979, not replaced; Ed Lacey,
Rosemary Gazella and Don Bartels resigned December 1, 1980.
Jay Earl, Arthur Popp, Thomas Siunick appointed April 22, 1981; Jay Earl
resigned May 31, 1981; Roland Johnson appointed June 10, 1981.
I hereby certify this is a true copy of the signatures appended hereto:
S/Richard J. Leland, City Clerk
I hereby certify that the above Commissioners were those duly elected to the
Plainwell Charter Commission on November 7, 1978, that Rochelle Hartleb was
appointed by the Charter Commission to take the place of Richard Madison,
resigned, and further that Ed Lacey, Rosemary Gazella and Don Bartels resigned
and Jay Earl, Arthur Popp, Thomas Siunick and Roland Johnson were appointed to
fill such vacancies, and further that Jay Earl resigned.
S/Richard J. Leland, City Clerk
CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER 1: CODE ADOPTION
Section
   
1-1   Title and authority
   
1-2   System
   
1-3   Publication and distribution
   
1-4   Purpose
   
1-5   Definitions
   
1-6   Deputies
   
1-7   Rules and regulations
   
1-8   Violations; misdemeanors; municipal civil infractions; penalties and
sanctions
   
1-9   Savings clause
Sec. 1-1. TITLE AND AUTHORITY.
   This code of ordinances, along with any amendments to it, shall be known as
the “Plainwell Code” and may be cited as such in any court. This code is
adopted pursuant to the Home Rule Cities Act, Public Act 279 of 1909, as
amended, and the charter of the city.
(Ord. 157, adopted 12-13-1965)
Sec. 1-2. SYSTEM.
   Hereafter, all general purpose ordinances of the city shall be so drafted,
designed and numbered as to fit into this code for ready reference and to
permit indexing, loose-leaf binding and distribution of the code or pertinent
parts thereof which are of interest to courts, officials, citizens, taxpayers
and others interested therein. All ordinances and amendments shall be styled,
titled and adopted as provided in the charter and as illustrated by this
chapter. Pertinent provisions may be cited by code section numbers without
reference to chapters.
(Ord. 157, adopted 12-13-1965)
Sec. 1-3. PUBLICATION AND DISTRIBUTION.
   The City Clerk is charged with the responsibility of keeping this code up to
date in loose-leaf form, shall keep a master thereof available for inspection
by the public at all times during business hours and shall distribute all or
pertinent parts thereof to interested persons at reasonable fees.
(Ord. 157, adopted 12-13-1965)
Sec. 1-4. PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this code is to assemble in orderly form and keep current all
general purpose ordinances of the city which it is empowered to adopt.
(Ord. 157, adopted 12-13-1965)
Sec. 1-5. DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CHARTER or CITY CHARTER. The city charter of the city, adopted in 1981, as
it has been or may be subsequently amended or revised.
   CITY. The City of Plainwell, Allegan County, Michigan.
   CITY ADMINISTRATOR. The City Administrator of the city as provided in §§ 
6.2 and
6.3 of the city charter or any designee.
   CITY COUNCIL. The legislative body of the city.
   CITY MANAGER. The City Administrator of the city as provided in §§ 
6.2 and
6.3 of the city charter or any designee.
   CLERK or CITY CLERK. The duly appointed City Clerk of the city or any
deputy.
   CODE. This code of ordinances.
   FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT. Public Act 442 of 1976 as it has been and may
from time to time be amended or superseded.
   MAYOR. The Mayor of the city who is elected as provided in the city charter
or the Mayor pro tem or other official duly acting in the Mayor’s stead as
provided in the city charter.
   OPEN MEETINGS ACT. Public Act 267 of 1976 as it has been and may from time
to time be amended or superseded.
   PERSON. Includes any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association,
trust or other entity or group formed as a unit for carrying out any purpose.
   PUBLIC PLACE. The entire width of any public right-of-way, any city or other
public park and any other public or private property to which the public is
commonly invited or permitted to use.
   TREASURER or CITY TREASURER. The duly appointed City Treasurer of the city
or any designee.
(Ord. 157, adopted 12-13-1965)
Sec. 1-6. DEPUTIES.
   Officials of the city are empowered to designate persons within their
departments who are full-time employees as their deputies, only upon the
explicit authorization of the City Manager and any deputy shall have the full
power and responsibility of the deputizing official during his or her absence
or incapacity and may perform any act, privilege or duty which the official
could perform.
(Ord. 157, adopted 12-13-1965)
Sec. 1-7. RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   All rules and regulations adopted and promulgated by officials designated in
this code or approved by the City Council pursuant to this code shall have the
force and effect of ordinances of the city as though fully set forth herein;
provided, they have been published and circulated as required by the charter of
the city or by general law and violations thereof shall be considered
violations of this code.
(Ord. 157, adopted 12-13-1965)
Sec. 1-8. VIOLATIONS; MISDEMEANORS; MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTIONS; PENALTIES AND
SANCTIONS.
   A.   Unless a violation of this code or other city ordinance is specifically
designated in the code or ordinance as a municipal civil infraction (or unless
expressly otherwise provided by the code or other city ordinance or expressly
otherwise required by applicable state or federal laws), the violation shall be
a misdemeanor.
   B.   The penalty for a misdemeanor violation shall be a fine not exceeding
$500, plus costs of prosecution, or imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or both
the fine, plus costs, and imprisonment in the discretion of the court, unless
another maximum fine or term of imprisonment is otherwise specifically provided
for the violation by this code or other city ordinance or authorized by state
law.
   C.   The sanction for a violation which is a municipal civil infraction
shall be a civil fine in the amount as provided by this code or other city
ordinance, plus any costs, damages, expenses and other sanctions, as authorized
under Chapter 87 of Public Act 236 of 1961, as amended and other applicable
laws.
      1.   Unless otherwise specifically provided for a particular municipal
civil infraction violation by this code or other city ordinance, the civil fine
shall be not less than $100, plus costs, expenses and other sanctions, for each
violation.
      2.   a.   Increased civil fines may be imposed for repeat violations by a
person of any requirement or provision of this code or other city ordinance. As
used in this section, REPEAT OFFENSE means a second (or any subsequent)
municipal civil infraction violation of the same requirement or provision:
            (1)   Committed by a person within any 12-month period (unless some
other period is specifically provided by this code or other city ordinance);
and
            (2)   For which the person admits responsibility or is determined
to be responsible.
         b.   Unless otherwise specifically provided by this code or other city
ordinance for a particular violation, the increased fine for a repeat offense
shall be as follows.
            (1)   The fine for any offense which is a first repeat offense
shall be not less than $1,000, plus costs, expenses and other sanctions.
            (2)   The fine for any offense which is a second repeat offense or
any subsequent repeat offense shall be not less than $2,500, plus costs,
expenses and other sanctions.
   D.   A violation includes any act which is prohibited or made or declared to
be unlawful or an offense by this code or other city ordinance; and any
omission or failure to act where the act is required by this code or other city
ordinance.
   E.   Each act of violation and each day on which any violation of this code
or other city ordinance continues or is permitted to exist constitutes a
separate offense and shall be subject to penalties or sanctions as a separate
offense.
   F.   The imposition of a fine, penalty or other sanction shall not excuse
any person from compliance with the requirements of this code or other city
ordinance.
   G.   The remedies, penalties and sanctions provided by this code and other
city ordinances are cumulative. In addition to any remedies provided by this
section or otherwise available to the city at law, the city may revoke or
suspend any permit or license or bring an action for an injunction or initiate
other available processes against a person to restrain, prevent or abate any
violation of this code or other city ordinance. The city may also seek orders
from courts of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with this code to
abate a nuisance or other condition violating this code, to provide for
restitution or for other equitable relief. The city shall also have a cause of
action to recover as damages any cost incurred by the city resulting from the
violation of this code.
   H.   The remedies, penalties and sanctions provided by this section, unless
another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any
section of this code or other city ordinance, whether or not the remedy,
penalty or sanction is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance.
   I.   This code may also be enforced, where appropriate, by any citizen,
elector or taxpayer of the city by means of suit for injunction, mandamus,
prohibition or other available legal process, at his or her own cost, unless
voluntarily accepted by the City Council.
(Ord. 157, adopted 12-13-1965; Ord. 318, adopted 11-12-2001)
Sec. 1-9. SAVINGS CLAUSE.
   In order that an orderly transition may be effected following the adoption
of this code, it is expressly provided that any action, demand, penalty, cause
or condition existing prior to the adoption hereof shall remain in full force
and effect as though this code were not adopted and may be pressed to
conclusion under any prior provision, rule, regulation, ordinance or statute
applicable thereto.
(Ord. 157, adopted 12-13-1965)
CHAPTER 2: RECODIFICATION
Section
   
2-1   Adoption
   
2-2   Effective date; repealer
   
2-3   No revivor
   
2-4   Amendments
Sec. 2-1. ADOPTION.
   The city adopts the volume entitled “City of Plainwell Codified Ordinances
2010", to be known as the Plainwell Code (“the code”), which shall supersede
all general and permanent ordinances of the city adopted before              ,
to the extent provided in § 2-2 below.
(Ord. 226, eff. 7-12-1985; Ord. 342, adopted 9-10-2007)
Sec. 2-2. EFFECTIVE DATE; REPEALER.
   All provisions of the code shall be in full force and effect ten days after
its publication in accordance with the city charter and state law, and all
ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the city finally adopted on or
before the date specified in § 
2-1 above and not included in the code or recognized and continued in force by
reference therein, are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of the
code.
(Ord. 226, eff. 7-12-1985; Ord. 342, adopted 9-10-2007)
Sec. 2-3. NO REVIVOR.
   The repeal provided for in § 
2-2 above shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that
has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this chapter.
(Ord. 226, eff. 7-12-1985; Ord. 342, adopted 9-10-2007)
Sec. 2-4. AMENDMENTS.
   Any and all additions and amendments to the code, when passed in a form as
to indicate the intention of the City Council to make the same a part of the
code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the code so that reference to the
code shall be understood and intended to include the additions and amendments.
(Ord. 226, eff. 7-12-1985; Ord. 342, adopted 9-10-2007)
CHAPTER 3: PURCHASING
Section
   
3-1   Short title
   
3-2   Definitions
   
3-3   General purchasing policy
   
3-4   Sealed bids
   
3-5   Competitive prices - exceptions
   
3-6   Prohibitions
   
3-7   Inspection of material
   
3-8   Emergency purchases
   
3-9   Cooperative purchases
   
3-10   City charter
   
3-11   Sale of property
Sec. 3-1. SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and referred to as the “Purchasing Chapter”.
(Ord. 392, adopted 8-22-2022)
Sec. 3-2. DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGENT. The Administrator as provided for in sections 
6.2 and
6.3 of the city charter or any designee.
   COMPETITIVE PRICES. The prices for contracts received in the form of sealed
bids, bids or quotations from more than one source.
   CONTRACT. Any transaction for the city's purchase of personal property,
public improvements, equipment, or services, subject to the exclusions
hereinafter mentioned. The term CONTRACT shall not include real property or
professional or similar services which may involve unique skill sets.
   PREFERRED VENDOR. A pre-approved vendor who may be used for repeat purchases
in order to maintain a unique or uniform appearance or standard of work.
   PROFESSIONAL SERVICES. Any form of service provided for the city by a
contractor such as accounting, engineering, legal or similar services.
   SOLE SOURCE VENDOR. A pre-approved vendor who is the only feasible option to
obtain a specific good or service and for which there is no reasonable
competitor or other option.
(Ord. 392, adopted 8-22-2022)
Sec. 3-3. GENERAL PURCHASING POLICY.
   A.   Competitive prices for all contracts, except as otherwise provided in
this chapter, shall be obtained as follows.
      1.   Competitive prices, in the manner and form provided herein, shall be
obtained from not less than two sources (provided that at least two sources are
reasonably available) prior to purchases as follows:
         a.   Purchases which are estimated to cost between $1,500 and $4,999
require a minimum of two phone and/or written quotes. Such purchases may be
approved and documented by the Agent without separate City Council approval.
         b.   Purchases which are estimated to cost between $5,000 and $34,999
require a minimum of two written quotes. Such purchases may be approved and
documented only with the City Council's approval.
         c.   Except as otherwise expressly provided in this chapter, purchases
in the amount of $35,000 or more shall be based upon the receipt of sealed
bids. Such purchases may be approved and documented only with the City
Council's approval.
      2.   Competitive prices for purchases under $1,500 shall be sought if
practically feasible and may be approved and documented by the Agent without
separate City Council approval.
   B.   In awarding contracts the Agent shall consider all circumstances
surrounding city purchases of goods and services and, if in the best interests
of the city, shall deal with vendors within the city where reasonable. In order
to determine the best interests of the city, overall cost shall be considered
as well as the reputation of the vendor, proximity for the delivery of goods or
services, training and staff of the vendor, recommendation of department heads,
prior experiences of the city with particular vendors and such other similar
matters as are deemed relevant by the Agent.
   C.   In instances of unknown mechanical repair needs or other similar
unforeseen circumstances, where an initial estimate is given and the final cost
may exceed the same, the Agent is authorized to approve the additional costs
without City Council review or action so long as any additional costs will not
exceed 25% of the initial estimated cost approved by the Council, the
unforeseen circumstances are documented by the Agent, and the Council is
advised no later than its next regular meeting of the same as well as the final
cost. Nothing herein shall limit the ability of the Agent or City Council to
utilize a "not to exceed clause" or "contingency clause" in the initial
submission for approval to the Council for information.
   D.   Sole source and preferred vendors are to be identified and recommended
by department heads and presented to the City Council for approval at a minimum
of every five years.
   E.   The following principles shall govern the city in all of its purchasing
decisions:
      1.   Purchases shall reflect a comparison of available prices to
facilitate the city obtaining the most competitive price and best value in its
expenditures.
      2.   Where the interest of the city and the public good are best served,
the city may elect to purchase from other than the lowest bidder. The approving
authority for each purchase shall reflect in the official purchasing record the
basis for any procurement not made from the lowest bidder.
      3.   The city may reject any or all bids on a proposed purchase as
determined to be in the best interest of the city.
      4.   The city may elect, at its sole discretion, not to proceed with any
proposed purchase for which it has sought bids, whether through public
advertisement or otherwise.
   F.   Rules and regulations consistent with these policies, this chapter, and
the city charter may be promulgated by the Agent as reasonably necessary or
convenient for the enhanced efficiency of the city's administrative operations.
   G.   Except as provided for herein, no contract shall be entered into on
behalf of the city without the Council's prior approval.
   H.   The Agent may sign all purchase orders to be issued on behalf of the
city. The Mayor and Clerk must sign all other written contracts on behalf of
the city, except where otherwise provided herein or where the City Council has
expressly authorized another party to sign written contracts on behalf of the
city.
(Ord. 392, adopted 8-22-2022)
Sec. 3-4. SEALED BIDS.
   A.   Except as otherwise expressly provided in this chapter, purchases in
the amount of $35,000 or more require shall be based upon the receipt of sealed
bids.
   B.   Sealed bids shall be solicited by the Agent by mailing a copy of the
specifications or requirements to qualified vendors as may be known to the
Agent or the city's consultants and by posting a copy of the request at city
hall and in such other locations as directed by the Agent in his or her
discretion.
   C.   Unless fixed by the Council, the Agent shall prescribe the amount of
any security to be deposited with any bid and, in the case of construction
contracts the amount of any payment and performance bond to be required of the
successful bidder. The security shall be in the form of a certified or
cashier's check or bond written by a security company authorized to do business
in Michigan as reasonably determined by the city and in a form satisfactory to
the city.
   D.   Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place designated in the
notice requesting bids. Bids shall be opened by the Agent and at least one
other city employee. Immediately following opening, the bids shall be examined,
tabulated and made available for inspection.
   E.   The tabulation of the bids shall be submitted to the Council not later
than the next regular Council meeting following the opening of the bids. The
Council in its sole discretion may reject any and all bids. The Council may
also waive any irregularities in the bids, enter into negotiations after bids
are opened and take such other actions as the Council determines to be in the
best interest of the city.
   F.   After the opening of bids, the bids may not be withdrawn without
forfeiture of the bid deposit, where applicable. Deposits of security
accompanying bids shall be retained until the contract is awarded and, where
possible, until executed. Deposits from bidders which are not awarded the
contract shall be returned to the various bidders within 72 hours following
final Council action. If any successful bidder fails or refuses to enter into
the contract awarded to him or her within ten days after being notified of the
award or file any bond required within the same time, the deposit accompanying
its bid shall be forfeited to the city and the Council may, in its discretion,
award the contract to another bidder or reject all bids.
   G.   If, after ample opportunity for competitive bidding, no bids are
received or the bids received are not satisfactory to the Council in its sole
discretion, the Council may obtain new competitive bids or authorize the Agent
to negotiate or contract on the open market without bids.
(Ord. 392, adopted 8-22-2022)
Sec. 3-5. COMPETITIVE PRICES - EXCEPTIONS.
   Competitive prices (including, but not limited to, sealed bids) shall not be
required in the following instances:
   A.   In the employment of professional services subject to City Council
approval.
   B.   In the event the city elects to use city personnel to furnish the
desired services.
   C.   In the event that doing so is not reasonably possible, such as
purchasing equipment without any comparable options or when purchasing annual
supplies by volume where the final amount is unknown.
   D.   When utilizing the MiDeal Program offered through the State of
Michigan, or similar joint purchasing arrangement with another public or
governmental body or agency.
   E.   Contracts with pre-approved preferred or sole source vendors.
(Ord. 392, adopted 8-22-2022)
Sec. 3-6. PROHIBITIONS.
   A.   Purchases shall not be subdivided to avoid the requirements of this
chapter.
   B.   The Agent and all other officers and/or employees of the city are
prohibited from accepting, directly or indirectly, from any person, company,
firm or corporation doing business with the city any rebate, gift, money or
anything of other than minimal value without the express prior approval of the
Council.
   C.   No contract shall be made with any person, firm, or corporation in
default to the city.
   D.   No purchases of personal property shall be made unless a sufficient,
unencumbered appropriation balance is available.
(Ord. 392, adopted 8-22-2022)
Sec. 3-7. INSPECTION OF MATERIAL.
   The responsibility for the inspection and acceptance of all materials,
supplies and equipment shall rest with the Agent; provided that, he or she may
delegate the responsibility to a department head or other party.
(Ord. 392, adopted 8-22-2022)
Sec. 3-8. EMERGENCY PURCHASES.
   In the event of an emergency or an apparent emergency endangering the public
health, safety and/or welfare of the city, the Agent, or a department head,
with the Agent's approval, may directly purchase any supplies, materials or
equipment which are deemed immediately necessary. Within 72 hours from the time
of purchase, the Agent or department head shall file in writing with the Agent
a detailed explanation of the necessity for the purchase or purchases, in
addition to a request for purchase. The Agent shall submit the statement to the
City Council no later than the next regular meeting of the Council for
information only.
(Ord. 392, adopted 8-22-2022)
Sec. 3-9. COOPERATIVE PURCHASES.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the Council or Agent,
as the case may be, shall have the power to enter into purchase contracts with
other governmental units, and/or political subdivisions, should there be an
opportunity for a saving to the city and/or where the Council determines that
it would be in the best interest of the city.
(Ord. 392, adopted 8-22-2022)
Sec. 3-10. CITY CHARTER.
   In addition to the requirements of this chapter, all contracts shall comply
with the requirements of the city charter.
(Ord. 392, adopted 8-22-2022)
Sec 3-11. SALE OF PROPERTY.
   No interest in property, real or personal, in the possession or ownership of
the city shall be sold or transferred without the prior approval of the City
Council, which approval shall include the terms and conditions of the sale or
transfer. The sole exception to this shall be sales or transfers of real or
personal property with an estimated value of less than $1,000.
(Ord. 392, adopted 8-22-2022)
CHAPTER 4: EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS POLICY
AND ORGANIZATION
Section
   
4-1   Intent and purpose
   
4-2   Authority
   
4-3   Responsibilities
   
4-4   Definitions
   
4-5   Administration responsibilities
   
4-6   Assistance provisions
   
4-7   Assistant Coordinators’ responsibilities
   
4-8   Mayor
   
4-9   Authority
   
4-10   Request for declaration
   
4-11   Action to be taken
   
4-12   Procedures
   
4-13   Regulations
   
4-14   Waiver
   
4-15   Emergency Services Coordinator
   
4-16   Duties
   
4-17   Volunteer citizens
   
4-18   Enlistment of citizens
   
4-19   Employee immunity
   
4-20   Immunity
   
4-21   Property immunity
   
4-22   Superseding order
   
4-23   Unlawful obstruction
Sec. 4-1. INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to establish an organization
that will ensure the complete and efficient utilization of all municipal
resources during periods of emergency and disaster.
(Ord. 244, adopted 5-9-1988)
Sec. 4-2. AUTHORITY.
   The City Manager is responsible for the coordinating of city-wide emergency
preparedness; will provide the means through which the City Council and the
Mayor may exercise the authority and discharge the responsibilities vested in
them by this chapter and state law, including without limitation, Public Act
390 of 1976, as amended.
(Ord. 244, adopted 5-9-1988)
Sec. 4-3. RESPONSIBILITIES.
   This chapter will not relieve any elected officials or municipal departments
of the normal responsibilities or authority given by general law or local
ordinance, nor will it affect the work of the American Red Cross or other
volunteer agencies organized for relief in a natural disaster.
(Ord. 244, adopted 5-9-1988)
Sec. 4-4. DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COORDINATOR. The City Manager, who shall coordinate emergency planning and
services within the city or as prescribed in this chapter.
   COUNTY COORDINATOR. The Allegan County Emergency Services Coordinator or the
authorized representative.
   DISASTER. An occurrence or imminent threat of widespread or severe damage,
injury or loss of life or property resulting from any natural or human-made
cause, including, but not limited to, fire, flood, snow, ice or windstorm, wave
action, oil spills, water contamination requiring emergency action to avert
danger or damage, utility failure, chemical, biological, radiological, nuclear,
explosive incident, major transportation accident, epidemic, air contamination,
blight, drought, infestation, explosion, riot or hostile military or
paramilitary action or similar occurrences resulting from terrorist activities,
riots or civil disorders.
   EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN. The City Emergency Operations Plan which has been
prepared to coordinate disaster response and recovery within the city.
   EMERGENCY SERVICES. Preparations for and relief from effects of natural and
human-made disasters, as defined herein, and including Allegan County Office of
Emergency Management.
   EMERGENCY SERVICES FORCES. All disaster relief forces; all agencies of the
municipal government, private and volunteer personnel, public officers and
employees; and all other persons or groups of persons having duties or
responsibilities under this chapter or pursuant to a lawful order or directive
authorized by this chapter.
   EMERGENCY SERVICES VOLUNTEER. Any person duly registered and appointed by
the Coordinator and assigned to participate in the emergency services activity.
   EMERGENCY SITUATION. Any situation confronting a community requiring
emergency actions of a lesser nature than a disaster, as defined above, to
include, but not limited to, civil disturbances, labor strikes, visits by
national or international dignitaries and build-up activities prior to an
actual disaster.
   STATE OF DISASTER. A declaration by executive order or proclamation by the
Governor under the provisions of Public Act 390 of 1976, which activates the
disaster response and recovery aspects of state, local and inter-jurisdictional
disaster emergency plans and authorizes the deployment and use of any forces to
which the plan or plans apply.
   STATE OF EMERGENCY. A declaration by the Mayor, pursuant to this chapter,
which activates the disaster response and recovery aspects of the city’s
Emergency Operations Plan and authorizes the deployment and use of any
municipal forces to which the plan applies.
(Ord. 244, adopted 5-9-1988)
Sec. 4-5. ADMINISTRATION RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The Mayor, with the approval of the Council, is authorized and directed to
create an organization to prepare for community disasters utilizing to the
fullest extent existing agencies within the municipality. The Mayor, as
executive head of the city government, shall be the Director of the Emergency
Services Forces of the city and shall be responsible for their organization,
administration and operation, working through the Coordinator.
(Ord. 244, adopted 5-9-1988)
Sec. 4-6. ASSISTANCE PROVISIONS.
   All officers and employees of departments, commissions, boards, institutions
and other agencies of the city government designated by the Mayor, with the
approval of the Council, as Emergency Services Forces shall cooperate with the
Emergency Services Coordinator in the formulation of the Emergency Operations
Plan and they shall assist the Coordinator in all matters pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 244, adopted 5-9-1988)
Sec. 4-7. ASSISTANT COORDINATORS’ RESPONSIBILITIES.
   Assistant Coordinators shall be designated to work with the Coordinator on
emergency planning matters. Assistant Coordinators shall be selected and shall
serve as follows.
   A.   There shall be one Assistant Coordinator appointed from each city
department as designated by the department head, with the approval of the
Mayor, as part of the Emergency Services Forces.
   B.   Assistant Coordinators shall assume the duties of the Coordinator
whenever he or she is unavailable during disasters or emergency situations in
the order of designation by the Mayor, acting upon the recommendation of the
Coordinator.
(Ord. 244, adopted 5-9-1988)
Sec. 4-8. MAYOR.
   The Mayor may exercise the emergency power and authority as specified in
this chapter. Whenever a situation requires or is likely to require that the
Mayor invoke the power and authority, he or she shall, as soon as reasonably
expedient, convene the Council to perform its legislative and administrative
duties as the situation demands and shall report to that body relative to
emergency activities. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as abridging
or curtailing the powers of the Council unless specifically provided.
(Ord. 244, adopted 5-9-1988)
Sec. 4-9. AUTHORITY.
   Under the following circumstances, the Mayor may declare a state of
emergency exists in the city and may assemble and utilize the Emergency
Services Forces in accordance with the city’s Emergency Operations Plan and he
or she may prescribe the manner and conditions of the use of the Emergency
Services Forces:
   A.   Whenever, on the basis of information received from authoritative
sources, he or she feels that a large scale disaster or emergency situation in
the city or state is imminent; and
   B.   During any period of disaster in the city or state and thereafter as
long as he or she shall deem it necessary.
(Ord. 244, adopted 5-9-1988)
Sec. 4-10. REQUEST FOR DECLARATION.
   Whenever the Mayor deems that any condition in the city is beyond the
control of local public or private agencies or has attained or threatens to
attain the proportions of a major disaster, he or she may request in accordance
with Public Act 390 of 1986 the Allegan County Emergency Management Director to
declare a local state of disaster exists therein by instructing the Coordinator
to contact the District Coordinator in accordance with § 14 of Public Act 390
of 1976.
(Ord. 244, adopted 5-9-1988)
Sec. 4-11. ACTION TO BE TAKEN.
   The Mayor, with the approval of the Council, may:
   A.   Appropriate and expend funds, make contracts, obtain and distribute
equipment, materials and supplies for disaster purposes;
   B.   Provide for the health and safety of persons and property, including
emergency assistance to the victims of a disaster;
   C.   Assign and make equipment available for duty, the employees, property
or equipment of the municipality relating to fire fighting, engineering,
rescue, health, medical and related services; police, transportation,
construction and similar items or service for disaster relief purposes within
or without the physical limits of the municipality; and
   D.   In the event of a foreign attack upon the state, to waive procedures
and formalities otherwise required by law pertaining to the performance of
public work, entering into contracts, the incurring of obligations, the
employment of permanent and temporary workers, the utilization of volunteer
workers, the rental of equipment, the purchase and distribution with or without
compensation of supplies, materials and facilities and the appropriation and
expenditure of public funds.
(Ord. 244, adopted 5-9-1988)
Sec. 4-12. PROCEDURES.
   The Mayor, with the approval of the Council, shall establish procedures for
the succession of government during emergencies where officials are unavailable
for exercising the powers and discharging the duties of their respective
offices.
(Ord. 244, adopted 5-9-1988)
Sec. 4-13. REGULATIONS.
   The Mayor, with the approval of the Council, may make regulations permitting
the Coordinator to assemble and utilize the Emergency Services Forces and
provide disaster relief aid as prescribed herein.
(Ord. 244, adopted 5-9-1988)
Sec. 4-14. WAIVER.
   When obtaining formal approvals would result in delay of relief activity,
the Mayor may, until the Council convenes, waive procedures and formalities
otherwise required pertaining to the performance of public works, entering into
contracts, the incurring of obligations, the employment of temporary workers,
the rental of equipment, the purchase and distribution of supplies, materials
and facilities and expenditure of existing funds and the Council is also
empowered to waive any procedures and formalities.
(Ord. 244, adopted 5-9-1988)
Sec. 4-15. EMERGENCY SERVICES COORDINATOR.
   The Emergency Services Coordinator shall be responsible for the
administration, planning, coordination and operation of all emergency
preparedness activities in the city. The Emergency Services Coordinator shall
maintain liaison with county, state and federal authorities and the authorities
of adjacent and nearby political subdivisions so as to ensure the most
effective emergency operations.
(Ord. 244, adopted 5-9-1988)
Sec. 4-16. DUTIES.
   The Emergency Services Coordinator duties shall include, but not be limited
to, the following:
   A.   Development of the City Emergency Operations Plan and any other
appropriate disaster plans, for the immediate use of all of the facilities,
equipment, manpower and other resources of the city for the purpose of
minimizing or preventing damage to persons or property; and protecting and
restoring to usefulness governmental services and public utilities necessary
for the public health, safety and general welfare;
   B.   Coordinating the recruitment and training of volunteer personnel and
agencies to augment the personnel and facilities of the city for emergency
purposes;
   C.   Through public information programs, educating the population as to
actions necessary and required for the protection of persons and property in
case of a disaster;
   D.   Conducting practice alerts and exercises to ensure the efficient
operation of the city’s emergency organization and to familiarize residents of
the city with emergency regulations, procedures and operations;
   E.   Coordinating the activity of all other public and private agencies
engaged in any emergency or disaster relief programs;
   F.   Negotiating with owners or persons in control of buildings or other
property for the use of the buildings or property for emergency or disaster
relief purposes and designating suitable buildings as public shelters;
   G.   Establishing and maintaining administrative control over a local CBNRE
program, to include emergency preparations for both peacetime radiation
incidents and international wartime disasters; and
   H.   Coordinating municipal emergency preparedness activities with those at
the county level and adjacent municipalities.
(Ord. 244, adopted 5-9-1988)
Sec. 4-17. VOLUNTEER CITIZENS.
   Each department, commission, board or other agency of city government may,
at any time, appoint or authorize the appointment of volunteer citizens to
augment the personnel of the city department, commission, board or agency in
time of emergency. The individuals shall be enrolled as Emergency Services
Volunteers and shall be subject to the rules and regulations set forth by the
respective department, commission, board or agency head for the volunteers.
(Ord. 244, adopted 5-9-1988)
Sec. 4-18. ENLISTMENT OF CITIZENS.
   The Coordinator may enlist volunteer citizens to form the personnel of an
emergency service for which the city has no counterpart or to temporarily
augment personnel of the city engaged in emergency activities. The Coordinator
shall maintain formal records of all volunteers for worker’s compensation
purposes.
(Ord. 244, adopted 5-9-1988)
Sec. 4-19. EMPLOYEE IMMUNITY.
   City employees assigned to duty as a part of the Emergency Services Forces
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall retain all of the rights,
privileges and immunities of city employees and shall receive the compensation
incident to their employment.
(Ord. 244, adopted 5-9-1988)
Sec. 4-20. IMMUNITY.
   This chapter is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for
the protection of the public health, safety and general welfare. Excepting
cases of willful misconduct or bad faith, neither the city, its agents,
representatives, employees, volunteer or auxiliary disaster relief workers
engaged in any disaster relief activity, complying or reasonably attempting to
comply with this chapter or any order or written directive pursuant to this
chapter or other precautionary measures enacted by the city shall be liable for
the death of or injury to persons or for property damage resulting from any
activity.
(Ord. 244, adopted 5-9-1988)
Sec. 4-21. PROPERTY IMMUNITY.
   Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who
voluntarily and without compensation grants the city the right to inspect,
designate and use the whole or any part of the real estate or premises for the
purpose of sheltering persons during a disaster or during an authorized
practice disaster exercise, shall not be civilly liable for the death of or
injury to, any person on or about the real estate or premises under the
license, privilege or other permission or for loss of or damage to, the
property of the person.
(Ord. 244, adopted 5-9-1988)
Sec. 4-22. SUPERSEDING ORDER.
   At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated
pursuant to this chapter shall be in effect, they shall supersede all other
existing and future ordinances, orders, rules and regulations, insofar as the
latter may be in consistent therewith.
(Ord. 244, adopted 5-9-1988)
Sec. 4-23. UNLAWFUL OBSTRUCTION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder or delay
any Emergency Services Forces in the enforcement or accomplishment of any rule
or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter or to do any act forbidden by any
rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this chapter.
It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any
emblem, insignia or other means of identification as a member of the Emergency
Services Forces of the city unless authority to do so has been granted to the
person by proper officials. Convictions for violations of the provisions of
this chapter shall be punishable by $500 fine and/or 30 days in the county jail
to which court costs may be added.
(Ord. 244, adopted 5-9-1988)
CHAPTER 5: MERIT SYSTEM OF PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT
Section
   
5-1   Purpose
   
5-2   System adopted
Sec. 5-1. PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for a merit system of personnel
management in accordance with § 
6.12 of the charter.
(Ord. 197, adopted 4-19-1982)
Sec. 5-2. SYSTEM ADOPTED.
   A merit system of personnel management for the city is established in
accordance with the following terms and conditions.
   A.   A complete copy of the merit system of personnel management for the
city shall be available in the Clerk’s office for inspection by the public at
all times.
   B.   The merit system of personnel management so adopted shall be thereafter
amended or modified only by action of the City Council at a regularly scheduled
Council meeting; provided further that, notice of any amendments and the
location where the amendments can be reviewed by the public will be published
no later than 15 days after any amendments are so adopted.
(Ord. 197, adopted 4-19-1982)
CHAPTER 6: COMPENSATION COMMISSION
Section
   
6-1   Local Officers Compensation Commission, creation and terms of office
   
6-2   Determination of salaries
   
6-3   Officers Compensation Commission procedure
   
6-4   Changes in procedure for establishing compensation
   
6-5   Open Meetings Act
   
6-6   Freedom of Information Act
Sec. 6-1. LOCAL OFFICERS COMPENSATION COMMISSION, CREATION AND TERMS OF OFFICE.
   The Local Officers Compensation Commission shall determine the salaries of
each local elected official. The Compensation Commission shall consist of five
members who are registered electors of the city, appointed by the Mayor,
subject to confirmation by a majority of the members elected and serving on the
City Council. The terms of office shall be five years. Members shall be
appointed at the first regular meeting of the City Council in each calendar
year. Vacancies shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term. No
member or employee of the legislative, judicial or executive branch of any
level of government or members of the immediate family of the member or
employee shall be eligible to be a member of the Compensation Commission.
(Ord. 237, adopted 12-8-1986)
Sec. 6-2. DETERMINATION OF SALARIES.
   The Compensation Commission shall determine the salary of each local elected
official, which determination shall be the salary unless the City Council
shall, by resolution adopted by two-thirds of the members elected to and
serving on the City Council, reject it. The determination of the Compensation
Commission shall be effective 30 days following its filing with the City Clerk
unless rejected by the City Council. If the determination is rejected, the
existing salary shall prevail. Any expense allowance or reimbursement paid to
elected officials in addition to salary shall be for expenses incurred in the
course of city business and accounted for to the city.
(Ord. 237, adopted 12-8-1986)
Sec. 6-3. OFFICERS COMPENSATION COMMISSION PROCEDURE.
   The Compensation Commission shall meet for not more than 15 session days in
every odd numbered year and shall make its determination within 45 calendar
days of its first meeting. The first session day shall be no later than April
15 and the determination shall be filed with the City Clerk on June 1 or as
close to June 1 as is practicable in any year in which the Compensation
Commission files a determination. A majority of the members of the Compensation
Commission shall constitute a quorum for conducting the business of the
Compensation Commission. The Compensation Commission shall take no action or
make any determination without a concurrence of a majority of the members
appointed and serving on the Compensation Commission. The Compensation
Commission shall elect a Chairperson from among its members. SESSION DAYS means
any calendar day on which the Compensation Commission meets and a quorum is
present. The members of the Compensation Commission shall receive no
compensation, but shall be entitled to their actual and necessary expenses
incurred in the performance of their duties.
(Ord. 237, adopted 12-8-1986)
Sec. 6-4. CHANGES IN PROCEDURE FOR ESTABLISHING COMPENSATION.
   The procedure for establishing the compensation of elected officials may be
changed by charter amendment or revision.
(Ord. 237, adopted 12-8-1986)
Sec. 6-5. OPEN MEETINGS ACT.
   All business which the Commission may perform shall be conducted at a public
meeting of the Commission held in compliance with the Open Meetings Act, Public
Act 267 of 1976, as amended from time to time.
(Ord. 237, adopted 12-8-1986)
Sec. 6-6. FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT.
   A writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of or retained by the
Commission in the performance of an official function shall be made available
to the public in compliance with the Freedom of Information Act.
(Ord. 237, adopted 12-8-1986)
CHAPTER 7: ORDINANCE ENFORCEMENT
Section
   
7-1   Ordinance Enforcement Officer
   
7-2   Appointment
   
7-3   Duties
Sec. 7-1. ORDINANCE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   There is established the Office of Ordinance Enforcement Officer within the
city.
(Ord. 236, adopted 7-14-1986; Ord. 318, adopted 11-12-2001)
Sec. 7-2. APPOINTMENT.
   The City Council may, by resolution, appoint any person or persons to the
office of Ordinance Enforcement Officer to serve at the pleasure of the City
Council for a term or terms as may be designated in its resolution and the City
Council may, in its discretion by resolution, remove any person from that
office.
(Ord. 236, adopted 7-14-1986; Ord. 318, adopted 11-12-2001)
Sec. 7-3. DUTIES.
   A.   The Ordinance Enforcement Officer is authorized to enforce all city
ordinance provisions whether they specifically designate a different official
for enforcement or do not designate any particular enforcing officer. Where a
particular officer is designated in any ordinance, the authority of the
Ordinance Enforcement Officer to enforce the ordinance shall be in addition and
supplementary to the authority granted to any other specific officer. The
ordinance enforcing authority of the other officers specifically designated in
any city ordinance shall continue in full force and effect and shall, in no
way, be diminished or impaired by the terms of this chapter.
   B.   Duties of the Ordinance Enforcement Officer shall include, but shall
not be limited to, the following: investigation of ordinance violations;
serving notice of violations; serving appearance tickets as authorized by state
law and this code; serving municipal civil infraction notices and citations as
authorized by state law and this code; appearance in court or other judicial
proceedings to assist in the prosecution of ordinance violators and other
ordinance-enforcing duties as may be delegated by the City Manager or assigned
by the city’s prosecuting attorney.
(Ord. 236, adopted 7-14-1986; Ord. 318, adopted 11-12-2001)
CHAPTER 8: LICENSES
Section
   
8-1   Licenses; responsibility of Clerk
   
8-2   Revocation
   
8-3   Renewal of license
   
8-4   Revocation or non-renewal of license, procedure
Sec. 8-1. LICENSES; RESPONSIBILITY OF CLERK.
   Except as otherwise provided in this code, the Clerk shall be responsible
for the issuance of all licenses issued by the city under state law or this
code. The Clerk shall collect all license fees for remittance to the Treasurer
who shall give receipt therefore. No license shall be issued unless all license
fees have been paid, all requirements for issuance have been met and the
proposed activity to be licensed will not violate any zoning or other ordinance
provision. The Clerk may, in the Clerk’s discretion, require a written opinion
from the City Attorney or any other city official, board or commission with
respect to the proposed license prior to its issuance; which opinion shall be
given within 30 days after the date the application for license has been made.
(Ord. 218, adopted 5-29-1984)
Sec. 8-2. REVOCATION.
   Unless another procedure is provided by state law or this code, all licenses
granted by the city may be revoked by the City Manager after the licensee is
provided notice and opportunity for a hearing before the City Manager. Grounds
for revocation include any of the following:
   A.   Fraud or misrepresentation by the licensee in the procurement or
renewal of the license;
   B.   Failure by the licensee to comply with requirements for the issuance of
the license or any conditions imposed by the license;
   C.   Violation by the licensee of any statute or ordinance provision in the
operation of the licensed business or operation of the business in a manner as
to constitute a nuisance; and/or
   D.   Failure of the licensee to timely pay (i.e., on or before the date on
which penalties and interest accrue) all real and personal property taxes,
water and sewer bills, special assessments or other amounts owed or due and
payable to the city.
(Ord. 218, adopted 5-29-1984)
Sec. 8-3. RENEWAL OF LICENSE.
   The City Council may, following hearing with notice to the licensee, decline
to renew a license granted under this chapter for the same reasons as set forth
in § 
8-2 above.
(Ord. 218, adopted 5-29-1984)
Sec. 8-4. REVOCATION OR NON-RENEWAL OF LICENSE, PROCEDURE.
   The City Manager may conduct a hearing on a proposed revocation or non-
renewal of a license upon a written complaint detailing the reasons for the
proposed revocation or non-renewal being filed with the City Clerk by any city
official or other person. The Clerk shall set a time and date for hearing and
shall give notice of the hearing to the licensee together with a copy of the
complaint no less than ten days prior to the hearing. The licensee shall be
afforded an opportunity at the hearing to show cause why the revocation, denial
or non-renewal of a license should not occur. The City Manager shall, within a
reasonable time following the hearing, issue written findings of fact and a
decision on the revocation or non-renewal which shall be sent to the licensee.
(Ord. 218, adopted 5-29-1984)
CHAPTER 9: PUBLIC SAFETY
Section
   
9-1   Placing or throwing glass or other debris on beach or public highway
   
9-2   Well or cistern; abandoning or failing to keep safely covered or fenced;
depth and width
   
9-3   Excavation or basement; failure to cover or fence
   
9-4   Icebox or refrigerator; abandoned without removing snaplock or locking
device; penalty
Sec. 9-1. PLACING OR THROWING GLASS OR OTHER DEBRIS ON BEACH OR PUBLIC HIGHWAY.
   Any person who shall place or throw glass or other dangerous pointed or
edged substances in or on any highway or walk or on public property within 50
feet of a public highway shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. eff. 7-12-1985)
Sec. 9-2. WELL OR CISTERN; ABANDONING OR FAILING TO KEEP SAFELY COVERED OR
FENCED; DEPTH AND WIDTH.
   Any person who shall knowingly abandon or fail to keep safely covered or
fenced any well or cistern of a depth of four feet or more and with a top width
of 12 inches or more on property owned or occupied by the person shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. eff. 7-12-1985)
Sec. 9-3. EXCAVATION OR BASEMENT; FAILURE TO COVER OR FENCE.
   Any person who shall hereafter dig or cause to be dug an excavation or a
partially constructed basement for any building or structure and who shall fail
to cover or safely fence the same within a period of 90 days after the
excavation has been commenced shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. eff. 7-12-1985)
Sec. 9-4. ICEBOX OR REFRIGERATOR; ABANDONED WITHOUT REMOVING SNAPLOCK OR
LOCKING DEVICE; PENALTY.
   Any person who knowingly leaves, in a place accessible to children, any
abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other container of a
kind and size sufficient to permit the entrapment and suffocation of a child
therein, without first removing the door, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. eff. 7-12-1985)
CHAPTER 10: BOARD OF HEALTH
Section
   
10-1   Creation; powers and duties
Sec. 10-1. CREATION; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   There is created a Board of Public Health consisting of the members of the
City Council. It shall have the powers and duties imposed on city boards of
health by general law. It may delegate the performance of the powers and duties
to the hospitals, physicians or other competent persons or agencies of the city
as, in its judgment, will result in the prompt accomplishment thereof.
(Ords. 68 and 75, readopted 12-31-1965)
CHAPTER 11: CITY PARKS
Section
   
11-1   Purpose and name
   
11-2   Definitions
   
11-3   Prohibited activities
   
11-4   Hours of operation
   
11-5   Violations and penalties
Editor’s note:
   Nothing in this chapter is meant to limit the authority of the city to
otherwise enforce its ordinances in
Chapters 22 et seq.
Sec. 11-1. PURPOSE AND NAME.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the development, management
and regulation of parks and park facilities in the city and to preserve and
promote the city and its landscape resource values. This chapter shall be known
as the “City Parks Chapter”.
(Ord. 200, adopted 5-10-1982)
Sec. 11-2. DEFINITIONS.
   A.   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CITY SUPERINTENDENT. The Superintendent of the Department of Public Works
or his or her authorized representative.
      COMMISSION. The City Parks and Tree Commission created and established by
ordinance.
      DEPARTMENT. The Department of Public Works of the city.
      PARK. All public parks having individual names and all areas, whether
owned by the city or not, to which the public has free access as a park.
      TREE. Tree, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation.
   B.   The provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise specifically stated
herein, shall apply only to public streets, parkways, parks and other land
publicly owned or controlled by the city.
(Ord. 200, adopted 5-10-1982)
Sec. 11-3. PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to do any of the following acts in any
park in the city:
   A.   Possess any alcoholic liquor, as that term is defined in the State
Liquor Control Act, in a container which is open, uncapped or upon which the
seal is broken or consume any alcoholic liquor; provided, however, that, the
alcoholic liquor may be sold, possessed and consumed in a park in accordance
with a special license with the specific approval of the City Council and in
conformance with the conditions of the approval and condition of a special
license granted by the State Liquor Control Commission;
   B.   Litter in a park or deposit of any garbage, glass, tin cans, papers or
miscellaneous waste in any park, except in containers provided for that
purpose;
   C.   To deposit garbage, trash or similar refuse generated outside the park
as a result of residential or commercial uses in any park refuse container;
   D.   To commit or assist any person in committing an act of vandalism in any
park, vandalism to include the intentional destruction, damage or defacement of
any public or private property, real or personal, without the consent of the
owner or person having lawful custody of said property. The offense shall
include, but not be limited to, actions taken by cutting, tearing, breaking,
marking, painting or drawing when the actions have the effect of destroying,
damaging or defacing the property;
   E.   Kindle or build fires in any park except in a fireplace, stove or other
facility provided for that purpose, nor shall any person leave any legal fire
unattended and it shall be the affirmative duty of the person last using any
legally kindled fire to see to it that the fire is extinguished before leaving;
   F.   Drive or park any motor vehicle, including, but not limited to, off-
road vehicles and snowmobiles, in any city park or city boardwalk area, except
in those areas specifically designated for motor vehicle use or in spaces set
aside and designated as parking areas. For purposes of this division F., OFF-
ROAD VEHICLES shall mean a motor vehicle capable of cross-country travel
without benefit of an improved road or trail. In addition, the operation of all
motor vehicles on all streets, roads and public rights-of-way within any city
park shall be subject to the provisions of the State Vehicle Code, as amended
and the Uniform Traffic Code, as amended;
   G.   Park or leave unattended any motor vehicle in any park during the
posted period of time during which any park is closed; and
   H.   Enter upon or remain in a park other than during the posted times when
the park is open; provided further that, all parks shall be posted so as to
inform the public as to the hours that parks are open to the public and all
postings shall conform with the times set forth herein.
(Ord. 200, adopted 5-10-1982; Ord. 351, adopted 10-12-2009)
Sec. 11-4. HOURS OF OPERATION.
   The hours which parks shall be open to the public by designation of park
name and hours of operation are as designated from time to time by resolution
of the City Council or otherwise by consent of the City Council.
   A.   Hicks Park: sunrise to 10:00 p.m.;
   B.   Sherwood Park: sunrise to 10:00 p.m. (11:00 p.m. for basketball courts
May 1 through October 30;
   C.   Thurl Cook Park: sunrise to 10:00 p.m.; and
   D.   Fannie Pell Park: sunrise to 10:00 p.m.
(Ord. 200, adopted 5-10-1982)
Sec. 11-5. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   A.   Any person who violates the provisions of § 
11-3A., D., F. or G. of this chapter or who disobeys any lawful order issued in
pursuance of those division is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500 or imprisonment not to
exceed 90 days or both the fine and imprisonment at the discretion of the
court.
   B.   Any person who violates the provisions of § 
11-3B., C., E. or H. of this chapter or who disobeys any lawful order issued in
pursuance of those division is responsible for a municipal civil infraction,
subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than $250, plus costs and other
sanctions, for each violation. Repeat offenses shall be subject to increased
fines as provided this code, except that the increased fine for a repeat
offense shall be as follows.
      1.   The fine for any offense which is a first repeat offense shall be
not less than $500, plus costs and other sanctions.
      2.   The fine for any offense which is a second repeat offense or any
subsequent repeat offense shall be not less than $1,000, plus costs and other
sanctions.
   C.   Imposition of any penalty for a violation of this chapter shall not be
construed as a waiver of the right of the city to collect from the defendant
the cost of repairing, replacing or otherwise indemnifying the city for damage
caused to property, either real or personal incurred by the city as a result of
the unlawful act of the defendant.
   D.   The city retains the right to seek and obtain injunctive relief in
addition to or as an alternative to the penalties prescribed above in order to
promote the purposes of this chapter.
(Ord. 200, adopted 5-10-1982; Ord. 318, adopted 11-12-2001)
CHAPTER 12: DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT PLAN AND TAX INCREMENT FINANCING PLAN
Section
   
12-1   Preliminary findings
   
12-2   Findings and determination
Sec. 12-1. PRELIMINARY FINDINGS.
   A.   A public hearing was held on 12-9-1985 on the proposed Development Plan
and Tax Increment Financing Plan for the Plainwell Downtown Development Area,
following the giving of notice thereof, all in accordance with Public Act 197
of 1975, as amended.
   B.   There are no findings or recommendations of a development area
citizens’ council, there having been no statutory requirement to form a
development area citizens’ council.
   C.   The proposed Development Plan and Tax Increment Financing Plan meet the
requirements set forth in Public Act 197 of 1975, as amended, specifically § 17
(2) thereof.
   D.   The proposed method of financing the proposed development is feasible
and the Downtown Development Authority of the city has the ability to arrange
for financing.
   E.   The proposed development is reasonable and necessary to carry out the
purposes of Public Act 197 of 1975, as amended.
   F.   Any land included within the proposed development area which is to be
acquired is reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes of the plan and of
Public Act 197 of 1975, as amended, in an efficient and economically
satisfactory manner.
   G.   The proposed Development Plan is in reasonable accord with the Master
Plan of the city.
   H.   Public services, such as fire and police protection and utilities, are
or will be adequate to service the proposed project areas.
   I.   Changes in zoning, streets, street levels, intersections and utilities
are reasonably necessary for the proposed project and for the city.
(Ord. 119, adopted 12-9-1985; Ord. 344, adopted 12-10-2007)
Sec. 12-2. FINDINGS AND DETERMINATION.
   A.   Based upon the foregoing findings, it is held and determined that the
Development Plan and Tax Increment Financing Plan for the City Downtown
Development Area constitutes a public purpose.
   B.   The amended Development Plan and Tax Increment Financing Plan as
approved by the Downtown Development Authority on 12-10-2007 is approved.
(Ord. 119, adopted 12-9-1985; Ord. 231, eff. 3-30-1986; Ord. 344, adopted 12-
10-2007)
CHAPTER 13: DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
Section
   
13-1   Purpose
   
13-2   Definitions
   
13-3   Creation of Authority
   
13-4   Description of Downtown District
   
13-5   Board
   
13-6   Powers of the Authority
   
13-7   Secretary of State
   
13-8   Termination
Sec. 13-1. PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to create a public body corporate to act in
the best interests of the city to halt property value deterioration, increase
property tax valuation where possible in the business district of the city and
eliminate the causes of that deterioration and to promote economic growth
pursuant to Public Act 197 of 1975.
(Ord. 194, adopted 9-14-1981)
Sec. 13-2. DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. The terms
used herein shall have the same meaning as given them in Public Act 197 of 1975
or as hereinafter in this section provided, unless the context clearly
indicates to the contrary and shall be in addition to the terms provided in
Public Act 197 of 1975.
   ACT 197. Public Act 197 of 1975 as now in effect or hereafter amended.
   AUTHORITY. The Downtown Development Authority of the city.
   DOWNTOWN DISTRICT. The Downtown District designated herein.
(Ord. 194, adopted 9-14-1981)
Sec. 13-3. CREATION OF AUTHORITY.
   There is created, pursuant to Public Act 197 of 1975, a Downtown Development
Authority for the city. The Authority shall be a public body corporate and
shall be known and exercise its powers under title of “Downtown Development
Authority of the City of Plainwell”. The Authority may adopt a seal, may sue
and be sued in any court of the state and shall possess all of the powers
necessary to carry out the purpose of its incorporation as provided herein and
in Public Act 197 of 1975. The enumeration of a power herein or in Public Act
197 of 1975 shall not be construed as a limitation upon the general powers of
the Authority.
(Ord. 194, adopted 9-14-1981)
Sec. 13-4. DESCRIPTION OF DOWNTOWN DISTRICT.
   The Downtown District in which the Authority shall exercise its powers as
provided by Public Act 197 of 1975 shall consist of the following described
territory in the city: land generally zoned Central Business District (CBD)
pursuant to the city’s zoning ordinance as follows: land north of East Bridge
Street and West Allegan Street (M-89), bounded on the north by the Kalamazoo
River, on the east by Woodhams and the west line E 115.5 feet of that pt; Lot 1
lying south of Conrail railroad right-of-way, except east 55 feet, Original
Plat, Section 29; and the north line of Conrail right-of-way extended east to
Kalamazoo River and on the west along the rear lot lines of those lots fronting
on the west side of Cedar Street (now vacated). Also, land south of East Bridge
Street and West Allegan Street, beginning on the west boundary at the Mill
Race; thence south along the east bank of the Mill Race to West Bridge Street;
thence east to the east line of Park Street; thence south thereon to ten feet
south of the south line of corner lot; thence east to the west lot lines of
those lots fronting on the alley lying west of Main Street; thence south to the
south line of those lots fronting on Grant Street; thence east to the west line
of Anderson Street; thence north thereon to the south line of Grant Street;
thence west thereon to the east line of lots fronting on Main Street; thence
north to the south line of Lot 58 Original Plat, Section 29; thence east to the
east line; thence north to Chart Street; thence east to Woodhams Street; thence
north to East Bridge Street. Also land located north of the Kalamazoo River
lying west of Main Street bounded on the north by the rear lot lines of those
lots fronting on First Division Street. Also land located north of the
Kalamazoo River lying east of Main Street bounded on the north by Sherwood
Street and on the east by the southwesterly extension of Thomas Street, to the
Kalamazoo River.
(Ord. 194, adopted 9-14-1981)
Sec. 13-5. BOARD.
   The Authority shall be under the supervision and control of a Board
consisting of the Chief Administrative Officer of the city and eight members
appointed by the Mayor subject to the approval of the City Council. At least a
majority of the Board members shall be persons with an interest in property in
the Downtown District and, if there are more than 100 residents of the Downtown
District, at least one Board member shall be a resident of the Downtown
District. Their terms of office shall be four years, but Board members shall
hold office until their successors are appointed.
(Ord. 194, adopted 9-14-1981)
Sec. 13-6. POWERS OF THE AUTHORITY.
   The Authority shall possess all of the powers necessary to carry out the
purposes of its incorporation and shall have all powers provided by Public Act
197 of 1975, as amended, and approved by the City Council.
(Ord. 194, adopted 9-14-1981)
Sec. 13-7. SECRETARY OF STATE.
   A certified copy of this chapter shall be filed with the state’s Secretary
of State in accordance with § 3, subparagraph (3) of Public Act 197 of 1975, as
amended, and shall be published at least once in a newspaper in general
circulation in the city.
(Ord. 194, adopted 9-14-1981)
Sec. 13-8. TERMINATION.
   Upon completion of its purposes, the Authority may be dissolved by the
Council. The property and assets of the Authority, after dissolution and
satisfaction of its obligations, shall revert to the city.
(Ord. 194, adopted 9-14-1981)
CHAPTER 14: PLANNING COMMISSION
Section
   
14-1   Planning Commission
   
14-2   Chair, meetings, rules
   
14-3   Annual report
   
14-4   Employees, consultants
Sec. 14-1. PLANNING COMMISSION.
   There is created a City Planning Commission, in accordance with the
provisions of Public Act 33 of 2008, as amended, M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3801 et seq.,
consisting of seven members, who shall be one member of the City Council to be
selected by it as a member ex officio; and six persons, who shall be
representative of important segments of the community such as the economic,
governmental, educational and social development of the city in accordance with
major interests that exist within the city such as recreation, education,
public health, government, transportation, industry and commerce, appointed by
the Mayor subject to the approval of the City Council. An appointed member
shall not hold another municipal office, except that one appointed member may
be a member of the Zoning Board of Appeals. Members may, upon written charges
and after a public hearing, be removed by a majority vote of the City Council
for misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance in office.
(Ord. 219, adopted 5-29-1984; Ord. 287, adopted 7-25-1994; Ord. 301, adopted
12-28-1998; Ord. 348, adopted 11-10-2008)
Sec. 14-2. CHAIR, MEETINGS, RULES.
   The Planning Commission shall annually select from among its members a
Chairperson and shall hold meetings at least once per month. Ex-officio members
are not eligible to serve as Chairperson. The Planning Commission shall adopt
rules of procedure and shall keep its records as required by state law.
(Ord. 219, adopted 5-29-1984; Ord. 348, adopted 11-10-2008)
Sec. 14-3. ANNUAL REPORT.
   The Planning Commission shall submit an annual report to the City Council
concerning its operations, its membership composition and the status of
planning activities, including recommendations regarding actions by the City
Council related to planning and development.
(Ord. 219, adopted 5-29-1984; Ord. 348, adopted 11-10-2008)
Sec. 14-4. EMPLOYEES, CONSULTANTS.
   The Planning Commission may appoint employees as it may deem necessary for
its work, whose appointment, promotion, demotion and removal shall be subject
to the same provisions of law as govern other corresponding civil employees of
the city. The Planning Commission may appoint advisory committees whose members
are not members of the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 348, adopted 11-10-2008)
CHAPTER 15: PARKS AND TREE COMMISSION
Section
   
15-1   Purpose and name
   
15-2   Definitions
   
15-3   Establishment of a Parks and Tree Commission
   
15-4   Term of office
   
15-5   Duties and responsibilities
   
15-6   Operation
Sec. 15-1. PURPOSE AND NAME.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish a Parks and Tree Commission for
the city and define its duties and responsibilities. This chapter shall be
known as the “Parks and Tree Commission Chapter”.
(Ord. 199, adopted 5-10-1982)
Sec. 15-2. DEFINITIONS.
   A.   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      COMMISSION. The City Parks and Tree Commission created and established by
this chapter.
      DEPARTMENT. The Department of Public Works of the city.
      PARK. All public parks having individual names and all areas, whether
owned by the city or not, to which the public has free access as a park.
      SUPERINTENDENT. The Superintendent of the Department of Public Works or
his or her authorized representative.
      TREE. Unless the context clearly, indicates otherwise, means tree,
shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation.
   B.   The provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise specifically stated
herein, shall apply only to public streets, parkways, parks and other land
publicly owned or controlled by the city.
(Ord. 199, adopted 5-10-1982)
Sec. 15-3. ESTABLISHMENT OF A PARKS AND TREE COMMISSION.
   The City Parks and Trees Commission shall consist of seven members who are
residents of the city appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City
Council. Included in the seven members shall be the Superintendent and at least
one Council member.
(Ord. 199, adopted 5-10-1982)
Sec. 15-4. TERM OF OFFICE.
   The term of office of the appointed members shall be two years, except for
the City Superintendent who shall be “standing” and the City Council
representative which shall be coincident with the person’s elected term of
office. The first Commission appointed pursuant to this chapter shall consist
of three non-Council members who shall serve three-year terms and two members
who shall serve two-year terms, the City Council member and the Superintendent.
(Ord. 199, adopted 5-10-1982)
Sec. 15-5. DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   A.   The Commission may study, investigate, counsel, develop, update
annually and administer a written plan of work for the development and
maintenance of parks and park amenities and the maintenance, preservation,
planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks,
along streets and in other public areas.
   B.   The Commission may review the tree ordinance and parks ordinance
adopted and make recommendations to the City Council with regard to any
proposed amendments which would promote the purpose of this chapter.
(Ord. 199, adopted 5-10-1982)
Sec. 15-6. OPERATION.
   The Commission shall choose its own officers, promulgate its own rules and
policies necessary to implement the objectives of this chapter and shall keep a
journal of its proceedings. A majority of the members of the Commission shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. At a minimum, the
Commission shall meet one time each year during the month of March.
(Ord. 199, adopted 5-10-1982; Ord. 295, adopted 12-26-1995; Ord. 401, adopted
7-14-2025)
CHAPTER 16: SPECIAL ASSESSMENT
Section
   
16-1   Definitions
   
16-2   Authority
   
16-3   Initiation of special assessment projects
   
16-4   Initiation by petition
   
16-5   Cost estimate; plans and specifications
   
16-6   Initial determination as to allocation of costs; declaration of intent
to make improvements; tentative designation of Special Assessment District
   
16-7   Public hearing on necessity
   
16-8   Notice of hearings
   
16-9   Final determination as to necessity; approval of costs, plans and
specifications; creation of Special Assessment District; dates of periodic
redeterminations of cost
   
16-10   Preparation and filing of assessment roll
   
16-11   Objection to assessment
   
16-12   Notice, hearing, confirmation of roll
   
16-13   Payment, installations, delinquency
   
16-14   Deferred assessments
   
16-15   Assessments as lien upon property
   
16-16   Delivery of assessment roll to Treasurer for collection
   
16-17   Notice as to payment of assessment
   
16-18   Collection fee and penalty for delinquent assessments
   
16-19   Return of delinquent assessments to County Treasurer
   
16-20   Delinquency in assessments
   
16-21   Excess assessments
   
16-22   Apportionment of assessment when property divided after confirmation of
assessment and before collection
   
16-23   Reassessment following invalid assessment
   
16-24   Collection of special assessments
   
16-25   Combination of projects
   
16-26   Borrowing in anticipation of special assessment collections; bonds
   
16-27   Payments from Improvement Revolving Fund
   
16-28   Single lot special assessments
Sec. 16-1. DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COST. The cost of services, plans, studies, condemnation, acquisition,
abatement, demolition, removal, construction, improvement, maintenance,
replacement, notices, advertising, legal fees, special assessments, financing,
and all other costs incidental to the making of any local improvement. If the
service rendered is rendered by city employees, the city may include the fair
and reasonable cost of rendering the service.
   LOCAL PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT. Any public work or public or special improvement
which the city is empowered to undertake and which is of such a nature as to
especially benefit any real property within the city, including without
limitation the following:
      1.   The acquisition, construction, improvement, and maintenance of storm
sewers, sanitary sewers, combined storm and sanitary sewers, and treatment
facilities;
      2.   The acquisition, construction, improvement, and maintenance of water
systems and water treatment facilities;
      3.   The acquisition, construction, improvement, and maintenance of
public streets and roads;
      4.   The acquisition, improvement, and maintenance of public parks;
      5.   The acquisition, construction, improvement, and maintenance of
sidewalks and elevated structures for foot travel over streets and roads in the
city;
      6.   The acquisition, condemnation, collection, removal, and abatement of
garbage, rubbish, structures, hazards, or any other condition declared to be a
public nuisance;
      7.   The acquisition, construction, improvement, and maintenance of
bicycle paths;
      8.   The construction, improvement, and maintenance of erosion control
structures or dikes;
      9.   The planting, maintenance, and removal of trees;
      10.   The installation, improvement, and maintenance of lighting systems;
      11.   The eradication or control of aquatic weeds, plants, and insects;
      12.   The construction, improvement, and maintenance of private roads;
      13.   The construction, improvement, and maintenance of snow melt systems
and equipment; and
      14.   The construction, improvement, and maintenance of public parking
systems.
(Ord. 279, adopted 2-22-1993; Ord. 390, adopted 2-28-2022)
Sec. 16-2. AUTHORITY.
   The whole cost, or any part thereof, incidental to any local improvement may
be defrayed by a special assessment upon the property especially benefitted by
the improvement in the manner provided for in this chapter.
(Ord. 279, adopted 2-22-1993; Ord. 390, adopted 2-28-2022)
Sec. 16-3. INITIATION OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENT PROJECTS.
   Proceedings for the making of local public improvements within the city may
be commenced by resolution of the City Council with or without a petition. The
City Council may require the filing of a petition meeting the requirements of
this chapter before deciding whether to proceed with an improvement under this
chapter.
(Ord. 279, adopted 2-22-1993)
Sec. 16-4. INITIATION BY PETITION.
   A.   Requirements for petition. A petition meeting the requirements of this
section may be filed with the City Clerk to request one or more local public
improvements. A petition meeting the requirements of this section may also be
filed with the City Clerk if required by the City Council pursuant to this
chapter. The petition shall be addressed to the City Council, shall describe,
in a general way, the improvement or improvements sought and shall contain a
brief description of the property owned by the respective signatories thereof.
If it shall appear that the petition is signed by not less than 51% of the
record owners of land to be assessed as required in this section, the City
Clerk shall certify the petition to the City Council.
   B.   Approval of record owners of land to be assessed. The petition
requesting the improvement must be signed by the record owners of land
constituting not less than 51% of the total land area of the assessable real
property located in the special assessment district as finally established by
the City Council.
   C.   Record owners. Record owners shall be determined by the city tax
assessment records, as defined herein, as of the day of the filing of a
petition.
   D.   Advisory nature of petition. A petition requesting a local public
improvement shall, in no event, be considered directory, but is advisory only.
The City Council has complete discretion to determine whether to proceed with
an improvement under this chapter. No action need be taken with respect to any
petition unless the same, after filing, shall be approved by resolution of the
City Council. Conversely, the City Council may commence proceedings for a
public improvement for which it has initially required that a petition first be
met, notwithstanding the fact that the petition is not filed or does not meet
the requirements of this section.
(Ord. 279, adopted 2-22-1993)
Sec. 16-5. COST ESTIMATE; PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   A.   Cost estimate; plans and specifications. If the City Council desires to
proceed with an improvement, the resolution adopted by the City Council shall
direct the City Clerk to cause to be prepared preliminary plans and
specifications describing the improvement and the location of the improvement
with an estimate of the cost of the improvement on a fixed or periodic basis,
as appropriate. If the nature of the improvement to be made is such that a
periodic redetermination of costs will be necessary without a change in the
special assessment district boundaries, the estimate of cost shall include any
projected incremental increases. Upon receipt of the plans, specifications and
cost estimate, the City Clerk shall report the same to the City Council.
   B.   If actual cost exceeds estimate by more than 10%. No increase in the
estimate of the cost to be assessed in excess of 10% of the original estimate
shall be made unless notice is given as provided herein and a hearing afforded
to the record owners of property to be assessed. If the nature of the
improvement to be made is such that a periodic redetermination of cost will be
necessary without a change in the special assessment district boundaries and,
at any time during the term of the special assessment district, an actual
incremental cost increase exceeds the estimate thereof by more than 10%, notice
shall be given as provided herein and a hearing afforded to the record owners
of property to be assessed. In the event that the actual cost of the
improvement exceeds the original estimate thereof by 10% or more, whether fixed
or periodic, the City Council may determine to assess up to 10% of the cost
above the original estimate and to pay any additional cost increase from city
funds available for that purpose. In that case, neither notice, nor a hearing,
shall be required.
(Ord. 279, adopted 2-22-1993)
Sec. 16-6. INITIAL DETERMINATION AS TO ALLOCATION OF COSTS; DECLARATION OF
INTENT TO MAKE IMPROVEMENTS; TENTATIVE DESIGNATION OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENT
DISTRICT.
   After receiving the estimate of cost, specifications and plans with respect
to an improvement, the City Council shall determine, by resolution, the
tentative necessity for the improvement and what portion, if any, of the
expense of the improvement shall be defrayed by an assessment upon the owners
of real estate to be benefitted and declare the amount, if any, of the cost of
the improvement which shall be levied upon the city at large and if it desires
to proceed further with the improvement, it shall, by resolution, tentatively
declare its intention to make the improvement and tentatively designate the
special assessment district against which any portion or all of the cost of the
improvement is to be assessed.
(Ord. 279, adopted 2-22-1993)
Sec. 16-7. PUBLIC HEARING ON NECESSITY.
   A.   Fix date of hearing; authorize notice. If the City Council, by
resolution adopted under § 
16-6, tentatively declares its intention to make an improvement, the City
Council, by resolution, shall fix a time and place to meet and hear any
objections to the improvement and to the special assessment district and to
determine the necessity for the improvement and shall cause notice of the
hearing to be given as provided below and in § 
16-8.
   B.   Content of notice. In addition to the date, time and place of the
hearing, the notice shall state that the preliminary plans and estimates are on
file with the City Clerk for public examination and shall contain a description
of the proposed public improvement and the proposed special assessment
district. If periodic determinations of cost will be necessary without a change
in the special assessment district, the notice shall state that the
redeterminations may be made without further notice to record owners or parties
in interest in the property.
   C.   Hearing. At the time of the hearing provided for in this section or any
adjournment thereof, which may be without further notice, the City Council
shall consider the necessity of the improvement and shall hear any objections
to the petition. to the improvement and to the special assessment district and
may revise, correct, amend or change the plans, estimate of cost or special
assessment district: provided, however, that, except as provided in § 
16-5, no increase in the estimate of cost, whether fixed or periodic, in excess
of 10% of the original estimate of the cost shall be made, nor shall any
property be added to the district, unless further notice is given and a hearing
afforded as provided in this section.
(Ord. 279, adopted 2-22-1993)
Sec. 16-8. NOTICE OF HEARINGS.
   A.   General. If special assessments are proposed to be made against
property, notice of hearings in the special assessment proceedings shall be
given as provided in this section.
   B.   Notice by first class mail and publication. Notice of hearings in
special assessment proceedings shall be given to each record owner of or party
in interest in, property to be assessed, whose name appears upon the last city
tax assessment records, by first class mail addressed to the record owner or
party in interest at the address shown on the tax records, at least ten days
before the date of the hearing. Notice shall also be published once at least
ten days before the date of the hearing in a newspaper published or circulating
in the city. The method of giving notice by mail as provided in this section is
declared to be the method that is reasonably certain to inform those to be
assessed of the special assessment proceedings.
   C.   Determination of record owners entitled to receive notice. The city tax
assessment records means the last assessment roll for ad valorem tax purposes
which was reviewed by the City Board of Review, as supplemented by any
subsequent changes in the names or the addresses of the owners or parties
listed on that roll. If a record owner’s name does not appear on the city tax
assessment records, then notice shall be given by first class mail addressed to
the record owner at the address shown by the records of the County Register of
Deeds at least ten days before the date of hearing. The City Clerk shall keep a
record of the names and addresses of record owners or parties in interest
entitled to notice in special assessment proceedings and shall, at all times,
keep the records current, complete and available for public inspection.
   D.   Notice to others upon request. If a person claims an interest in real
property whose name and correct address do not appear upon the last city tax
assessment records, that person shall give immediately his or her name and
address with the City Clerk. This filing is effective only for the purpose of
establishing a record of the names and addresses of those persons entitled to
notice in special assessment proceedings.
   E.   Failure to provide notice. Failure to give notice as required in this
section shall not invalidate an entire assessment roll, but shall affect, if at
all, only the assessment on property for which notice was not given. A special
assessment shall not be declared invalid as to any property if the owner or the
party in interest of that property actually received notice, waived notice or
paid any part of the assessment. If an assessment is declared void by a court
decree or judgment, a reassessment against the property may be made.
(Ord. 279, adopted 2-22-1993)
Sec. 16-9. FINAL DETERMINATION AS TO NECESSITY; APPROVAL OF COSTS, PLANS AND
SPECIFICATIONS; CREATION OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENT DISTRICT; DATES OF PERIODIC
REDETERMINATIONS OF COST.
   A.   Resolution on necessity. After the hearing provided for herein, if the
City Council then desires to proceed with the improvement, it shall, by
resolution, make final determination of the necessity thereof and, by
resolution, finally determine to proceed with the making of the improvement and
shall approve or determine all of the following:
      1.   The plans, estimate of cost and specifications as originally
presented or as revised, corrected, amended or changed; and
      2.   The special assessment district of the properties especially
benefitted by the improvement, if any of the cost thereof is to be raised by
special assessment.
   B.   Periodic redeterminations of cost. If the nature of the improvement to
be made is such that a periodic redetermination of costs will be necessary
without a change in the special assessment district boundaries, the City
Council shall so state in the resolution, shall set the dates upon which the
redeterminations shall be made and shall specify the term of the special
assessment district.
(Ord. 279, adopted 2-22-1993)
Sec. 16-10. PREPARATION AND FILING OF ASSESSMENT ROLL.
   After finally determining the special assessment district, the City Council
shall, by resolution, determine whether the assessment shall be based upon
special benefits, frontage, area or factors permitted by law or a combination
thereof and shall direct the City Assessor to make a special assessment roll in
which shall be entered and described all the parcels of land to be assessed,
with the names of the respective record owners of each parcel, if known and the
total amount to be assessed against each parcel of land, which amount shall be
the relative portion of the whole sum to be levied against all parcels of land
in the special assessment district as the benefit to the parcel of land bears
to the total benefit to all parcels of land in the special assessment district.
There shall also be entered upon the roll the amount which has been assessed to
the city at large, if any. When the City Assessor shall have completed the
assessment roll, the City Assessor shall affix his or her certificate to the
roll, which shall state that the roll was made pursuant to a resolution of the
City Council adopted on a specified date and that, in making the assessment
roll, the Assessor, according to his or her best judgment, has conformed in all
respects to the directions contained in the resolution and to the provisions of
this chapter and the laws of the state. The Assessor shall then file the
special assessment roll with the City Clerk, who shall present the same to the
City Council.
(Ord. 279, adopted 2-22-1993)
Sec. 16-11. OBJECTION TO ASSESSMENT.
   If, at or prior to the final confirmation of any special assessment roll,
the record owners of more than 50% of the real property to be assessed shall
object in writing to the proposed improvement, the assessment shall not be made
without a four-fifths vote of the members of the City Council. For purposes of
determining the percentage of property owners objecting to an assessment, the
same principles shall be used as those set forth herein for determining the
sufficiency of a petition requesting a local public improvement.
(Ord. 279, adopted 2-22-1993)
Sec. 16-12. NOTICE, HEARING, CONFIRMATION OF ROLL.
   A.   Set hearing on roll; notice. Before confirming the assessment roll, the
City Council shall appoint a time and place when it will meet, review and hear
any objections to the assessment roll. The City Council shall cause notice of
the hearing to be given as provided below herein.
   B.   Content of notice. In addition to the date, time and place of the
hearing, the notice shall state that the assessment roll is on file with the
City Clerk for public examination and shall contain a description of the public
improvement and the special assessment district. The notice of hearing shall
also include a statement that appearance and protest at the hearing is required
in order to appeal the amount of the special assessment to the state tax
tribunal and shall state that the appearance may be in person, by Agent or by
letter.
   C.   Hearing. The hearing of the City Council, upon the special assessment
roll, may be adjourned from time to time without further notice. Any person
objecting to the assessment roll shall file the objection in writing with the
City Clerk before the close of the hearing. The City Clerk shall maintain a
record of parties who appear to protest their assessment at the hearing. If a
hearing is terminated or adjourned for the day before a party is provided the
opportunity to be heard, a party whose appearance is recorded is considered to
have protested the special assessment in person.
   D.   Confirmation of roll. After the hearing, at the same or at a subsequent
meeting, the City Council may confirm the special assessment roll as reported
to it by the City Assessor or as amended or corrected by the City Council or
may refer it back to the City Assessor for revision or may annul it and direct
a new roll to be made. Upon confirmation of any special assessment roll, the
City Council shall, by resolution, determine the number of installments in
which the assessments may be paid, the amount or method for determining the
amount of each installment and the payment dates thereof, the rate of interest
to be charged on the installments and the date from which the interest shall
commence and whether any assessments shall be deferred and the terms of the
deferral, all as provided herein.
   E.   Clerk’s endorsement. If a special assessment roll is confirmed, the
City Clerk shall endorse thereon the date of the confirmation and shall attach
a copy of the resolution to the special assessment roll. After the confirmation
on the special assessment roll, all assessments on that special assessment roll
shall be final and conclusive unless an action contesting an assessment is
filed in a court of competent jurisdiction within 30 days after the date of
confirmation.
(Ord. 279, adopted 2-22-1993)
Sec. 16-13. PAYMENT, INSTALLMENTS, DELINQUENCY.
   A.   Installment payments. The City Council may provide that special
assessments are payable in one or more installments. If the special assessments
are payable in more than one installment, the City Council shall by resolution
determine the amount or method for determining the amount of each installment.
The amount of each installment, if more than one, need not be extended upon the
special assessment roll until confirmation of that assessment roll. Subject to
§ 16-5, the amount of installments for improvements subject to periodic cost
revision may be extended upon the special assessment roll by the City Council
without additional public hearings or public notice; provided that, additional
property is not added to the special assessment roll.
   B.   Date of payments. The first installment of a special assessment shall
be due on or before the time after confirmation as the City Council shall fix.
Subsequent installments shall be due at annual or semi-annual intervals and on
dates to be determined by resolution of the City Council, which may correspond
with the date(s) for collection of other taxes; provided, however, that, if
special assessment bonds are issued by the city in anticipation of all or part
of the unpaid installments, the installments shall be due annually at intervals
of 12 months from the due date of the first installment or 12 months from a
date that the City Council shall fix.
   C.   Interest on unpaid installments. Except as payment of special
assessments may be otherwise deferred by the City Council at the time of
confirmation of the special assessment roll, all unpaid installments shall bear
interest, payable on each installment due date, at a rate to be set by the City
Council, not exceeding 1% above the average rate of interest borne by special
assessment bonds issued by the city in anticipation of all or part of the
unpaid installments, if any bonds are issued or, if bonds are not issued by the
city, not exceeding 12% per annum, commencing in each case from a date fixed by
the City Council. If special assessment bonds are issued by the city, the City
Council shall by resolution determine the interest rate for the special
assessments within 30 days from the date of the closing for the sale of the
bonds. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the entire assessment or the first
installment thereof may be paid in full to the City Treasurer within 30 days
after the assessment first becomes payable without payment of any interest,
except the bond interest as may have been capitalized as part of the cost of
the improvement. Subsequent installments shall not be entitled to any grace
period for late payment. Future due installments of an assessment against any
parcel of land may be paid to the City Treasurer at any time in full, with
interest accrued through the month in which the final installment is paid.
(Ord. 279, adopted 2-22-1993)
Sec. 16-14. DEFERRED ASSESSMENTS.
   A.   Hardship. If, in the opinion of the City Council, any person holding
property subject to special assessment is unable to contribute toward the cost
thereof by reason of poverty, payment of the special assessment or any part
thereof may, by resolution of the City Council, be deferred until the death of
the person or until the person transfers any part or all of his or her interest
in the property. At that time, any deferred payments of the special assessment
shall become due and payable together with any and all interest accrued thereon
to the time. While payment is so deferred, interest on the amount of the
special assessment shall accrue and be added to the amount of the deferred
special assessment. In the alternative, the City Council may require that
interest payments be made during the period that the assessment is deferred.
   B.   Lien on deferred payment; resolution; changes in circumstances.
Deferment of the payment of any special assessment shall not destroy or impair
the lien of the city on the premises so assessed from the date of confirmation
of the special assessment roll as above provided. As a condition of granting
the deferred or partial payment of an assessment, the City Council may require
that any deferred assessment be shown as a recorded lien against the property.
The resolution deferring payment for any assessments may be made as part of the
resolution confirming the roll. If the City Council shall, by resolution,
determine, after notice to the owner of the property for which payment was
deferred, that there has been a material change in the circumstances on which
the deferment was based or that the best interests of the city so require, the
deferment may be terminated and all or part of the deferred payments and
accrued interest, if any, shall then become due and payable.
(Ord. 279, adopted 2-22-1993)
Sec. 16-15. ASSESSMENTS AS LIEN UPON PROPERTY.
   All special assessments contained in any special assessment roll, including
any part thereof deferred as to payment, shall, from the date of confirmation
of the roll, constitute a lien upon the respective parcels of land assessed.
The lien shall be of the same character and effect as the lien created for city
taxes and shall include accrued interest and penalties. No judgment or decree
or any act of the City Council vacating a special assessment shall destroy or
impair the lien of the city upon the premises assessed for the amount of the
assessment as may be equitably charged against the same or as by a regular mode
of proceeding might be lawfully assessed thereon.
(Ord. 279, adopted 2-22-1993)
Sec. 16-16. DELIVERY OF ASSESSMENT ROLL TO TREASURER FOR COLLECTION.
   After a special assessment roll has been ratified and confirmed by the City
Council, it shall be delivered by the City Clerk to the City Treasurer for
collection and the City Clerk shall take the receipt of the City Treasurer
thereof. At the time of the delivery of the assessment roll to the City
Treasurer, the Mayor shall attach thereto a warrant signed by the Mayor
commanding the City Treasurer to collect the assessments therein contained.
(Ord. 279, adopted 2-22-1993)
Sec. 16-17. NOTICE AS TO PAYMENT OF ASSESSMENT.
   Upon receipt of the assessment roll, the City Treasurer shall cause to be
served on each person whose name appears on the roll a written notice
specifying the amount of the assessment against the person, the time within
which the same may be paid without interest or collection fee and the time when
interest and collection fees shall be chargeable with respect thereto. The
notice shall also include a statement that the owner or any person having an
interest in the real property may file a written appeal of the special
assessment with the state tax tribunal within 30 days after the confirmation of
the special assessment roll if that special assessment was protested at the
hearing held for the purpose of confirming the roll. The notice shall be served
by sending the same by first class mail directed to the person in the same name
and at the same address as assessed. The City Treasurer shall attach his or her
certificate to the roll showing the date and manner of the service.
(Ord. 279, adopted 2-22-1993)
Sec. 16-18. COLLECTION FEE AND PENALTY FOR DELINQUENT ASSESSMENTS.
   A.   Collection fee. If a special assessment or any installment of a special
assessment is not paid within 60 days after it is first due, the same shall be
deemed to be delinquent and there shall be collected, in addition to interest
thereon, a collection fee equal to 4% of the amount of the installment or
assessment so due.
   B.   Penalty; transfer of tax roll. If any special assessment or installment
thereof which has been payable for more than 60 days shall be due and unpaid on
June 1 in any year, there shall be collected a penalty of 4% of the amount of
the assessment or installment so due. The amount of the assessment or
installment thereof, plus the accrued interest with respect thereto as of the
last installment payment date, the 4% collection fee and the 4% penalty by this
section provided shall be certified by the City Treasurer to the City Assessor
for inclusion upon the city tax roll of the year in a column headed “Special
Assessments” and the City Assessor shall include the same in the city tax roll
to be prepared by him or her and thereafter the same shall be collected as the
city taxes are collected, anything in this chapter to the contrary
notwithstanding.
   C.   Determination of collection fee and penalties based on amount of
installment. If the assessment roll has been divided into installments, then
the collection fee and any penalties shall attach only to the first
installment, in the first instance and thereafter to the succeeding
installments as they respectively fall due and shall be computed with respect
to each installment rather than the total amount of the assessment. For
purposes of determining any collection fee or penalties, the amount of each
installment shall include the interest due thereon as of the last installment
payment date.
(Ord. 279, adopted 2-22-1993)
Sec. 16-19. RETURN OF DELINQUENT ASSESSMENTS TO COUNTY TREASURER.
   The assessments and charges placed upon the city tax roll as provided
herein, with interest, penalties and charges which remain due and unpaid on
March 1 following the date when the city tax roll was received by the
Treasurer, shall be returned to the County Treasurer at the same time and in
the same manner and with like effect as returns by the City Treasurer of city
taxes. The returns shall be made upon a delinquent tax roll to be prepared by
the Treasurer under the provisions of the charter and shall be collected in the
same manner as taxes returned to the County Treasurer are collected under the
provisions of the general laws of the state and shall be and remain a lien upon
the lands against which they are assessed until paid.
(Ord. 279, adopted 2-22-1993)
Sec. 16-20. DEFICIENCY IN ASSESSMENTS.
   Should the assessments in any special assessment roll prove insufficient for
any reason to pay for the improvement or that portion or percentage of an
improvement for which they were made or to pay the principal and interest on
the bonds issued in anticipation of the collection of special assessments, then
the City Council shall make additional pro rata assessments to supply the
deficiency as shall be necessary; provided that, the total amount assessed
against any parcel of land shall not exceed the value of the benefits from the
improvement.
(Ord. 279, adopted 2-22-1993)
Sec. 16-21. EXCESS ASSESSMENTS.
   Should the total amount levied on special assessments prove larger than the
actual cost of the improvement by more than 5% of the original roll, then the
excess shall be prorated among the properties assessed in accordance with the
amount assessed against each and applied as a credit against future unpaid
installments in the inverse order in which they are payable to the extent the
installments then exist and the balance of the refund, if any, shall be paid in
cash to the persons who are the respective owners of the property on the date
of the passage of the resolution ordering the refund. Any excess of 5% or less
may be paid into the city general funds, the Special Improvement Revolving Fund
or disposed of as provided by this section, all as directed by resolution of
the City Council. No refunds may be made which contravene the provisions of any
outstanding evidence of indebtedness secured in whole or part by the special
assessments.
(Ord. 279, adopted 2-22-1993)
Sec. 16-22. APPORTIONMENT OF ASSESSMENT WHEN PROPERTY DIVIDED AFTER
CONFIRMATION OF ASSESSMENT AND BEFORE COLLECTION.
   A.   Should any parcel of land be divided after a special assessment thereon
has been confirmed and before the complete collection thereof, the City
Assessor shall apportion the uncollected amounts between the several divisions
thereof, subject to approval by resolution of the City Council. If the
interested parties do not agree in writing to the apportionment, the City
Assessor shall give notice by first class mail to the owner of each of the
several divisions of the property, insofar as the same are known to him or her,
of the amount of the uncollected assessment apportioned to each division of
property and the date, time and place of the meeting of the City Council at
which the apportionment shall be reviewed and at which objections may be heard.
The notice shall be mailed at least ten days before the meeting of the City
Council. The City Council shall review the apportionment made by the City
Assessor and shall by resolution either confirm the same or make other
apportionment as shall to City Council appear to be equitable in the
circumstances. The action of the City Council shall be final and conclusive
upon all parties.
   B.   Notwithstanding the foregoing, no assessment shall be apportioned under
this chapter if the effect of the apportionment is to allow more residential
equivalent units to receive a benefit from the improvement than what was
contemplated at the time of confirmation of the roll. In such case, the
interested parties shall pay to the city the amount which represents the then
current capital cost for the improvement for each residential equivalent unit
that was not included in the initial assessment. The City Council shall, in the
future, adopt resolutions or ordinances that are necessary to establish the
then current costs of certain improvements and to provide any procedural
mechanisms necessary to implement the charges.
(Ord. 279, adopted 2-22-1993)
Sec. 16-23. REASSESSMENT FOLLOWING INVALID ASSESSMENT.
   All proceedings in assessing and levying taxes for special improvements and
the correction of the assessments or installments thereof shall be presumed by
all courts of this state to be legal until the contrary is affirmatively shown.
Whenever any special assessment shall, in the opinion of the City Council, be
invalid by reason of irregularities or informalities in the proceedings or if
any court of competent jurisdiction shall adJudge the assessment to be illegal,
the City Council shall, whether the improvement has been made or not and
whether any part of the assessment has been paid or not, have power to proceed
from the last step at which the proceedings were legal and cause a new
assessment to be made for the same purpose for which the former assessment was
made. All proceedings on the reassessment and for the connection thereof shall
be conducted in the same manner as provided for in the original assessment and
whenever an assessment or any part thereof, levied upon any premises has been
so set aside, if the same has been paid and not refunded, the payment so made
shall be applied upon the reassessment and the reassessment to that extent
shall be deemed satisfied. If more than the amount reassessed shall have been
collected, the balance shall be refunded to the person making the payment.
(Ord. 279, adopted 2-22-1993)
Sec. 16-24. COLLECTION OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
   Monies raised by special assessment to pay the cost of any local
improvements shall be held in a special fund to pay the cost or to repay any
money borrowed thereof. Each special assessment account must be used only for
the improvement project for which the assessment was levied, expenses
incidental thereto, including the repayment of the principal and interest on
money borrowed thereof and to refund excessive assessments, if refunds be
authorized. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event bonds are issued in
anticipation of the collection of special assessments, all collections on each
special assessment roll or combination of rolls shall be set in a separate fund
for the payment of the principal and interest on the bonds so issued in
anticipation of the payment of the special assessments and shall be used for no
other purpose until the bonds have been fully paid.
(Ord. 279, adopted 2-22-1993)
Sec. 16-25. COMBINATION OF PROJECTS.
   The City Council may combine one or more local public improvements into one
special assessment district if all lands included in the special assessment
district are benefitted by and assessed for each of the combined improvements.
The city may also combine the improvements for two or more special assessment
districts into one construction project. In that case, the City Council shall
by resolution allocate a portion of the combined cost to each of the special
assessment districts included in the combined project.
(Ord. 279, adopted 2-22-1993)
Sec. 16-26. BORROWING IN ANTICIPATION OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENT COLLECTIONS; BONDS.
   The City Council may borrow money and issue bonds of the city thereof in
anticipation of the collection of special assessments to defray all or any part
of the cost of any improvement made under this chapter after the special
assessment roll thereof shall have been confirmed. The bonds shall not exceed
the amount of the special assessments in anticipation of the collection of
which they are issued. Collections on special assessments to the extent the
same are pledged for the payment of bonds shall be set aside in a special fund
for the payment of the bonds. Bonds may be issued in anticipation of the
collection of special assessments levied in respect to one or more public
improvements, but no special assessment district shall be compelled to pay the
obligation of any other special assessment district. The City Council may
pledge the limited tax, full faith and credit of the city for the prompt
payment of the principal of and interest on the bonds authorized herein, as the
same shall become due, in which event the city may levy a tax on all taxable
property in the city for the payment of principal and interest on the bonds,
subject to constitutional, statutory and charter tax rate limitations. Bonds
issued under this chapter shall be executed by the original or facsimile
signatures of the Mayor and City Clerk.
(Ord. 279, adopted 2-22-1993)
Sec. 16-27. PAYMENTS FROM IMPROVEMENT REVOLVING FUND.
   The City Council may create and designate a fund to be known as the Special
Improvement Revolving Fund and, in lieu of issuing bonds in anticipation of the
collection of future installments of a special assessment roll, may finance the
same out of the Revolving Fund as the City Council, by its resolution, may
determine. The amount advanced shall not exceed the amount the City Council
anticipates will be collected by the special assessments.
(Ord. 279, adopted 2-22-1993)
Sec. 16-28. SINGLE LOT SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
   A.   General. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the
contrary, when the city incurs or anticipates incurring a cost incidental to a
local improvement which is or may be chargeable against a single lot or parcel,
any special assessment regarding such cost will be implemented and governed by
the provisions of this section.
   B.   General non-applicability. Chapter 16, sections
16-3 through
16-12, inclusive, do not apply to special assessments implemented and governed
under this section.
   C.   General applicability. Withstanding the provisions of this section to
the contrary, Chapter 16, sections
16-13 through
16-27, inclusive, apply to special assessments implemented and governed under
this section.
   D.   Procedures. Special assessments implemented and governed under this
section will comply with the following requirements:
      1.   Report to City Council. When the city incurs or anticipates
incurring a cost incidental to a public improvement which is or may be
chargeable against a single lot or parcel, the estimated amount of applicable
costs, with a description of the lot or parcel for which the cost was or is
anticipated to be incurred, and the name of the owner or owners, if known, will
be reported to the City Council.
      2.   Determination of City Council. After reviewing the report, the City
Council may determine by resolution what amount or part of such estimated costs
will be charged and the property upon which the charge will be levied as a
special assessment. The City Council will determine the number of installments
in which the assessment may be paid, determine the rate of interest to be
charged, designate the property upon which the special assessment may be
levied, direct the preparation of a special assessment roll, and fix the time
and place for the hearing when the City Council will review the assessment
roll. Such hearing will not be less than ten calendar days after notice of the
time and place for the hearing has been provided to the owner of or party in
interest in the property to be assessed whose name appeared on the last local
tax assessment records. Notice will be provided to each owner of or party in
interest in the property to be assessed whose name appeared upon the last local
tax assessment records, by mailing such notice via regular first-class mail to
the owner of or party in interest at the address shown on the last local tax
assessment records. Notice will be deemed effective three business days
following such mailing or upon receipt, whichever is earlier.
      3.   Certificate of roll. When the assessment roll has been completed, it
will be filed with the City Clerk who will present it to the City Council.
      4.   Objections to roll. Any party claiming to be aggrieved by the
special assessment roll may file an objection and protest in writing with the
City Clerk at or prior to the time of the hearing. Any objection must specify
how the party is aggrieved. If the objection is timely and properly filed, the
objecting party's in person appearance is not required at the hearing.
      5.   Review of roll. The City Council will review the special assessment
roll at the hearing provided for herein and consider any objections. The City
Council may correct the roll as to any assessment or description of any lot or
parcel of land or other errors. Any changes made in the roll must be noted in
the minutes.
      6.   Confirmation of roll. After the hearing, the City Council may
confirm the special assessment roll, with any corrections that were made.
Following the confirmation of the special assessment role by the City Council,
the City Clerk will endorse the date of confirmation and, upon confirmation,
the roll will be final and conclusive. Thereafter, all charges and amounts
confirmed will be a lien on the property and collected in the manner authorized
by law.
   E.   Objections. If, at or prior to the final confirmation of the special
assessment roll, the record owner or owners of the property to be assessed
object in writing to the proposed improvement, the assessment will not be made
without a four-fifths affirmative vote of the City Council.
   F.   Actual cost exceeds estimate cost. An increase in the estimate of the
cost to be assessed up to ten percent of the original estimate may be made
without further notice and hearing. An increase in the estimate of the cost to
be assessed in excess of ten percent of the original estimate will not be made
unless notice and hearing is given as provided herein.
   G.   Failure to provide notice. A special assessment will not be declared
invalid as to any property if the owner or the party in interest of that
property actually received notice, waived notice, or paid any part of the
assessment. If an assessment is declared void by a court of competent
jurisdiction, a reassessment against the property may be made.
(Ord. 390, adopted 2-28-2022)
CHAPTER 17: MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION
Section
   
17-1   Title
   
17-2   Definitions
   
17-3   Municipal civil infraction action; commencement
   
17-4   Municipal civil infraction citations; issuance and service
   
17-5   Municipal civil infraction citations; contents
   
17-6   Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau; municipal civil infraction
violation notices
   
17-7   Sanctions for municipal civil infractions; repeat offenses; continuing
violations; injunctive relief
   
17-8   Schedule of civil fines
Sec. 17-1. TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be referred to as the “City of Plainwell
Municipal Civil Infraction Chapter”.
(Ord. 298, adopted 7-27-1998)
Sec. 17-2. DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. Public Act 236 of 1961, as amended.
   AUTHORIZED CITY OFFICIAL.
      1.   A public safety officer; or
      2.   Any other personnel of the city authorized by this chapter or any
other ordinance provisions to issue municipal civil infraction citations or
municipal civil infraction violation notices. In addition to the personnel
specifically authorized by any city ordinance to issue citations or notices (or
in the absence of the specific authorization by any city ordinance), the City
Manager may authorize any city employee, officer or another agency or entity to
perform those functions on behalf of the city.
   BUREAU. The City of Plainwell Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau, as
established by this chapter.
   MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION. An act or omission that is prohibited by any
city ordinance, but which is not a crime under the chapter and for which civil
sanctions, including, without limitation, fines, damages, expenses and costs,
may be ordered, as authorized by state law. A MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION is not
a lesser included offense of a violation of a city ordinance that is a criminal
offense.
   MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION ACTION. A civil action in which the defendant is
alleged to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction.
   MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION CITATION. A written complaint or notice prepared
by an authorized city official, directing a person to appear in court regarding
the occurrence or existence of a municipal civil infraction violation by the
person cited.
   MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION VIOLATION NOTICE. A written notice prepared by an
authorized city official, directing a person to appear at the Municipal
Ordinance Violations Bureau and to pay the fine and costs, if any, prescribed
for the violation by the schedule of civil fines adopted by the city, pursuant
to this chapter and as authorized by the Act.
(Ord. 298, adopted 7-27-1998; Ord. 318, adopted 11-12-2001)
Sec. 17-3. MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION ACTION; COMMENCEMENT.
   A municipal civil infraction action may be commenced upon the issuance by an
authorized city official of:
   A.   A municipal civil infraction citation directing the alleged violator to
appear in court; or
   B.   A municipal civil infraction violation notice directing the alleged
violator to appear at the City Bureau.
(Ord. 298, adopted 7-27-1998)
Sec. 17-4. MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION CITATIONS; ISSUANCE AND SERVICE.
   A municipal civil infraction citation shall be issued and served by an
authorized city official as follows.
   A.   The time for appearance specified in a citation shall be within a
reasonable time after the citation is issued.
   B.   The place for appearance specified in a citation shall be the District
Court.
   C.   Each citation shall be numbered consecutively and shall be in a form
approved by the State Court Administrator.
   D.   The first copy of the citation (the original citation) shall be filed
with the District Court. The second copy of the citation shall be retained by
the city. The third copy (and any duplicate copies, as needed) shall be issued
to the alleged violator.
   E.   A citation for a municipal civil infraction signed by an authorized
city official shall be treated as made under oath if the violation alleged in
the citation occurred in the presence of the official signing the complaint and
if the citation contains the following statement immediately above the date and
signature of the official: “I declare under the penalties of perjury that the
statements above are true to the best of my information, knowledge and belief.”
   F.   An authorized city official who witnesses a person commit a municipal
civil infraction shall prepare and subscribe, as soon as possible and as
completely as possible, an original and any required copies of a citation.
   G.   An authorized city official may issue a citation to a person if:
      1.   Based upon investigation, the official has reasonable cause to
believe that the person is responsible for a municipal civil infraction; or
      2.   Based upon investigation of a complaint by someone who allegedly
witnessed the person commit a municipal civil infraction, the official has
reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for an infraction
and if the City Attorney approves in writing the issuance of the citation.
   H.   A municipal civil infraction citation shall be served by an authorized
city official as follows.
      1.   Except as provided, below, an authorized city official shall
personally serve a copy of the citation upon the alleged violator.
      2.   If the municipal civil infraction action involves the use or
occupancy of land, a building or other structure, a copy of the citation does
not need to be personally served upon the alleged violator, but may be served
upon an owner or occupant of the land, building or structure by posting the
copy of the land or attaching the copy to the building or structure. In
addition, a copy of the citation shall be sent by first-class mail to the owner
of the land, building or structure at the owner’s last known address.
(Ord. 298, adopted 7-27-1998)
Sec. 17-5. MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION CITATIONS; CONTENTS.
   A.   A municipal ordinance citation shall contain the name and address of
the alleged violator, the municipal civil infraction alleged, the place where
the alleged violator shall appear in court, the telephone number of the court
and the time at or by which the appearance shall be made.
   B.   Further, the citation shall inform the alleged violator that he or she
may do one of the following:
      1.   Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by mail, in
person or by representation, at or by the time specified for appearance;
      2.   Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction “with
explanation” by mail by the time specified for appearance or, in person or by
representation; or
      3.   Deny responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by doing
either of the following:
         a.   Appearing in person for an informal hearing before a Judge or
District Court Magistrate, without the opportunity of being represented by an
attorney, unless a formal hearing before a Judge is requested by the city; or
         b.   Appearing in court for a formal hearing before a Judge, with the
opportunity of being represented by an attorney.
   C.   The citation shall also inform the alleged violator of all of the
following.
      1.   If the alleged violator desires to admit responsibility “with
explanation” in person or by representation, the alleged violator must apply to
the court in person, by mail, by telephone or by representation within the time
specified for appearance and obtain a scheduled date and time for an
appearance.
      2.   If the alleged violator desires to deny responsibility, the alleged
violator must apply to the court in person, by mail, by telephone or by
representation within the time specified for appearance and obtain a scheduled
date and time to appear for a hearing, unless a hearing date is specified on
the citation.
      3.   A hearing shall be an informal hearing unless a formal hearing is
requested by the alleged violator or the city.
      4.   At an informal hearing, the alleged violator must appear in person
before a Judge or District Court Magistrate, without the opportunity of being
represented by an attorney.
      5.   At a formal hearing, the alleged violator must appear in person
before a Judge with the opportunity of being represented by an attorney.
   D.   The citation shall contain a notice in boldfaced type that the failure
of the alleged violator to appear within the time specified in the citation or
at the time scheduled for a hearing or appearance is a misdemeanor and will
result in entry of a default judgment against the alleged violator on the
municipal civil infraction.
(Ord. 298, adopted 7-27-1998)
Sec. 17-6. MUNICIPAL ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS BUREAU; MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION
VIOLATION NOTICES.
   A.   Bureau established. The city establishes a Municipal Ordinance
Violations Bureau (“Bureau”) as authorized by the Act to accept admissions of
responsibility for municipal civil infractions in response to municipal civil
infraction violation notices issued and served by authorized city officials and
to collect and retain civil fines and costs as prescribed by this chapter or
any other city ordinance.
   B.   Location; supervision; employees; rules and regulations. The Bureau
shall be located at the City Hall and shall be under the supervision and
control of the Clerk. The Clerk, subject to the approval of the City Council,
shall adopt rules and regulations for the operation of the Bureau and appoint
any necessary qualified city employees to administer the Bureau.
   C.   Schedule of civil fines. The schedule of civil fines payable to the
Bureau, as established by this chapter, shall be posted at the Bureau. The
schedule may provide that fines not paid with in certain time periods or for
repeated offenses, will be increased by the amounts as stated in the schedule.
   D.   Disposition of violations. The Bureau shall dispose only of municipal
civil infraction violations for which a fine has been scheduled and for which a
municipal civil infraction violation notice (as compared with a citation) has
been issued.
   E.   Bureau limited to accepting admissions of responsibility. The scope of
the Bureau’s authority shall be limited to accepting admissions of
responsibility for municipal civil infractions and collecting and retaining
civil fines and costs as a result of those admissions. The Bureau shall not
accept payment of a fine from any person who denies having committed the
offense or who admits responsibility only with explanation and in no event
shall the Bureau determine or attempt to determine, the truth or falsity of any
fact or matter relating to an alleged violation. No person shall be required to
dispose of a municipal civil infraction violation at the Bureau and may have
the violation processed before a court of appropriate jurisdiction. The
unwillingness of any person to dispose of any violation at the Bureau shall not
prejudice the person or in any way diminish the person’s rights, privileges and
protection accorded by law.
   F.   Municipal civil infraction violation notices. Municipal civil
infraction violation notices shall be issued and served by authorized city
officials under the same circumstances and upon the same persons as provided by
this chapter for the service of a municipal civil infraction citation. In
addition to any other information required by this chapter or any other city
ordinance, the notice of violation shall indicate the time by which the alleged
violator must appear at the Bureau, the methods by which an appearance may be
made, the address and telephone number of the Bureau, the hours during which
the Bureau is open, the amount of the fine scheduled for the alleged violation
and the consequences for failure to appear and pay the required fine within the
required time.
   G.   Appearance; payment of fines and costs. An alleged violator receiving a
municipal civil infraction violation notice shall appear at the Bureau and pay
the specified fine and costs at or by the time specified for appearance in the
municipal civil infraction violation notice. An appearance may be made by mail,
in person or by representation.
   H.   Procedure where admission of responsibility not made or fine not paid.
If an authorized city official issues and serves a municipal ordinance
violation notice and if an admission of responsibility is not made and the
civil fine and costs, if any, prescribed by the schedule of fines for the
violation are not paid at the Bureau, a municipal civil infraction citation may
be filed with the District Court and a copy of the citation may be served by
first-class mail upon the alleged violator at the alleged violator’s last known
address. The citation filed with the court does not need to comply in all
particulars with the requirements for citations as provided by §§ 8705 and 8709
of the Act, but shall consist of a sworn complaint containing the allegations
stated in the municipal ordinance violation notice and shall fairly inform the
alleged violator how to respond to the citation.
(Ord. 298, adopted 7-27-1998)
Sec. 17-7. SANCTIONS FOR MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTIONS; REPEAT OFFENSES;
CONTINUING VIOLATIONS; INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
   A.   The sanction for a violation which is a municipal civil infraction
shall be a civil fine in the amount as provided by the ordinance violated (or
by the schedule of civil fines established by this chapter for admissions of
responsibility accepted at the Bureau in response to a municipal civil
infraction violation notice), plus any costs, damages, expenses and other
sanctions, as authorized under Chapter 87 of the Act and other applicable laws.
   B.   Increased civil fines may be imposed for repeat offenses by a person of
any requirement or provision of any ordinance. As used in this section, REPEAT
OFFENSE means a second (or any subsequent) admission or determination of
responsibility for the same municipal civil infraction made within the period
as specified by the ordinance violated.
   C.   Each day on which any violation designated as a municipal civil
infraction continues constitutes a separate offense and shall be subject to
sanctions as a separate violation.
   D.   In addition to any remedies available at law, the city may bring an
action for an injunction or other process against a person to restrain, prevent
or abate any municipal civil infraction violation.
(Ord. 298, adopted 7-27-1998)
Sec. 17-8. SCHEDULE OF CIVIL FINES.
   This section establishes a schedule of civil fines to be paid upon an
admission of responsibility at the City Bureau in response to the issuance by
an authorized city official of a municipal civil infraction violation notice.
City of Plainwell Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau Schedule of Civil
Fines
City Ordinance Municipal Civil Infraction Violation Fine*
City of Plainwell Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau Schedule of Civil Fines
City          Municipal Civil Infraction Violation                                       Fine*
Ordinance
Subdivision   Failure to comply with any provision of the subdivision ordinance          $500
ordinance     regulations
regulations   First repeat offense                                                       $1,000
(Ord. 269)    Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense                                  $2,500
Housing Code  Failure to comply with any provision of the Housing Code                   $500
(Ord. 175)    First repeat offense                                                       $1,000
              Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense                                  $2,500
Dangerous     Failure to comply with any provision of the dangerous buildings ordinance  $1,000
buildings     First repeat offense                                                       $2,500
ordinance     Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense                                  $5,000
(Ord. 207)
Unused,       Failure to comply with any provision of the unused, dismantled or          $250
dismantled or inoperable vehicles, machinery or equipment ordinance
inoperable    First repeat offense                                                       $500
vehicles,
machinery or  Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense                                  $1,000
equipment
(Ord. 313)
Littering of  Failure to comply with any provision of the littering of property and      $500
property and  waters ordinance
waters (Ord.  First repeat offense                                                       $1,000
eff. 7-12-    Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense                                  $2,500
1985)
Trespass      Failure to comply with any provision of the trespass ordinance             $250
(Ord. eff. 7- First repeat offense                                                       $1,000
12-1985)      Second (or subsequent) repeat offense                                      $5,000
Auctioneers,  Failure to comply with any provision of the auctioneers, hawkers,          $250
hawkers,      peddlers, transient dealers and traders ordinance
peddlers,     First repeat offense                                                       $500
transient
dealers and   Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense                                  $1,000
traders (Ord.
87)
Fireworks     Failure to comply with any provision of the fireworks ordinance            $250
(Ord. eff. 7- First repeat offense                                                       $500
12-1985)      Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense                                  $1,000
Frisbees;     Failure to comply with any provision of the frisbees; skateboards;         $100
skateboards;  rollerskates ordinance
rollerskates  First repeat offense                                                       $500
(Ord. 234)    Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense                                  $1,000
City parks    Failure to comply with §                                                 $250
ordinance     11-3B, C., E. or H.
(Ord. 200)    First repeat offense                                                       $500
              Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense                                  $1,000
                                                                                         Not less
                                                                                         than
                                                                                         $1,000 and
                                                                                         not more
              Failure to comply with any provision of the sewer use ordinance except as  than
              provided by §                                                            $10,000
              35-114                                                                     per day
                                                                                         for each
                                                                                         infraction
Sewer use                                                                                plus costs
ordinance                                                                                other
(Ord. 355)                                                                               sanctions
                                                                                         Not less
                                                                                         than
              First repeat offense                                                       $2,500
                                                                                         ,plus
                                                                                         costs
                                                                                         Not less
              Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense                                  than
                                                                                         $5,000,
                                                                                         plus costs
Water use     Failure to comply with any provision of the water use ordinance            $500
ordinance     First repeat offense                                                       $1,000
(Ord. 217)    Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense                                  $2,500
Water supply  Failure to comply with any provision of the water supply wells             $500
wells         contamination ordinance
contamination First repeat offense                                                       $1,000
(Ord. 117)    Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense                                  $2,500
Street        Failure to comply with any provision of the street vacations ordinance     $500
vacations     First repeat offense                                                       $1,000
(Ords. 133,   Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense                                  $2,500
149)
Snow removal; Failure to comply with any provision of the snow removal ordinance         $250
places of     First repeat offense                                                       $500
business or
service (Ord. Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense                                  $1,000
227)
Animals (Ord. Failure to comply with any provision of the animals ordinance, except §  $250
eff. 7-12-    26-7
1985)         First repeat offense                                                       $500
              Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense                                  $1,000
Refuse bin    Failure to comply with any provision of the refuse bin safety standard     $500
safety        ordinance
standard      First repeat offense                                                       $1,000
(Ord. 174)    Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense                                  $2,500
Garbage (Ord. Failure to comply with any provision of the garbage ordinance              $500
104)          First repeat offense                                                       $1,000
              Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense                                  $2,500
Tree          Failure to comply with any provision of the tree ordinance                 $500
ordinance     First repeat offense                                                       $1,000
(Ord. 201)    Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense                                  $2,500
Yard waste    Failure to comply with any provision of the yard waste ordinance           $250
ordinance     First repeat offense                                                       $500
(Ord. 259)    Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense                                  $1,000
Bonfires and  Failure to comply with any provision of the bonfires and rubbish fires     $250
rubbish fires ordinance
(Ord. 289)    First repeat offense                                                       $500
              Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense                                  $1,000
              Sending or causing to be sent three or more false alarm calls during a
              calendar year period as provided by § 
False alarm   32-2B.
ordinance     For the third false alarm call within a calendar year period               $250
(Ord. 254)    For the fourth false alarm call within a calendar year period              $500
              For the fifth or any subsequent false alarm call within a calendar year    $1,000
              period
Environmental Failure to comply with any provision of the environmental cleanup and cost $500
cleanup and   recovery ordinance
cost recovery First repeat offense                                                       $1,000
(Ord. 317)    Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense                                  $2,500
Sign          Failure to comply with any provision of the sign ordinance                 $500
ordinance     First repeat offense                                                       $1,000
(Ord. 308)    Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense                                  $2,500
Zoning        Failure to comply with any provision of the zoning ordinance               $500
ordinance     First repeat offense                                                       $1,000
(Ord. 188)    Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense                                  $2,500
NOTES TO TABLE:
* For any fine not paid in full at the Bureau within 30 days of the time specified for appearance
in the municipal civil infraction violation notice, the fine amount due shall automatically be
double the amount listed in this column of the schedule. The schedule of fines payable to the
Bureau as established by this section shall be posted at the Bureau. The city reserves the right to
amend the schedule of fines established by this section for any purpose determined necessary by the
city, including, but not limited to, adding, deleting or modifying code provisions, ordinances,
listed violations or changing the amount of fines for listed violations.
 
(Ord. 298, adopted 7-27-1998; Ord. 318, adopted 11-12-2001)
CHAPTER 18: MICHIGAN VEHICLE CODE
Section
   
18-1   Code adopted
   
18-2   References in code
   
18-3   Penalties
Sec. 18-1. CODE ADOPTED.
   The Michigan Vehicle Code, Public Act 300 of 1949, as amended, is adopted by
reference as well as part 821, 324.82101 to 324.82160 of the State Natural
Resources and Environmental Protection Act (Public Act 451 of 1994).
(Ord. 324, adopted 12-9-2002)
Sec. 18-2. REFERENCES IN CODE.
   References in the Michigan Vehicle Code to “local authorities” shall mean
the “city”.
(Ord. 324, adopted 12-9-2002)
Sec. 18-3. PENALTIES.
   The penalties provided by the Michigan Vehicle Code are adopted by
reference; provided, however, that, the city may not enforce any provision of
the Michigan Vehicle Code for which the maximum period of imprisonment is
greater than 93 days.
(Ord. 324, adopted 12-9-2002)
CHAPTER 19: UNIFORM TRAFFIC CODE
Section
   
19-1   Code and amendments and revisions adopted
   
19-2   References in code
   
19-3   Penalties
   
19-4   All-night parking prohibited
Sec. 19-1. CODE AND AMENDMENTS AND REVISIONS ADOPTED.
   The Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages, as promulgated
by the Director of the Department of State Police pursuant to the
Administrative Procedures Act of 1969, Public Act 306 of 1969, as amended, is
incorporated by reference.
(Ord. 323, adopted 12-9-2002)
Sec. 19-2. REFERENCES IN CODE.
   References in the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages to
a “governmental unit” shall mean the “city”.
(Ord. 323, adopted 12-9-2002)
Sec. 19-3. PENALTIES.
   The penalties provided by the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and
Villages are adopted by reference.
(Ord. 323, adopted 12-9-2002)
Sec. 19-4. ALL-NIGHT PARKING PROHIBITED.
   A.   Parking a motor vehicle or trailer within the right-or-way of any
public street in the city is prohibited between the hours of 2:00 a.m. to 5:00
a.m. of any day during the months of November, December, January, February,
March and April, except as otherwise provided in this section.
   B.   1.   This section shall not apply to physicians, ambulance drivers or
morticians on emergency calls. It also shall not apply where the City Manager
or City Council has given permission due to unforeseen or unusual circumstances
with respect to a particular parcel or particular use of parcel and where the
on-street parking is therefore reasonably necessary for a time period of
limited duration. The permission shall only be granted if the condition:
         a.   Is not a self-imposed hardship;
         b.   Is unique and not common to other property owners;
         c.   Will not increase traffic congestion or impair snow plowing or
other necessary street operations; and
         d.   Will not adversely affect the public health, safety or welfare.
      2.   It shall also not apply to the central business district as defined
in the city’s zoning ordinance.
   C.   In addition, if the City Public Safety Director identifies streets
where all-night parking would restrict the free-flow of regular vehicles and
emergency vehicles, the Public Safety Director can prohibit all-night parking
on those streets.
   D.   A person who violates this section is guilty of a municipal civil
infraction.
(Ord. 346, adopted 1-14-2008)
CHAPTER 20: TRAFFIC CONTROL ON SCHOOL PROPERTY
Section
   
20-1   School areas traffic control
   
20-2   Traffic Engineer
   
20-3   Modification, revocation of ordinance
   
20-4   Right to amend, modify or repeal
   
20-5   Right to be reimbursed
Sec. 20-1. SCHOOL AREAS TRAFFIC CONTROL.
   The City having received a resolution from the Plainwell Community Schools,
Counties of Allegan, Barry and Kalamazoo, Michigan, as provided in Public Act
175 of 1958, as amended, the Uniform Traffic Code, as provided therein, shall
apply to the property of the school district located within the city.
(Ord. 161, eff. 3-1-1974)
Sec. 20-2. TRAFFIC ENGINEER.
   The term “Traffic Engineer”, as used in the Uniform Traffic Code, shall
refer to the person designated by the school district to act as Traffic
Engineer.
(Ord. 161, eff. 3-1-1974)
Sec. 20-3. MODIFICATION, REVOCATION OF ORDINANCE.
   Upon receipt of a duly authorized resolution enacted by the Board of
Education of the school district requesting the city to modify this chapter,
the amendments to this chapter as are necessary to effect such modification
will be enacted by the city; provided that, the modification is not
inconsistent with other ordinances of the city or in violation of the statutes
of the state. The city will revoke this chapter upon receipt of a resolution of
the Board of Education of the school district requesting the revocation.
(Ord. 161, eff. 3-1-1974)
Sec. 20-4. RIGHT TO AMEND, MODIFY OR REPEAL.
   The city reserves the right to amend, modify or repeal the sections of the
code inserted by this chapter.
(Ord. 161, eff. 3-1-1974)
Sec. 20-5. RIGHT TO BE REIMBURSED.
   The city reserves the right to be reimbursed by the school district for the
costs as are incurred in excess of any monies recovered by the city in the
enforcement of the provisions of the code or be reimbursed in kind for any
service required as may be appropriate.
(Ord. 161, eff. 3-1-1974)
CHAPTER 21: UNUSED, DISMANTLED OR INOPERABLE VEHICLES, MACHINERY OR EQUIPMENT
Section
   
21-1   Intent and purpose
   
21-2   Definitions
   
21-3   Storage
   
21-4   Violations declared a nuisance
   
21-5   Construction
   
21-6   Violations and penalties
Sec. 21-1. INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   The city has determined that the continued existence of unused vehicles or
of inoperable vehicles, machinery or equipment may result in nuisance
conditions, the impairment of property rights, the destruction of property
values and a threat to the public health, safety and welfare of the city. It is
the intent and purpose of this chapter to protect the general health, safety
and welfare of the residents, property owners and other persons within the city
by regulating and preventing, reducing or eliminating the presence of unused
vehicles or of dismantled or inoperable vehicles, machinery or equipment which
exist or which may in the future exist in the city. The terms and provisions of
this chapter shall be interpreted and applied as minimum standards and
requirements for the promotion and protection of the public health, safety and
welfare within the city.
(Ord. 313, adopted 9-11-2000)
Sec. 21-2. DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Any word
or term not defined in this chapter shall be considered to be defined in
accordance with its common or standard definition.
   BOAT. A vehicle for use on the water which is self-propelled or intended to
be self-propelled, either mechanically or manually.
   DISMANTLED OR PARTIALLY DISMANTLED MACHINERY AND EQUIPMENT. Machinery or
equipment from which some part that is ordinarily a component of the machinery
or equipment has been removed or is missing.
   DISMANTLED OR PARTIALLY DISMANTLED MOTOR VEHICLE OR BOAT. A motor vehicle or
boat from which some part ordinarily a component of the motor vehicle or boat
has been removed or is missing.
   INOPERABLE MACHINERY AND EQUIPMENT. Any item of a piece of machinery or
equipment which, by reason of dismantling or disrepair or other cause, is
incapable of functioning or being operated as it was intended to function or be
operated.
   INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE OR BOAT. Any item of a piece of a motor vehicle or
a boat which, by reason of dismantling or disrepair or other cause, is
incapable of functioning or being operated as it was intended to function or be
operated.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any wheeled or unwheeled vehicle for use on land, in or on
water or in the air which is self-propelled or intended to be self-propelled
either mechanically or manually.
   UNUSED VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle or other conveyance which lacks a current
license plate or registration required for use.
(Ord. 313, adopted 9-11-2000)
Sec. 21-3. STORAGE.
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to store on, place on or permit to be
stored or placed on or to allow to remain on any platted or unplatted parcel of
land within the city for longer than 48 hours a dismantled, partially
dismantled or inoperable motor vehicle or boat or dismantled, partially
dismantled or inoperable machinery or equipment or any parts thereof or any
unused vehicle, except as permitted under the pertinent provisions of the
city’s zoning ordinance, unless the dismantled, partially dismantled or
inoperable motor vehicle, boat, machinery or equipment or parts thereof or
unused vehicle, is kept wholly enclosed in a garage or other wholly enclosed
structure.
   B.   This section shall not be construed to permit the parking or placing of
unused vehicles, dismantled or partially dismantled motor vehicles, boats,
machinery or equipment on any street, public property or public place in the
city or in any yard, as defined by the city’s zoning ordinance.
   C.   Each day that the prohibited item remains on the property in violation
of this section shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 313, adopted 9-11-2000)
Sec. 21-4. VIOLATIONS DECLARED A NUISANCE.
   The presence of an unused vehicle or of a dismantled, partially dismantled
or inoperable motor vehicle, boat, machinery or equipment or any parts thereof,
on any platted or unplatted parcel of land within the city in violation of this
chapter is declared to be a public nuisance.
(Ord. 313, adopted 9-11-2000)
Sec. 21-5. CONSTRUCTION.
   This section shall not be construed as repealing any ordinance or section
now in effect or hereafter made effective relating to rubbish, litter, garbage,
refuse, trash or junk, but shall be construed as supplementary to any ordinance
or section, as well as any statutes of the state relating thereto.
(Ord. 313, adopted 9-11-2000)
Sec. 21-6. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   A person who violates any provision of this chapter is responsible for a
municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than
$250, plus costs and other sanctions, for each violation. Repeat offenses shall
be subject to increased fines as provided by code, except that the increased
fine for a repeat offense shall be as follows.
   A.   The fine for any offense which is a first repeat offense shall be not
less than $500, plus costs and other sanctions.
   B.   The fine for any offense which is a second repeat offense or any
subsequent repeat offense shall be not less than $1,000, plus costs and other
sanctions.
(Ord. 313, adopted 9-11-2000; Ord. 318, adopted 11-12-2001)
CHAPTER 22: OFFENSES
Section
Article I. General
   
22-1   Definitions
   
22-2   Rule of construction
   
22-3   General provisions
Article II. Offenses Against Persons
   
22-4   General offenses
Article III. Offenses Against Property
   
22-5   Trespass
   
22-6   Destruction of or interference with property
   
22-7   Littering and waste
   
22-8   Theft offenses
Article IV. Alcohol and Drug Offenses
   
22-9   General provisions
   
22-10   Drug paraphernalia
   
22-11   Possession or use of marijuana
Article V. Offenses Against the Public Peace
   
22-12   Disturbance of the peace
   
22-13   Vice offenses
   
22-14   Curfew
   
22-15   Miscellaneous offenses
   
22-16   Weapons
   
22-17   Public nudity
Article VI. Offenses Against Government Order
   
22-18   General provisions
   
22-19   Offenses on school property
Article VII. Violations and Penalties
   
22-20   Violations and penalties
ARTICLE I. GENERAL
Sec. 22-1. DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES. Any spirituous, vinous, malt, fermented liquor, beer,
wine, spirits, alcoholic liquids and compounds whether or not medicated,
proprietary or patented and by whatever name called, containing 0.5% or more of
alcohol by volume.
   DANGEROUS WEAPON. Any weapon likely to produce or capable of producing death
or great bodily injury; or any weapon which, because of the manner in which it
is used or attempted to be used, endangers life or inflicts great bodily harm.
   DRUG. Any drug, controlled or other substance, the sale, distribution or
possession of which is prohibited or restricted by federal or state law.
   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA. Equipment, products and materials of any kind which are
used, intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging,
storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise
introducing into the human body a controlled substance as provided for in
Public Act 368 of 1978, as amended (M.C.L.A. §§ 333.1101 et seq.). It includes,
but is not limited to:
      1.   Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting marijuana or any species of
plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can
be derived;
      2.   Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing controlled
substances;
      3.   Isomerization devices used, intended for use or designed for use in
increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance;
      4.   Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use in
identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled
substances;
      5.    Scales and balances used, intended for use or designed for use in
weighing or measuring controlled substances;
      6.   Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol,
mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use or designed for use in
cutting controlled substances;
      7.   Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or designed for
use in removing twigs and seeds from or in otherwise cleaning or refining,
marijuana;
      8.   Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons or mixing devices used, intended
for use or designed for use in compounding controlled substances;
      9.   Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended
for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled
substances;
      10.   Containers and other objects used, intended for use or designed for
use in storing or concealing controlled substances;
      11.   Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for
use or designed for use in parenthetically injecting controlled substances into
the human body; and
      12.   Objects used, intended for use or designed for use in ingesting,
inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil
into the human body, such as, but not limited to:
         a.   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes
with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or punctured metal
bowls;
         b.   Water pipes;
         c.   Carburetion tubes and devices;
         d.   Smoking and carburetion masks;
         e.   Roach clips, which are objects used to hold burning material such
as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in
the hand;
         f.   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
         g.   Chamber pipes;
         h.   Carburetor pipes;
         i.   Electric pipes or conduit;
         j.   Air-drive pipes;
         k.   Chillumns;
         l.   Bongs; and
         m.   Ice pipes or chillers.
   HUNT or HUNTING. The act of pursuing or trapping animals, for the purpose of
killing or catching them, by whatever means.
   LITTER. All rubbish, refuse, waste material, garbage, offal, paper, glass,
cans, bottles, trash, debris or other foreign substances of every kind and
description.
   MARIJUANA. All parts of the plant Cannabis sativa L., whether growing or
not, the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and
every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the
plant, its seeds or resin. It does not include the mature stalks of the plant,
fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant,
any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of
the mature stalks, except the resin extracted therefrom, fiber, oil or cake or
the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled.
   PRINCIPAL. Unless the context calls for a different interpretation, means
any principal of any elementary, secondary or high school or chief
administrative officer of any elementary, secondary or high school.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any parking lot, street, alley, park, sidewalk, public
building, any place of business open to the public or frequented by the public
or any portion thereof and any other place or any portion thereof, which is
open to public view or to which the public has access.
   SCHOOL. Any pre-elementary, elementary (grades K-6); secondary (grades 7-
12); high school or combination thereof.
Sec. 22-2. RULE OF CONSTRUCTION.
   To the extent permitted by law, the rule that a penal statute is to be
strictly construed shall not apply to this chapter or its individual
provisions. All provisions of this chapter shall be construed according to the
fair import of their terms, to promote justice and to effect the object of the
law.
Sec. 22-3. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   The following general provisions shall apply in all prosecutions for
offenses provided for in this chapter.
   A.   Any person who aids, abets, counsels, procures, commands, persuades or
assists in the commission of any offense prohibited by this chapter shall be
punished as a principal or as if he or she committed or perpetuated the actual
offense.
   B.   Any person who shall attempt to commit an offense prohibited by this
chapter and in an attempt shall do any substantial damage towards the
commission of the offense, but shall fail in the perpetration or shall be
intercepted or prevented in intercepted or prevented in the execution of the
same, shall be punished as if the offense were actually perpetrated or
committed.
   C.   Any person who conspires with one or more other persons to commit any
act prohibited by this chapter shall be punished as if the offense were
actually perpetrated and shall be punished as a principal.
ARTICLE II. OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS
Sec. 22-4. GENERAL OFFENSES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
   A.   Commit an assault or an assault and battery upon another person, with
or without a weapon;
   B.   Verbally, electronically, by use of the mails or by placement in any
mailbox whether public or private and of whatever nature, communicate a threat
of any physical violence or harm to any other person or member of the person’s
family;
   C.   Accost, molest, beg, panhandle or willfully annoy another person;
   D.   Recklessly endanger the life, health or well-being of another person;
   E.   Engage in any indecent, insulting, immoral or obscene conduct in any
public place or place open to the public;
   F.   Utter any vile, blasphemous, vulgar or obscene language in any public
place or in a way as to subject the public to the language;
   G.   By words or conduct, harass, assault, molest or intimidate any other
person. As used in this division, HARASS includes, but is not limited to, the
use of any personally abusive epithets or words, language or conduct of an
offensive nature, which words, epithets, conduct or language, when addressed to
or directed at a reasonable person, are, as a matter of common knowledge, used
to produce or likely to provoke a reaction of fear, anger or apprehension; and/
or
   H.   Furnish to any minor any alcoholic liquor, illegal drugs or narcotics
or compounds releasing vapors or otherwise contribute to the delinquency of any
minor.
ARTICLE III. OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Sec. 22-5. TRESPASS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
   A.   Enter or remain upon the lands or premises of another without lawful
authority or after having been forbidden to do so by the owner, occupant or
agent of the owner or occupant;
   B.   Prowl about the private premises of another or any alley abutting the
same, either by day or night, without the express consent of the owner or
person in lawful possession of the premises;
   C.   Drive or park a motor vehicle on private property, knowing the same to
be private, without the express consent of the owner or person in lawful
possession of the premises;
   D.   Enter into any place, area or building or any part thereof without,
where applicable, having first paid any fee, charge or other consideration
required for admission or failing to pay for services as required before
leaving;
   E.   Break and enter or enter without breaking, any public or private
building, structure, vehicle, boat or similar property, whether occupied or
unoccupied, without the express permission of the owner or person in lawful
possession of the property;
   F.   Swim, bathe or wade in any creek, stream, pond, lake or any other body
of water not designed for the public use or not open to the public at that time
or swim, bathe or wade in water on private property not owned or lawfully
occupied by the person, without the express consent of the owner or person in
lawful possession;
   G.   Sleep, whether in a motor vehicle or not, in any park, street, public
way, public beach or other public place in the city during the nighttime,
unless specifically authorized to do so by the City Council; and/or
   H.   Sleep, whether in a motor vehicle or not, on any private premises
unless specifically authorized to do so by the owner of the premises.
Sec. 22-6. DESTRUCTION OF OR INTERFERENCE WITH PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
   A.   Interfere with, move, disconnect or carry off any property not his or
her own, without the express consent of the owner of the property;
   B.   Willfully, wantonly or recklessly destroy, mark, damage, deface or
tamper with any property, private or public, not his or her own;
   C.   Place any sign, advertisement or any other matter upon any lamppost,
electric light, railway, telegraph, telephone or other utility pole, shade
tree, fire hydrant, bridge, pavement, sidewalk, crosswalk or public building
without the consent and authorization of the appropriate official. This shall
not be construed as preventing any public officer or official from doing any
lawfully authorized act;
   D.   Mutilate, deface, conceal or tear down any official sign, notice or
placard posted by the city unless permission is given by a city officer or
employee to remove the notice;
   E.   Destroy, damage or in any manner alter or deface any drinking fountain
or public toilet or restroom or deposit or throw any substance in any public
toilet which causes or may cause damage to it or put any substance in a water
fountain which may pollute its waters. For purposes of this division, the terms
DRINKING FOUNTAIN and PUBLIC TOILET shall mean any facilities owned or operated
by the city or a governmental unit as well as facilities owned by private
businesses where the facilities are available for use by the public;
   F.   Open or attempt to open, interfere with or damage any fire hydrant
without authority; and/or
   G.   Maliciously and willfully, by and with the aid and use of any key,
instrument, device or explosives, blows or attempts to blow or forces or
attempts to force an entrance into any coin box, depository box, automated
teller machine (or “ATM”) or other receptacle established and maintained for
the convenience of the public or of any person or persons, in making payment
for any article of merchandise or service, wherein is continued any money or
thing of value or extracts or obtains or attempts to extract or obtain,
therefrom any money or thing of value so deposited or contained therein.
Sec. 22-7. LITTERING AND WASTE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
   A.   Knowingly, without the consent of the public authority having
supervision of any public property or the owner of private property, dump,
deposit, place, throw or leave or cause or permit the dumping, depositing,
placing, throwing or leaving of, litter on public or private property or water
other than property designated and set aside for the purposes or on city
streets as directed by the city during designated clean-up period. For purposes
of this division, PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY OR WATER includes, but is not
limited to, the right-of-way of a road or highway: a body of water or
watercourse or the shore or beach (including the ice above the water); city
parks or playgrounds; refuge, conservation or recreation areas; and residential
or farm properties or timberlands;
   B.   Knowingly fail to remove a vehicle, of any nature, wrecked or damaged
in an accident on a highway, road or street or fail to remove all glass and
other injurious substance dropped on the highway, road or street as a result of
an accident;
   C.   Knowingly cause any litter or any object to fall or to be thrown into
the path of or to hit a vehicle, of any nature traveling the highway;
   D.   A person who violates any provision of this chapter is responsible for
a municipal civil infraction, as defined herein. Repeat offenses shall be
subject to increased fines as provided by this code; and/or
   E.   No person shall leave outside of any building or dwelling or in a place
accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox,
refrigerator, trunk, chest, cooler cabinet or any other container of any kind
which has an airtight door or lock which may not be released for opening from
the inside of the icebox, refrigerator, trunk, chest cooler, cabinet or other
container, without first removing the locks or doors therefrom.
Sec. 22-8. THEFT OFFENSES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
   A.   Obtain or attempt to obtain money, goods, property or services by
fraud, trick or false pretenses;
   B.   Knowingly obtain or attempt to obtain telephone service or the
transmission of a telephone message by the use of any false or fictitious
telephone credit number or telephone number of another without the authority of
the person to whom the credit number or telephone number was issued;
   C.   Buy, receive, possess, conceal or aid in the concealment of stolen,
embezzled or converted money, goods or property, knowing the money, goods or
property to be stolen, embezzled or converted;
   D.   Refuse or willfully neglect to return a motor vehicle, trailer or other
tangible property, which he or she has on a rental or lease basis under any
agreement in writing providing for its return to a particular place at a
particular time, after the expiration of the time stated in a written notice
proved to have been duly mailed by registered or certified mail addressed to
the last known address of the person who rented or leased the motor vehicle,
trailer or other tangible property and with intent to defraud the lessor;
   E.   As the agent, servant or employee of another or as the trustee, bailee
or custodian of the property of another or of any partnership, voluntary
association, public or private corporation or of this state or of any county,
city, village, township or school district within the state, fraudulently
dispose of or convert to his or her own use or take or secrete with intent to
convert to his or her own use without the consent of his or her principal, any
money or other personal property, of his or her principal which shall have come
to his or her possession or shall be under his or her charge or control by
virtue of his or her being the agent, servant, employee, trustee, bailee or
custodian;
   F.   By use of a computer, telephone or other electronic or mechanical
device, obtain or gain access to any database, confidential records or other
information not his or her own without permission of the owner or keeper of the
information;
   G.   Telephone, e-mail or other electronic device in a false order to any
food delivery service or a false request to any service business and request
that food be delivered to a location or that services be rendered at a
particular location;
   H.   With intent to defraud, make or draw or utter or deliver any check,
draft or order for the payment of money, to apply on account or otherwise, upon
any bank or other depository, knowing at the time of the making, drawing,
uttering or delivering, that the maker or drawer, has not sufficient funds in
or credit with the bank or other depository, for the payment of the check,
draft or order, in full upon its presentation, if the amount payable in the
check, draft or order is for any amount;
   I.   With intent to defraud, make, draw, utter or deliver any check, draft
or order for the payment of money to apply on account or otherwise, upon any
bank or other depository and who shall not have sufficient funds for the
payment for same when presentment is made to the drawee, except where the lack
of funds is due to garnishment, attachment, levy or other lawful cause and the
fact was not known to the person who made, draw, uttered or delivered the
instrument at the time of so doing if the amount payment in the check, draft or
order is for any amount;
   J.   As against the maker or drawer thereof, the making drawing, uttering or
delivering of a check, draft or order payment of which is drawer, when
presented in the usual course of business evidence of intent to defraud and of
knowledge of insufficient funds in or credit with the bank or other depository;
provided, the maker or drawer shall not have paid the drawer thereof the amount
due thereon, together with all costs and protest fees, within days after
receiving notice that the check, draft or order has not been paid by the
drawee;
   K.   With regard to divisions H., I. or J. above, where the check draft or
order is protested on the ground of insufficiency of funds or credit, the
notice of protest shall be admissible a proof of presentation, nonpayment and
protest, shall be prima facie evidence of intent to defraud and of knowledge of
insufficient funds or credit with the bank or other depository;
   L.   Take, in any way, from the public library any book, pamphlet, map,
chart, painting, picture, photograph, periodical, newspaper, magazine,
manuscript or exhibit or any part thereof, with intent to convert the same to
his or her own use or with intent to defraud the owner thereof or who having
procured or taken any book, pamphlet, map, chart, painting, picture,
photograph, periodical, newspaper, magazine, manuscript or exhibit or any part
thereof, shall thereafter convert the same to his or her own use or
fraudulently deprive the owner thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor; and/
or
   M.   Taking or injuring fruit, shade, ornamental trees, shrubs, vines. Any
person who shall wrongfully take and carry away from any place any fruit tree,
ornamental, tree, shade tree, ornamental shrub or any plant, vine, bush or
vegetable there growing, standing or being, with intent to deprive the owner
thereof or who shall, without right and with wrongful intent, detach from the
ground or injure any fruit tree, ornamental tree, shade tree, ornamental shrub
or any plant, vine, bush, vegetable or produce shall be deemed by so doing to
have committed the crime of larceny and shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
ARTICLE IV. ALCOHOL AND DRUG OFFENSES
Sec. 22-9. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
   A.   Be intoxicated or under the influence of an alcoholic beverage, any
drug or any combination of alcoholic beverages and drugs in any public place
and either endanger directly the safety of another person or property or act in
a manner that causes or creates a public disturbance;
   B.   Sell, give or furnish any drug to any person without a license to sell,
give or furnish a drug; and/or
   C.   Possess or use a drug unless otherwise expressly permitted or licensed
by federal or state law.
Sec. 22-10. DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      1.   Use or possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant,
propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce,
process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject,
ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a drug in violation
of this chapter;
      2.   Deliver or possess with intent to deliver, drug paraphernalia,
knowing or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that it will
be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound,
convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store,
contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human
body a drug in violation of this chapter; and/or
      3.   Place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill or other publication any
advertisement, knowing or under circumstances where one reasonably should know,
that the purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the
sale of objects designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia.
   B.   This section shall not apply to a law enforcement officer who, in the
course of his or her duties, is required to perform certain acts in
investigating illegal drug traffic, nor shall it include a person for whom
marijuana has been prescribed by a physician, duly licensed by the state or a
person who, in the lawful course of his or her business, is required to handle
the items.
Sec. 22-11. POSSESSION OR USE OF MARIJUANA.
   No person who has not obtained a registration from the Michigan Department
of Community Health and complies with the Michigan Medical Marijuana Act (MMMA)
of 2008 shall knowingly or intentionally possess or use marijuana.
   A.   This section shall not apply to a Qualifying Patient who possesses a
caregiver or patient medical marijuana card and complies with M.C.L.A.
§§ 333.26421 et seq. of MMMA.
   B. When any person who has not previously been convicted of any offense
under this chapter or under any statute of the United States or of any state
relating to narcotic drugs coca leaves, marijuana or stimulant, depressant or
hallucinogenic drugs, pleads guilty to or is found guilty of possession or use
of marijuana, the court, without entering judgment of guilty and with the
consent of the accused may defer further proceedings and place the person or
probation upon reasonable terms and conditions. Upon violation of a term or
condition imposed, the court may enter an adjudication of guilty and proceed as
otherwise provided. Upon fulfillment of the terms and conditions, this court
shall discharge the person and dismiss the proceedings against him or her.
Discharge and dismissal, under this section, shall be without an adjudication
of guilt. There may be only one discharge and dismissal under this division
granted to any person.
ARTICLE V. OFFENSES AGAINST THE PUBLIC PEACE
Sec. 22-12. DISTURBANCE OF THE PEACE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
   A.   Create or engage in any disturbance, fight or quarrel in any public
place, except in reasonable self-defense when attacked without reasonable
provocation, or in reasonable defense of another who was so attacked;
   B.   Disturb the public peace and quiet by loud, boisterous or vulgar
conduct or language, which can be heard by persons at a distance of 50 feet
from the location where the conduct or language originates;
   C.   Without proper authority, conduct himself or herself in any public
place so as to obstruct the free and uninterrupted passage of the public;
   D.   Disturb or unreasonably interfere with any service of worship or other
assembly gathered for lawful purpose;
     E.   Fire, discharge, display or possess any fireworks except of the type
and under the conditions expressly permitted by state law and this code of
ordinances;
   F.   Incite, cause or attempt to incite or cause any assembled group of
persons to act in a manner that is likely to or does endanger the safety of
another person or of property; and/or
   G.   By the use or means of telephone, perform any of the following:
      1.   Disturb the peace, quiet or privacy of any other person by repeated
calls intended to harass or annoy the person or family to whom the calls are
made;
      2.   Use obscene or offensive language or suggest any lewd or lascivious
act;
      3.   Attempt to extort money or anything of value from any person;
      4.   Threaten any physical violence or harm to any person;
      5.   Repeatedly and continuously ring the telephone of any person with
intent to disturb or harass the person;
   H.   Except as permitted at events approved, from time to time, by
resolution of the City Council, create any loud noises or use any loudspeaker,
sound amplifier, or other electrical or mechanical device intended to increase
the volume of sound which can be heard by persons at a distance of 50 feet from
the location where the sound originates, and which disturbs the quiet, comfort
or repose of any person or persons; and/or
   I.   It shall be unlawful, from 9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. in a residential
district or from 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. in commercial district, to disturb the
public quiet, comfort or repose of any person or persons by making, creating or
causing any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise that can be heard by a person at
a distance of 50 feet from the location or property line where the sound
originates.
(Ord. 360, adopted 9-12-2011)
Sec. 22-13. VICE OFFENSES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
   A.   Engage in prostitution or solicit or accost any person for the purpose
of inducing the commission of prostitution or any illegal or immoral act;
   B.   Engage in gambling or any game of chance for money, except as otherwise
expressly permitted by law;
   C.   Attend, frequent, operate or be an occupant of any place where
prostitution, gambling, the illegal sale or use of alcoholic beverages, drugs
or any other illegal or immoral business or occupation is permitted or
conducted;
   D.   Knowingly transport any person to any place for the purpose of enabling
the person to engage in gambling, prostitution or in any illegal act;
   E.   Keep, maintain or permit the use of a gambling room, table, equipment
or pool tickets, to be used for gambling on any premises occupied or controlled
by him or her; and/or
   F.   Permit or allow any premises owned, occupied or controlled by him or
her to he occupied by persons engaging in any act of prostitution.
Sec. 22-14. CURFEW.
   A.   Minor under 17. No minor under the age of 17 years shall congregate,
traverse or remain in or upon any public street, highway, alley or other public
place between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., except where the minor is
accompanied by a parent or guardian or some adult delegated by the parent or
guardian to accompany the minor child or where the minor is upon an errand or
other legitimate business directed by his or her parent or guardian.
   B.   Aiding and abetting violation. No person who is 17 years or over shall
assist, aid, abet or encourage any minor under the age of 17 years to violate
the provisions of divisions A., B. or C. herein.
   C.   Parents, guardians, etc. No parent, guardian or other person having the
legal care and custody of any minor under the age of 17 years shall knowingly
allow, permit or encourage that minor, while in his or her legal custody, to
congregate, traverse or remain in or upon any public street, highway, alley or
other public place as prohibited in divisions A., B. and C. herein.
   D.   Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to persons
traveling to or from their homes, places of employment or an activity sponsored
or sanctioned by a school, civic group, church or licensee of the city at which
no alcoholic liquor or alcoholic beverages are served.
Sec. 22-15. MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
   A.   Engage in any window peeping;
   B.   Swim or bathe in the nude in any public place or on private property
without the specific permission of the owner;
   C.   Expectorate, urinate, defecate or perform any other act which creates a
hazardous, unsanitary or deleterious condition in any public place or upon the
property of any other person. This division shall not apply to the property use
of public or private restroom facilities; and/or
   D.   Tell or pretend to tell fortunes by person, machine or otherwise for
hire, gain, reward or profit, whether by means of cards, tokens, trances,
inspection of the hands or skull mind reading, consulting the movements of the
heavenly bodies or otherwise.
Sec. 22-16. WEAPONS.
   A.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms
shall be defined as provided below:
      AUTHORIZED AREA. An authorized target range, or other property where
firearms may be discharged, or on or within private property with the
permission of the owner or possessor of that property.
      AUTHORIZED TARGET RANGE. A gun or archery range with all applicable
licenses, permits, and approvals.
      BOW. A device for propelling an arrow from a string drawn, held, and
released by hand if the force used to hold the string in the drawn position is
provided by the archer’s muscles.
      CONCEAL. To intentionally hide, put out of sight, disguise, or do any
other act to keep an object out of sight and to avoid its being discovered or
observed.
      CROSSBOW. A weapon consisting of a bow, with the draw weight of 100
pounds or more, mounted transversely on a stock or frame and designed to fire
an arrow, bolt, or quarrel by the release of a bow string controlled by a
mechanical or electric trigger with a working safety.
      DANGEROUS STABBING WEAPON. A knife with a blade in excess of four inches,
a knife having the appearance of a pocket knife with a blade that can be opened
by the flick of a button, a dagger, dirk, stiletto, sword, or similar dangerous
weapon used for cutting or piercing.
      FIREARM. Any weapon which will, is designed to, or may readily be
converted to expel a projectile by action of an explosive.
      PNEUMATIC GUN. Any implement, designed as a gun, that will expel a BB or
pellet by spring, gas, or air. PNEUMATIC GUN includes a paintball gun that
expels by pneumatic pressure plastic balls filled with paint for the purpose of
marking the point of impact.
      POSSESS. Carrying or having control over an object with knowledge of its
presence.
      PUBLIC BUILDING. A building owned and/or controlled by the city and
located in the city.
   B.   Discharge of dangerous weapons. No person shall discharge any firearm,
bow, cross bar, or pneumatic weapon except for as follows:
      1.   Authorized law enforcement officers are permitted to discharge
firearms in the performance of their duties.
      2.   A person may discharge a firearm, bow, crossbow, or pneumatic weapon
for the lawful protection of life or property.
      3.   A person may discharge a firearm, bow, or crossbow for target
practice purposes, in a safe manner in an authorized target range.
      4.   A person may discharge a pneumatic gun in any authorized area if
such person exercises reasonable care to prevent a projectile from crossing the
bounds of the property.
      5.   The City Council has determined that the city is sufficiently
populated such that all conduct in violation of this section would be dangerous
to the inhabitants of the city.
   C.   Possession of knives and dangerous stabbing weapons by minors. No
person under 18 years of age shall possess or control, except within his or her
own domicile, a dangerous stabbing weapon. However, such person shall not be in
violation of this section if:
      1.   The person is at or in route to or from a place of employment where
use of such dangerous stabbing weapon is necessary; or
      2.   The person is accompanied by a parent, guardian, or other
responsible adult and is at or in route to or from a place of hunting, trapping
or fishing and, whenever required, is carrying a valid license for such weapon.
   D.   Possession of dangerous stabbing weapons in public buildings. No person
shall possess or conceal any dangerous stabbing weapon in a public building.
However, this section shall not apply to any law enforcement officer carrying a
weapon issued or authorized for use on the job by the officer’s employer.
   E.   Projectiles from vehicles. No person shall throw or propel any
snowball, missile, or other object from a moving vehicle in the direction of a
person or vehicle, or onto the private property of another.
   F.   Hunting or trapping. No person shall hunt or trap animals within the
city.
(Ord. 377, passed 10-24-2016)
Sec. 22-17. PUBLIC NUDITY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or intentionally display in
a public place or, for payment or promise of payment including, but not limited
to, payment or promise of payment of an admission fee, to knowingly or
intentionally display in any other place any individual’s genitals or anus with
less than fully opaque covering or a female individual’s breast with less than
a fully opaque covering of the nipple and areola. Public nudity does not
include any of the following:
   A.   A woman’s breastfeeding of an infant shall not under any circumstances
constitute public nudity irrespective of whether the nipple is covered during
or incidental to the feeding;
   B.   “Material” defined in § 2 of Public Act 343 of 1984, as amended, being
M.C.L.A. § 752.362;
   C.   “Sexually explicit visual material” as defined in § 3 of Public Act 33
of 1978, as amended, being M.C.L.A. § 722.673;
   D.   Any display of any part of the anatomy occurring as part of the regular
curriculum of an educational institution that is funded, chartered or
recognized by the state; and/or
   E.   Any modeling session for a local, nonprofit organization, that is not
open to the public or to any persons other than members of the organization,
that is for the purpose of instruction in the artistic depiction in two-
dimensional or three-dimensional media of the human form and during which the
model remains in a fixed pose.
ARTICLE VI. OFFENSES AGAINST GOVERNMENT ORDER
Sec. 22-18. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
   A.   Use any physical or verbal conduct which obstructs, resists, hinders or
opposes any member of the Police or Fire Department or any other peace officer,
in the lawful discharge of his or her duties;
   B.   Knowingly furnish to any city official or employee, acting in the
lawful discharge of his or her duties, a false name, address, date of birth or
a false of misleading report in connection with an arrest or the investigation
of an alleged commission of any crime, misdemeanor or citation;
   C.   Escape or attempt to escape while lawfully in the custody of any police
or other peace officer;
   D.   Impersonate, with due authority, a firefighter, police or other peace
officer or other governmental officer or employee;
   E.   Knowingly report a false alarm of fire;
   F.   Any person who shall willfully and knowingly make to any police
officer, a fictitious report of the commission of any crime knowing the same to
be false, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. If the report of fictitious crime
relates to a bombing, an attempted bombing or a threat to bomb and the report
shall be willfully and knowingly communicated to any peace officer or to any
other person, then the person making the fictitious report shall be deemed to
be guilty of a misdemeanor;
   G.   A person who, with the intent not to use the assistance, knowingly
causes or makes a request for the assistance of an ambulance service or an
advanced mobile emergency care service is guilty of a misdemeanor;
   H.   When operating a motor vehicle which has been stopped in response to a
police officer’s signal, leave or attempt to leave the scene unless and until
he or she has received permission to do so from the officer;
   I.   Falsely indicate a lack of knowledge or, when asked by a law
enforcement officer, a prosecuting attorney, the City Attorney or a Judge, fail
to disclose or conceal knowledge of the actual commission of a violation of
this chapter from a court of law or from a law enforcement officer
investigating the violation. This division shall not be interpreted to conflict
with the right of any person not to be a witness against himself or herself or
any other legally recognized privilege or right;
   J.   Willfully fail to obey the command of any properly identified law
enforcement officer to stop or halt;
   K.   Willfully fail to obey the command of any police officer who is
directing traffic or engaging in crowd control;
   L.   Willfully fail to obey the command of any law enforcement officer,
school official or other authorized representative of the Department, to leave
a public park, school grounds, playground, boulevard, swimming pool or
recreation area when ordered to do so;
   M.   Stand, sit, kneel, lie, loiter or walk upon or occupy the traveled
portion of any roadway, except when necessary to avoid contact with any vehicle
lawfully on the roadway.
      1.   Where there are no adjacent sidewalks, a person may, without
violating this provision, walk along the left edge of the traveled portion of
the roadway in a manner so as to be facing traffic.
      2.   Walking, as provided in division M.1. above shall be in a “single
file” so that two or more persons are not walking abreast.
   N.   Sitting or standing in a drive aisle in any public parking lot. This
provision does not apply to a person standing in a drive aisle while
momentarily waiting for access to a vehicle in that parking lot or while
loading or unloading items in a vehicle in that parking lot;
   O.   Repeatedly travel in a motor vehicle over one or more city streets with
no destination or without stopping at any destination. For purposes of this
division, if the vehicle passes the same place on a street three times within
one hour, there shall be a presumption of the offensive conduct;
   P.   Interfere with any person’s use of public streets, sidewalks, public
places or places open to the general public; and/or
   Q.   Travel or stand in a motor vehicle in a slow manner, in a repeated
route or in another manner so as to impede or interfere with the travel on or
use of any street, road, parking lot or right-of-way by any other vehicles.
Sec. 22-19. OFFENSES ON SCHOOL PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful to:
   A.   Entry upon school property:
      1.   Enter into or upon any public, private or parochial building or
school property in the city for any reason whatsoever, unless the person has
received permission from the principal or other person designated by the
principal to be in or upon or to remain in or upon the public, private or
parochial school building or school property or is otherwise so permitted by
law; and/or
      2.   This division shall not apply to persons engaging in or attending a
school for an authorized activity or to persons using a school playground or
playground equipment after school hours or when school is not in session,
unless the entry or use shall have been otherwise prohibited by a published or
posted rule or regulation of the school board, school principal or other
person, board or committee with the authority to prohibit the use or entry.
   B.   Making or assisting in making any noise, disturbance or improper
diversion by which the peace, quietude or good order of any public, private or
parochial school is disturbed;
   C.   Failing to leave the building or property, immediately when so directed
by the principal or by any other person designated by the principal or other
school personnel;
   D.   By violence, threats of violence or other form of coercion, force or
attempts to force any public, private or parochial school student or other
person to give or to lend any money or other thing of value to any person at
any time; and/or
   E.   Damage, destroy, mark or deface any public, private or parochial school
building or other grounds, outbuildings, fences, trees or other appurtenances
or fixtures belonging thereto.
ARTICLE VII. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
Sec. 22-20. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is responsible for a
municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than
$250, plus costs and other sanctions, for each violation. Repeat offenses shall
be subject to increased fines as provided by code, except that the increased
fine for a repeat offense shall be as follows.
   A.   The fine for any offense which is a first repeat offense shall be not
less than $500, plus costs and other sanctions.
   B.   The fine for any offense which is a second repeat offense or any
subsequent repeat offense shall be not less than $1,000, plus costs and other
sanctions.
CHAPTER 23: FIREWORKS
Section
   
23-1   Code and amendments and revisions adopted
   
23-2   References in code
   
23-3   Violations and penalties
Sec. 23-1. CODE AND AMENDMENTS AND REVISIONS ADOPTED.
   Michigan Fireworks Safety Act, Act 256 of 2011, M.C.L.A. 28.450 et seq.,
effective January 1, 2012 as amended, is incorporated by reference.
(Ord. 367, adopted 8-25-2014)
Sec. 23-2. REFERENCES IN CODE.
   References in the Michigan Fireworks Safety Act to a “governmental unit”
shall mean the “city”.
(Ord. 367, adopted 8-25-2014)
Sec. 23-3. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is responsible for a
municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than
$250, plus costs and other sanctions, for each violation.
Repeat offenses shall be subject to increased fines as provided by code, except
that the increased fine for a repeat offense shall be as follows.
   A.   The fine for any offense which is a first repeat offense shall be not
less than $500, plus costs and other sanctions.
   B.   The fine for any offense which is a second repeat offense or any
subsequent repeat offense shall be not less than $1,000, plus costs and other
sanctions.
(Ord. 367, adopted 8-25-2014)
CHAPTER 24: FRISBEES; SKATEBOARDS; ROLLERSKATES
Section
   
24-1   Regulations
   
24-2   Purpose
   
24-3   Definitions
   
24-4   Prohibited uses
   
24-5   Violations and penalties
Sec. 24-1. REGULATIONS.
   A chapter to regulate frisbees, skateboards, rollerskate and rollerskates.
(Ord. 234, adopted 6-9-1986)
Sec. 24-2. PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to ensure the safe and convenient use of the
public highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks and footpaths of the city.
(Ord. 234, adopted 6-9-1986)
Sec. 24-3. DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FRISBEE. Any saucer shaped disc used for skimming into the air.
   ROLLERSKATE. Any shoe like device with wheels attached.
   SKATEBOARD. Any board like object with wheels attached.
(Ord. 234, adopted 6-9-1986)
Sec. 24-4. PROHIBITED USES.
   A.   No person shall ride or in any manner use a skateboard, rollerskate or
rollerskates, upon the following public ways:
      1.   Main Street between Chart Street and North Main Street Bridge;
      2.   East Bridge Street (M-89) between Anderson Street and Main Street;
      3.   Allegan Street (M-89) between Millrace Bridge and Main Street;
      4.   West Bridge Street between Millrace Bridge and Main Street;
      5.   Any city owned/leased or maintained parking lot;
      6.   The sidewalks running along the public ways set forth in divisions
A.1. through 5. above;
      7.   The city boardwalk and sidewalks within any public park unless
designated for that use.
   B.   No person shall ride on or in any manner use a skateboard, rollerskate
or rollerskates, with a sail.
   C.   No person shall ride on or in any manner use a skateboard, rollerskate
or rollerskates, which is being towed by any vehicle or animal.
   D.   No person shall throw, cause to be thrown or participate in any manner
in the throwing of a frisbee on a public highway, street, alley, sidewalk or
footpath.
   E.   No person shall throw, cause to be thrown or participate in any manner
in the throwing of a frisbee in a manner as to interfere with the lawful use of
public highway, street, alley, sidewalk or footpath.
   F.   This chapter shall not be construed to prohibit the use of frisbees in
other areas; provided that, the use does not interfere with the lawful use of a
public highway, street, alley, sidewalk or footpath.
(Ord. 234, adopted 6-9-1986)
Sec. 24-5. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is responsible for a
municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than
$100, plus costs and other sanctions, for each violation. Repeat offenses shall
be subject to increased fines as provided by code, except that the increased
fine for a repeat offense shall be as follows.
   A.   The fine for any offense which is a first repeat offense shall be not
less than $500, plus costs and other sanctions.
   B.   The fine for any offense which is a second repeat offense or any
subsequent repeat offense shall be not less than $1,000, plus costs and other
sanctions.
(Ord. 234, adopted 6-9-1986; Ord. 318, adopted 11-12-2001)
CHAPTER 25: NUISANCES
Section
   
25-1   Offensive matter, trades
   
25-2   Offensive substances on sidewalks, streets or alleys
   
25-3   Offensive structures
   
25-4   Litter, debris, hazards; private property
   
25-5   Authority to inspect and report
   
25-6   Removal of nuisance
   
25-7   Violations and penalties
   
25-8   Nuisances prohibited
Sec. 25-1. OFFENSIVE MATTER, TRADES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to keep in or about any shop,
dwelling or premises owned or occupied by him, her or them within the limits of
the city any offensive animal or vegetable matter or within the limits of the
city to engage in or carry on any filthy or loathsome trade or occupation that
may be prejudicial to health therein.
(Ords. 11 and 135, readopted 12-31-1965)
Sec. 25-2. OFFENSIVE SUBSTANCES ON SIDEWALKS, STREETS OR ALLEYS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, suffer, cause or permit to be
thrown on any sidewalk or into any street or alley within the limits of the
city any urine, carrion, slops, filthy water or filthy substance or suffer or
permit the same to pass through any drain onto any sidewalk or any street or
alley within the limits of the city.
(Ords. 11 and 135, readopted 12-31-1965)
Sec. 25-3. OFFENSIVE STRUCTURES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to erect or continue or cause
to be continued any privy, hog sty, cow pen, stable or any nuisance within the
limits of the city in any manner so the same shall be injurious to the public
health or so near to another lot or lots as to materially impair the comfort of
any person occupying other lot or lots, but the nuisance or the injury
occasioned by the same shall be removed within 24 hours by the owner or
occupant of the lot or premises upon which the same exists after being notified
by the Superintendent of the Department of Public Works or designee in writing
to remove or cause the removal of the same.
(Ords. 11 and 135, readopted 12-31-1965)
Sec. 25-4. LITTER, DEBRIS, HAZARDS; PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupier or person having the right
to possession of any private property to cause or permit:
      1.   Any junk, debris or waste, including, but not limited to, filth,
rubbish, refuse, garbage, offal, paper, glass, cans, bottles, dead shrubbery,
trash, dead trees or any other foreign substance to remain on the property; or
      2.   Any pollutants or hazardous materials to remain in the soil, water
or air following a release of pollutants or hazardous materials from the
property in a quantity which is or may become injurious to the public health,
safety or welfare or the environment.
      3.   It shall be unlawful and constitute a public nuisance to deposit on
the public sidewalk any snow or ice which is hazardous to pedestrians.
      4.   It shall be unlawful and constitute a public nuisance to deposit
snow or ice on neighboring right-of- ways or properties.
      5.   A person shall not deposit, or cause to be deposited, snow, ice or
slush on any roadway or highway.
      6.   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         HAZARDOUS MATERIAL. Any of the following:
            (1)   Hazardous substances as defined in the Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act of 1980, Pub. Law No.
96-510, 94 State, 2767, as amended; or as defined in Part 201 of Public Act 451
of 1994, as amended; or as defined under other local, state or federal laws,
rules or regulations;
            (2)   Hazardous waste as defined under 40 C.F.R. Part 261; or as
defined under Part 111 of Public Act 451 of 1994, as amended; or as defined
under other local, state or federal laws, rules or regulations;
            (3)   Any material defined or listed as a toxic waste or pollutant
in 40 C.F.R. § 401.15; in the Critical Materials Register promulgated by the
State Department of Environmental Quality: or under other local, state or
federal laws, rules or regulations;
            (4)   Petroleum as described in Part 213 of Public Act 451 of 1994,
as amended; and
            (5)   Any substance or material in quantity or form which, in the
determination of the city, pose a substantial present or potential hazard to
human life, health and safety, welfare, property or the environment and shall
include, but shall not be limited to, such substances as chemicals, explosives,
oxidizers, peroxides, poisons, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum
products, gases, poisons, etiologic (biologic) agents, flammables and
corrosives.
         POLLUTANT. Any material or substance added to the soil, water or air
and includes (but is not limited to) solids, residues, wastes, gases, liquids,
vapors, sludges, wastes, ash, particulate matter, biological materials,
radioactive materials, chemicals, dust and dirt; and properties of materials
(including, but not limited to, pH, odors and heat).
         RELEASE. Includes, but is not limited to, the accidental or
intentional, sudden or gradual, spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting,
emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping or disposing into
the environment or the abandonment or discarding of barrels, containers or
other receptacles containing a hazardous material.
   B.   It shall also be unlawful for any person to keep or permit upon the
land any hazard, open pit, hole, excavation, basement, abandoned refrigerator,
well, cistern or similar condition unless fenced as prescribed by the Council.
   C.   It shall also be unlawful for any person to keep or permit any grass or
weeds exceeding six inches in length upon the land or upon the following public
access areas abutting the property:
      1.   The city right-of-way on either side of a public street;
      2.   A public or utility easement to the centerline; and/or
      3.   An alley or alleyway to the centerline.
   D.   It shall be unlawful for any person by himself or herself or by aiding
or abetting another, to cause litter to exist upon any public or private
property within the city including, but not limited to, the items mentioned in
division A. hereof.
(Ord. 340, adopted 6-27-2005; Am. Ord. 365, adopted 2-10-2014)
Sec. 25-5. AUTHORITY TO INSPECT AND REPORT.
   The Superintendent of the Department of Public Works or designee is
authorized and empowered and it is declared to be his or her duty to visit and
inspect any and all premises in the city and if he or she finds thereon any
filth that, in his or her estimation, constitutes a nuisance or is injurious or
detrimental to the public health, it shall be his or her duty to report the
same to the Health Officer of the city, who shall at once visit and inspect the
same and, if in his or her judgment, the filth constitutes a nuisance or is
detrimental to the public health, he or she shall so report to the
Superintendent of the Department of Public Works or designee, of if the Health
Officer shall discover any filth within the limits of the city that is a
nuisance or is detrimental to the public health although not so reported to him
or her by the Superintendent of the Department of Public Works or designee, he
or she shall at once report the same to that officer.
(Ords. 11 and 135, readopted 12-31-1965)
Sec. 25-6. REMOVAL OF NUISANCE.
   It shall then be the duty of the Superintendent of the Department of Public
Works or designee to, at once, order the owner or occupant of the premises upon
which the filth or nuisance exists to remove the same in the time, not less
than 24 hours as he or she may prescribe in the notice and the notice shall be
in writing and shall specify the premises and the filth or nuisance ordered to
be removed. In case the occupant or owner shall refuse, neglect or fail to
remove the same within the time prescribed in the notice then, and in that
case, the Superintendent of the Department of Public Works or designee shall
cause the same to be removed, keeping an accurate account of the expense
thereof and shall as soon as practicable thereafter make and present to the
owner or occupant an itemized and sworn bill of the expenses and demand payment
thereof and if the owner or occupant fails to pay the same the Superintendent
of the Department of Public Works or designee shall return the same, with a
verified statement of the time when and the place where, he or she presented
the bill to the owner or occupants and the fact of non-payment, to the Clerk,
who shall duly file the same in his or her office and make report thereof to
the City Council and the amount of the expenses shall be a lien upon and be
levied as a tax upon the premises where the filth or nuisance existed.
(Ords. 11 and 135, readopted 12-31-1965)
Editor’s note:
   The enforcement remedy set forth in the city’s special assessment ordinance,
as amended, shall be considered cumulative to the remedy set forth herein.
Sec. 25-7. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is responsible for a
municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than
$250, plus costs and other sanctions, for each violation. Repeat offenses shall
be subject to increased fines as provided by code, except that the increased
fine for a repeat offense shall be as follows.
   A.   The fine for any offense which is a first repeat offense shall be not
less than $1,000, plus costs and other sanctions.
   B.   The fine for any offense which is a second repeat offense or any
subsequent repeat offense shall be not less than $2,500, plus costs and other
sanctions.
(Ords. 11 and 135, readopted 12-31-1965)
Sec. 25-8. NUISANCES PROHIBITED.
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, permit, maintain or allow
the creation or maintenance of a nuisance.
   B.   For purposes of this chapter, NUISANCE shall mean an act or omission
which creates or permits the existence of a situation which interferes with a
person’s use and enjoyment of his or her property, including, but not limited
to, the following:
      1.   Glare from spotlights or lighting fixtures that are mounted,
positioned or aimed so as to directly illuminate adjacent residential
properties; and
      2.   Dust crossing a property line generated from construction activity
or created by a lack of landscaping or groundcover. Construction activity does
not include ordinary yard work or lawn maintenance.
(Ord. 353, adopted 1-11-2010)
CHAPTER 26: ANIMALS
Section
   
26-1   Purpose
   
26-2   Enforcement
   
26-3   Impoundment
   
26-4   Ownership
   
26-5   Licensing and registration required generally
   
26-6   Collar and license tag to be worn
   
26-7   Licensing of impounded dogs and animals
   
26-8   Trespassing and destructive dogs and animals
   
26-9   Vicious and dangerous animals
   
26-10   Barking or howling dogs
   
26-11   Treatment of animals
   
26-12   Other animals
   
26-13   Violations and penalties
Sec. 26-1. PURPOSE.
   The purposes of this chapter are to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare of the citizens of the city and to ensure the humane treatment
of animals by regulating the care and control of animals within the city.
Sec. 26-2. ENFORCEMENT.
   A.   This chapter shall be enforced by the Public Safety Department of the
city and the Animal Control Officer of the county and any of his or her
deputies. They are hereby authorized and empowered to serve a summons for a
violation of this chapter and to issue and serve appearance tickets in lieu of
a summons for the violation.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, prevent or
hinder any public safety or Animal Control Officer in the enforcement of this
chapter or the performance of any act required or authorized by this chapter.
Sec. 26-3. IMPOUNDMENT.
   A.   Any member of the Public Safety Department of the city or ay Animal
Control Officer of the county shall have the power and duty to seize and hold
any dog whether licensed or unlicensed, which is found off premises of its
owner in violation of this chapter.
   B.   Any member of the Public Safety Department of the city or any animal
control officer of the county shall have the power and duty to seize and hold
any dog required under this chapter to be wearing a collar or harness with a
current license, when the dog is not wearing a collar or harness with a current
license.
   C.   The authority and duty to seize and hold a dog under this section shall
include, but is not limited to, the pursuit of the dog onto private property
for the purposes of capture.
   D.   Dogs seized and held under this section shall be held at the county’s
dog pound and shall be disposed of under the rules and regulations adopted by
the county’s animal shelter, including but not limited to payment of fees,
hours of operation, licensing and care of the dog’s health.
Sec. 26-4. OWNERSHIP.
   Every person in possession of any dog and their domesticated animals and
usual household pets such as, but not by way of limitation, cats and animals as
usually obtainable in pet stores, who shall knowingly allow the animal or
animals to remain about his or her premises for a period of five days, shall be
deemed to be the owner thereof for the purposes of this chapter.
Sec. 26-5. LICENSING AND REGISTRATION REQUIRED GENERALLY.
   No resident person shall own, keep or house any dog or allowed animal within
the city unless the person shall have complied with the laws of the state and
County of Allegan providing for the licensing and registration of the dog or
animal. The number of the animals shall be as prescribed in § 
53-2.
Sec. 26-6. COLLAR AND LICENSE TAG TO BE WORN
   No resident person shall own, keep or house any dog six months old or older,
or any other animal that requires licensing and registration, that does not, at
all times when the dog or animal is off the premises of the owner, wear a
collar or harness with a license tag issued pursuant to the laws of the state
and County of Allegan.
Sec. 26-7. LICENSING OF IMPOUNDED DOGS AND ANIMALS.
   No dog, or any animal that required a license, shall be released form the
pound unless the owner or person entitled to demand the same shall procure a
license of the dog, or of the animal if a license is required of the animal, in
the manner required by the state law at the time in force and effect, in the
event that the dog or animal shall not have already been duly license.
Sec. 26-8. TRESPASSING AND DESTRUCTIVE DOGS AND ANIMALS.
   No person shall own, keep or have charge of any dog or animal which by the
destruction of property or trespassing on public property, becomes a nuisance.
It shall be unlawful to permit any animals of any age to run at large within
the corporate boundaries of the city. An animal is at large when it is off the
premises of the owner and not on a leash or otherwise under immediate control.
Sec. 26-9. VICIOUS AND DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to own or harbor an vicious or
dangerous animal. A vicious or dangerous animal is any animal that attacks,
bites or physically injures a human being or other animal without provocation.
   B.   The owner of any dog which has bitted a human or other animal shall
immediately place and keep the dog on a leash, even though it remains on the
owner’s property and shall immediately notify the Public Safety Department or
County Animal Control of all facts known to the owner regarding the incident.
The owner shall keep the dog continually under secure quarantine and under the
supervision and control as may be required by the Public Safety Department or
Animal Control or shall turn the dog over to the car and custody of Animal
Control for impoundment until the time as Animal Control and the Health
Department determine it is safe to release the dog, at which time all costs for
the dog’s care shall be paid by the owner to Animal Control.
SEC. 26-10. BARKING OR HOWLING DOGS.
   No person shall own, keep, house or have charge of any dog which by loud and
frequent barking, howling or yelping becomes a nuisance.
SEC. 26-11. TREATMENT OF ANIMALS.
   No person shall treat any animal in a cruel or inhuman manner, or willfully
or negligently cause or permit any animal to suffer unnecessary torture or
pain.
SEC. 26-12. OTHER ANIMALS.
   The keeping of livestock within the city is prohibited. Livestock shall
include horses, sheep, goats, pigs, cows, llamas, donkeys, mules, fowl and
other animals of a similar nature.
SEC. 26-13. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   A.   Civil infraction violations. Any person who violates any provision of
this chapter except § 
26-2B. (enforcement), § 
26-9 (vicious and dangerous animals) and § 
26-11 (treatment of animals) is responsible for a municipal civil infraction,
subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than $250, plus costs and other
sanctions, for each violation. The violator shall also be liable for all
reasonable costs incurred by the city in enforcing this chapter. Repeat
offenses shall be subject to increased fines as provided by Code, except that
the increased fine for a repeat offense shall be as follows:
      1.   The fine for any offense which is a first repeat offense shall be
not less than $500, plus costs and other sanctions.
      2.   The fine for any offense which is a second repeat offense or any
subsequent repeat offense shall be not less than $1,000, plus costs and other
sanctions.
   B.   Misdemeanors violations. Any violation of Section
26-2 B., Section
26-9 and Section
26-11 of this chapter is a misdemeanor shall, upon conviction, be punished by a
fine of net less than $100 and not more than $500 or imprisonment of not more
than 90 days in jail or by both fine and imprisonment. The violator shall also
be liable for all reasonable costs incurred by the city in enforcing this
chapter
CHAPTER 27: REFUSE BIN SAFETY STANDARD
Section
   
27-1   Definitions
   
27-2   Substandard refuse bins
   
27-3   Refuse bin requirements
   
27-4   Regulations; effective date
   
27-5   Extension
   
27-6   Violations and penalties
Sec. 27-1. DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PERSON. A natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation and
his, her or their legal successors.
   REFUSE BINS. Those refuse receptacles designed to be transported by or
mechanically emptied into a refuse collection vehicle and does not include
receptacles used in office buildings, businesses and single-family dwellings,
which are less than 20-gallon capacity.
   SUBSTANDARD REFUSE BINS. Those refuse bins which do not meet the stability
requirements established herein.
(Ord. 174, adopted 7-11-1977)
Sec. 27-2. SUBSTANDARD REFUSE BINS.
   All persons owning, leasing or using substandard refuse bins or permitting
the placing of the substandard refuse bins on private property within their
custody or control are encouraged to assure the early modification or
retrofitting of the substandard refuse bins or in the alternative, removal of
the bins from areas of public access.
(Ord. 174, adopted 7-11-1977)
Sec. 27-3. REFUSE BIN REQUIREMENTS.
   From and after the dates established in § 
27-4, each refuse bin shall be:
   A.   Reasonably secured in some manner, such as, secured to a stake, fence,
wall or other stationary object in a manner to prevent its tipping over;
   B.   Enclosed within a fence or barrier at least four feet high with an
access gate which is kept locked or otherwise reasonably protected from
unauthorized access; or
   C.   Designed, constructed or modified so that it will not tip when
subjected to 191 pounds hanging vertically from the leading edge thereof or to
a pull force of 70 pounds exerted horizontally from any edge thereof.
(Ord. 174, adopted 7-11-1977)
Sec. 27-4. REGULATIONS; EFFECTIVE DATE.
   Except on the basis of an extension previously recommended and approved in
accordance with this chapter, no person shall rent, lease, place upon the
property of another or permit to remain upon property within its custody or
control, any refuse bin which is not secured or protected from unauthorized
access or which does not meet the stability requirements established in the
preceding section hereof in the immediate vicinity of a school or school yard
on or after 9-2-1977; or elsewhere in the city to which the public has access
on or after 12-31-1977.
(Ord. 174, adopted 7-11-1977)
Sec. 27-5. EXTENSION.
   A fact-finding Committee appointed by the City Council may accept, consider
and make recommendations to the City Clerk upon an application from a
responsible person for an extension of the period in which to comply with the
provisions of the preceding section regarding the security of refuse bins. The
Committee, upon a showing by the applicant of diligent effort and good cause
for inability to comply with the security requirements may recommend and the
City Council may approve an extension not in excess of three months.
(Ord. 174, adopted 7-11-1977)
Sec. 27-6. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is responsible for a
municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than
$500, plus costs and other sanctions, for each violation. Repeat offenses shall
be subject to increased fines as provided by code.
(Ord. 318, adopted 11-12-2001)
CHAPTER 28: GARBAGE
Section
   
28-1    License required
   
28-2   License application
   
28-3   License approval
   
28-4   Inspection of equipment and facilities
   
28-5   License fee, term
   
28-6   Windshield sticker
   
28-7   Insurance
   
28-8   Storage
   
28-9   Transportation
   
28-10   Depositing upon private or public property
   
28-11   Garbage cans on curb lawn
   
28-12   Frequency of collection
   
28-13   Garbage cans regulated
   
28-14   Public dumping
   
28-15   Hours of collection
   
28-16   Licensees; telephone required
   
28-17   Judgments against city by reason of license granted
   
28-18   Garbage disposal dump
   
28-19   Feeding to livestock
   
28-20   Complaints; violations
   
28-21   Violations and penalties
   
28-22   License revocation
   
28-23   “Garbage” defined
Sec. 28-1. LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, association, firm or corporation to
engage in the business of collecting and disposing of garbage in the city
without first obtaining a license therefor as hereinafter provided.
(Ord. 104, adopted 4-13-1945)
Sec. 28-2. LICENSE APPLICATION.
   Application for the license shall be made in writing to the city on blanks
to be furnished by the City Clerk and the blanks shall contain in the case of
each applicant, his or her name, residence and business address, nature and
kind of business previously engaged in and places where and length of time the
same was operated, the type and model of conveyances to be used and owned by
the applicant, the location of the conveyance and the number, size and age of
garbage cans owned and to be used by the applicant, whether a can washer is to
be used by applicant and the place where the same is located and any and all
other information that may be required by the City Council to enable it to
determine the ability and qualifications of applicant to conduct such a
business in compliance with this chapter and in a manner as will not be
deleterious to the public health and welfare and so as not to create a public
or private nuisance. The application shall also contain an agreement by
applicant to abide by, to obey and comply with all the provisions of this
chapter and all other laws, ordinances, rules and regulations pertaining to the
conduct of the business now in force or which may hereafter be adopted.
(Ord. 104, adopted 4-13-1945)
Sec. 28-3. LICENSE APPROVAL.
   No license shall be granted hereunder without approval of the City Council.
(Ord. 104, adopted 4-13-1945)
Sec. 28-4. INSPECTION OF EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES.
   No license shall be granted hereunder to any applicant until all equipment
and facilities to be used by applicant in the conduct of the business shall be
inspected and approved by the City Health Officer as to its fitness for the
purpose for which it is to be used.
(Ord. 104, adopted 4-13-1945)
Sec. 28-5. LICENSE FEE, TERM.
   Every person, association, firm or corporation who engages in the business
of collecting and disposing of garbage shall pay to the city an annual license
fee of $15. The license year shall be from May 1 to the succeeding April 30 and
the license fee shall be payable in advance; provided, the license fee upon any
license granted hereunder between January 1 and May 1 of any calendar year
shall be one-half the above amount.
(Ord. 104, adopted 4-13-1945)
Sec. 28-6. WINDSHIELD STICKER.
   Upon the granting of a license and the payment of fees required hereunder,
the City Clerk shall supply each licensee a windshield sticker for each vehicle
to be used by the licensee in the conduct of the business showing engine number
and license number of the vehicle and the sticker shall be continuously
displayed on the vehicle at all times when engaged in the collection and
transportation of garbage. No vehicle shall be used by any licensee in the
conduct of the business other than the one stated in his or her application and
for which a windshield sticker has been issued as aforesaid.
(Ord. 104, adopted 4-13-1945)
Sec. 28-7. INSURANCE.
   Before any licensee shall engage in the business of the collection and
disposal of garbage, he or she shall deposit with the city a public liability
insurance policy or policies with coverage limits not less than $100,000 for
anyone person, $300,000 for any one accident and $25,000 for property damage,
which shall be approved by the City Council, which insurance shall be kept in
full force and effect at all times during the terms of the license.
(Ord. 104, adopted 4-13-1945)
Sec. 28-8. STORAGE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to keep in, on or about the
premises owned or occupied by them any garbage or decayed vegetable matter
whatever or any swill from the house or any substance which may be injurious to
the public health, unless the same is kept in a closed covered can, as required
by the provisions of this chapter. This section shall not apply to a properly
constructed and maintained compost pile.
(Ord. 104, adopted 4-13-1945)
Sec. 28-9. TRANSPORTATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to carry, cart or
convey along or through the public streets of the city any garbage or decayed
vegetable matter whatever or any swill from any house or building in the city,
unless the person, association, firm or corporation is licensed hereunder.
Provided, no person shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this section when
carrying, transporting or conveying garbage in tightly enclosed cans or metal
containers over and along the public streets and alleys from his or her home to
any approved garbage dump for disposal at the dump.
(Ord. 104, adopted 4-13-1945)
Sec. 28-10. DEPOSITING UPON PRIVATE OR PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any licensee, person or persons, to throw or
deposit or cause to be thrown or deposited, any garbage upon any private
property, street, alley, gutter, sidewalk or public grounds in the city or in
or along the Kalamazoo River or any of the creeks within the corporate limits
of the city, except at designated places as approved by the City Health Officer
or the City Council.
(Ord. 104, adopted 4-13-1945)
Sec. 28-11. GARBAGE CANS ON CURB LAWN.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, association, firm or corporation to
place or permit to remain on any curb lawn any garbage can for any purpose
whatsoever. Provided, however, that, the can(s) may be placed on the curb lawn
on the day of the scheduled garbage pickup at that address.
(Ord. 104, adopted 4-13-1945)
Sec. 28-12. FREQUENCY OF COLLECTION.
   All garbage cans shall be collected by all licensees, from all places in the
city at least once a week in the residence portion of the city and connections
from public markets, commercial houses, hotels, hospitals, stores, stands,
restaurants and eating houses shall be made at least three times a week
throughout the year, except Sunday or at other times as the City Council shall
reasonably designate.
(Ord. 104, adopted 4-13-1945)
Sec. 28-13. GARBAGE CANS REGULATED.
   All garbage cans provided by the licensee for the use of his or her
customers shall be suitable for the purpose and shall be free from leaks and be
provided with covers so that cans may be tightly closed and any can, whenever
removed, shall be so removed as to prevent the contents or any odor from
escaping therefrom and when any can, which has contained garbage, has been
removed from the premises of any customer, the can shall be thoroughly cleaned
before the can shall be returned to the premises of any customer or again used
in the collection of garbage in the city and any vehicle drawing the cans shall
be so loaded and driven that none of the material contained therein shall fall
upon the ground or run out or spill therefrom. When any can shall be removed,
the licensee shall provide another can, which has been thoroughly cleaned, to
take the place thereof; provided that, any can which has previously been used
only for ashes or other waste material which is not garbage as termed herein,
need not be cleaned as herein provided. All garbage cans used by any licensee
shall be approved by the Health Officer and shall be withdrawn from use
whenever required so as to do by the Health Officer for the reason that the
same do not comply with the provisions of this section.
(Ord. 104, adopted 4-13-1945)
Sec. 28-14. PUBLIC DUMPING.
   It shall be unlawful for any licensee under the provisions of this chapter,
to permit or allow the dumping of cans upon the wagon or dumping from one can
into another on any wagon or in any street, alley, public place or private
property, except designated dumping places and any person or persons who shall
so dump the contents of any garbage can shall be deemed guilty of the violation
of this chapter.
(Ord. 104, adopted 4-13-1945)
Sec. 28-15. HOURS OF COLLECTION.
   There shall be no collection of garbage between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m.
(Ord. 104, adopted 4-13-1945)
Sec. 28-16. LICENSEES; TELEPHONE REQUIRED.
   All licensees under the provisions of this chapter shall maintain a
telephone and shall provide someone to regularly answer all complaints made and
to properly dispose of the same.
(Ord. 104, adopted 4-13-1945)
Sec. 28-17. JUDGMENTS AGAINST CITY BY REASON OF LICENSE GRANTED.
   Any licensee under this chapter shall pay any judgment which may be obtained
against the city, either alone or jointly with the licensee, on account of any
injury or damage to person or to property by reason of any license granted
hereunder and the licensee shall intervene and defend any suit or action, upon
written notice hereof given by the City Clerk.
(Ord. 104, adopted 4-13-1945)
Sec. 28-18. GARBAGE DISPOSAL DUMP.
   A.   Whenever any garbage is dumped or disposed of upon any premises or
place in the city which has been designated or approved for the purpose by the
City Health Officer, it shall be covered to a depth of one foot of clean earth
at the end of each day’s dumping where the garbage is below the finished grade.
No garbage shall be left uncovered for a period longer than 12 hours. When the
garbage is dumped or disposed of at the finished grade, it shall be covered
with at least three feet of clean earth. Whenever any licensee shall have
sufficient garbage to dump or dispose of in the manner above specified so that
it requires mechanical equipment to adequately cover to the depths above
specified, he or she shall provide himself or herself with adequate and proper
mechanical equipment so that the covering of the garbage may be properly done
in the time specified above. All equipment shall be approved by the City Health
Officer as to its fitness and adequacy to do the work required to comply
herewith.
   B.   It shall be the duty of any licensee operating any garbage disposal
dump as herein provided to so handle the same as to prevent fires and to
prevent loose material such as waste paper and similar matter from blowing away
and to operate the dump in a manner as not to permit the collection of loose,
unsightly waste or debris and to prevent odors and fumes from escaping
therefrom and to operate the dump in a manner as not to be deleterious to
public health, welfare and convenience of the neighborhood in which it is
located and in a manner as not to create a public or private nuisance. The
operation of the dump and manner of disposal of garbage at any dump operated by
any licensee hereunder shall at all times be under the general supervision and
direction of the City Health Officer and the licensee shall, at all times,
comply with all reasonable and proper directions of the Health Officer as to
the manner and method of operating of the dump and the handling of garbage.
(Ord. 104, adopted 4-13-1945)
Sec. 28-19. FEEDING TO LIVESTOCK.
   It shall be unlawful to feed any garbage to swine, poultry or other animals
within the limits of the city.
(Ord. 104, adopted 4-13-1945)
Sec. 28-20. COMPLAINTS; VIOLATIONS.
   A.   It shall be the duty of the Health Officer and the Police Chief to
enforce this section and to make investigation of all complaints or violation
of the terms and provisions hereof.
   B.   It shall also be the duty of all other officers and employees of the
city to report to the Health Officer or the Police Chief any and all violations
of this section that come to their attention or knowledge or as to which any
complaints are made of which they are informed.
(Ord. 104, adopted 4-13-1945)
Sec. 28-21. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is responsible for a
municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than
$500, plus costs and other sanctions, for each violation. Repeat offenses shall
be subject to increased fines as provided by code.
(Ord. 318, adopted 11-12-2001)
Sec. 28-22. LICENSE REVOCATION.
   Every license granted hereunder shall be revocable by the City Council, in
its discretion, with or without cause; and when any license shall be revoked
for noncompliance with the terms and conditions upon which it is granted or on
account of any violation of any section or regulation, the person holding the
license shall, in addition to all other penalties, forfeit all payments made
for the license.
(Ord. 104, adopted 4-13-1945)
Sec. 28-23. “GARBAGE” DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GARBAGE. Includes every refuse accumulation of animal, fruit or vegetable
matter that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing of
meats, fish, fowl, birds, fruit or vegetables; it shall also be held to include
kitchen and table refuse or waste matter of any nature or kind, mixed, handled
or included therewith.
(Ord. 104, adopted 4-13-1945)
CHAPTER 29: TREES
Section
   
29-1   Purpose and name
   
29-2   Definitions
   
29-3   Tree and shrub management
   
29-4   Builder responsibility
   
29-5   Protection of trees and shrubs
   
29-6   Compensation for trees damaged or destroyed
   
29-7   Authority of City Superintendent to inspect trees on private property
   
29-8   Private trees; disease, insect and other hazards
   
29-9   Trimming and removal of trees on private property
   
29-10   Violations and penalties
   
29-11   Enforcement and appeals
Sec. 29-1. PURPOSE AND NAME.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the management and protection
of trees for the public health, safety and general welfare of the residents of
the city and to preserve and promote the city and its landscape resource
values. This chapter shall be known as the “Tree Chapter”.
(Ord. 101, adopted 5-10-1982; Ord. 201, adopted 5-10-1982)
Sec. 29-2. DEFINITIONS.
   A.   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      BUILDER. All property owners who shall engage in new construction in any
zoning district of the city.
      CITY. The City of Plainwell, Michigan.
      CITY SUPERINTENDENT. The Superintendent of the Department of Public Works
or his or her authorized representative.
      COMMISSION. The City Parks and Tree Commission established by the city.
      CURB LAWN. The part of a street not covered by sidewalk or paving, lying
between the property line and the portion of the street paved for vehicular
traffic.
      DEPARTMENT. The Department of Public Works of the city.
      PARK. Includes all public parks having individual names and all areas,
whether owned by the city or not, to which the public has free access as a
park.
      PROHIBITED SPECIES. Any tree of poplar (Populus Sp.), willow (Salix Sp.),
box elder (Acer Negundo), silver maple (Acer Saccharinum), locust (Robina Sp.),
tree of heaven (Ailanthus Altissima), catalpa (Catalpa Sp.), mulberry (Morus
Sp.), Siberian elm (Ulmus pumila), birch (Betula Sp.) and any other species so
determined by the Commission.
      PRUNING. The proper trimming and/or cutting of limbs, branches and
leaves.
      PUBLIC UTILITY. Any person, owning or operating any pole, line, pipe or
conduit located in any public street or over or along any public easement or
right-of-way for the transmission of electricity, gas, telephone service or
telegraph service.
      STREET. All the land lying between property lines on either side of all
streets and highways and public rights-of-way in the city.
      TREE. Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, means tree, shrubs,
bushes and all other woody vegetation.
      TREE TOPPING. The severe cutting back of tree limbs to stubs larger than
three inches in diameter within the crown of the tree to a degree so as to
remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. TREE TOPPING shall also
include stubbing, heading, heading-back, stubbing-off, hatracking, topping off,
dehorning, lopping and other similar practices.
   B.   The provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise specifically stated
herein, shall apply only to public streets, parkways, parks and other land
publicly owned or controlled by the city.
(Ord. 101, adopted 5-10-1982; Ord. 264, eff. 12-16-1990)
Sec. 29-3. TREE AND SHRUB MANAGEMENT.
   The planting, maintenance, pruning or removal of trees in places open to the
public in the city shall be done by the Department by order of the
Superintendent upon recommendation of the Commission. The action may be
initiated by the Commission, City Superintendent, City Manager, City Council or
by petition of parties owning a majority of the lineal footage on the fronting
property along a street.
   A.   No person shall hereafter plant, transplant, prune or remove any tree
on any street, street lawn, park or public place in the city, nor cause the act
to be done by others without first obtaining a written permit from the office
of the City Clerk. Application for permits must be made not less than 72 hours
in advance of the time the work is intended to commence and each permit granted
shall contain an expiration date not to exceed 60 days from the date of
issuance.
   B.   Each permit issued by the City Clerk shall describe the work to be
done, the number of trees to be removed or planted and the location, size,
species or variety of each tree, the method of planting and other information
that the City Superintendent may require to ensure that the work will be done
properly. Any permit issued will be void if its terms are violated. Whenever
any tree shall be planted in conflict with the provisions of the permit, it
shall be lawful for the Superintendent to cause removal of the same and the
cost for the removal shall be assessed to the permittee as provided by law in
the case of special assessments or as otherwise provided herein.
   C.   The City Superintendent shall promulgate rules for the proper pruning
techniques to be used on trees located on public property or publicly
maintained rights-of-way. The rules and any modifications to the rules, shall
be subject to approval by resolution of the City Council. A copy of the rules
shall be kept on file by the City Clerk for public inspection.
(Ord. 101, adopted 5-10-1982)
Sec. 29-4. BUILDER RESPONSIBILITY.
   A.   General. Builders shall be required to fulfill tree planting and
protection requirements as provided under the ordinances and policies of the
city and its City Parks and Tree Commission including, but not limited to,
subdivision regulations and site plan requirements.
   B.   Minimum planting requirements. One street tree of an approved species
measuring at least one and one-half inch caliper shall be planted on all new
construction sites, residential or otherwise, for each site or lot of 75 feet
or less and at least two trees for every lot in excess of 75 feet frontage.
Corner lots shall require at least one tree for each street. The builder shall
be responsible for fulfilling these requirements.
(Ord. 101, adopted 5-10-1982)
Sec. 29-5. PROTECTION OF TREES AND SHRUBS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to do any of the
following acts in any tree lawn, park, publicly maintained right-of-way or
other public place:
   A.   Fasten any sign, card, poster, wire, rope or other material to, around
or through, any tree or shrub or its guard, except in emergencies such as
storms or accidents;
   B.   Remove, break, injure, mutilate, kill, cut, peel or destroy any tree or
shrub by any means or in any manner;
   C.   Permit any fire to burn where the fire will injure any portion of any
tree or shrub;
   D.   Permit any toxic chemical to seep, drain or to be emptied on or about
any tree or shrub;
   E.   Deposit, store, place or maintain, on any street, highway or other
public place, any brick, sand, stone, concrete or other material which may
impede free passage of water, air and fertilizer to the roots of any tree or
shrub growing therein;
   F.   Fail to repair or stop any leak existing or occurring in any gas pipe
or main within a radius of 40 feet of any tree;
   G.   Knowingly permit any electrical wires to come into contact with any
tree or shrub;
   H.   Allow excavations and driveways to be placed within five feet of any
tree without written permit from the Superintendent. Any person making the
excavation or construction shall guard any tree within six feet thereof with a
good substantial frame box to be approved by the Department and all building
materials or other debris shall be kept at least four feet from any tree;
   I.   Plant any prohibited species of tree as hereinafter provided herein.
Exceptions to this prohibition may be granted by the City Council upon
recommendation of the Commission after review on a case by case basis; and/or
   J.   Allow the practice of tree topping or any other prohibited pruning
technique prescribed. Exceptions to this prohibition may be granted by the City
Council upon recommendations by the Commission after review on a case by case
basis for trees severely damaged by storms or other natural or accidental
causes or if permitted pruning practices are impractical due to location of a
tree under utility wires or because of some other obstruction.
(Ord. 101, adopted 5-10-1982)
Sec. 29-6. COMPENSATION FOR TREES DAMAGED OR DESTROYED.
   Any tree growing on any street, curb tree lawn, park or other public place
which is destroyed or damaged to the point where repair or replacement is
needed shall be the responsibility of the party responsible for the damage or
destruction in an amount necessary to replace or repair the destroyed or
damaged trees.
(Ord. 101, adopted 5-10-1982)
Sec. 29-7. AUTHORITY OF CITY SUPERINTENDENT TO INSPECT TREES ON PRIVATE
PROPERTY.
   The Superintendent shall have authority to enter upon private property at
all reasonable hours for purposes of examining any trees, shrubs, plants or
vines where hazardous conditions, destructive insects or diseases are
suspected. The Superintendent may remove the specimens as required for analysis
to determine the presence of insect, disease or other detrimental conditions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent the Superintendent or agents
from entering private property for purposes of carrying out his or her duties
hereunder.
(Ord. 101, adopted 5-10-1982)
Sec. 29-8. PRIVATE TREES; DISEASE, INSECT AND OTHER HAZARDS.
   A.   When the City Superintendent shall discover that any tree growing on
private property within the city is afflicted with any dangerous insect,
infestation, disease or condition, he or she shall immediately serve a written
notice upon the property owner or his or her agent describing the tree or
trees, their location, the nature of the insect infestation, disease or
condition and ordering the owner or his or her agent to take necessary measures
to abate the insect infestation or disease or condition, to prevent the
spreading thereof and specifying the corrective measures required to be taken.
This notice may require the pruning, treatment or destruction of the affected
trees as reasonably necessary.
   B.   Every notice shall be complied with within a definite time as stated in
the notice, but not less than ten days after service thereof upon the property
owner.
   C.   If, at the expiration of the time limit in the notice, the owner has
not complied with the requirements thereof, the Superintendent shall carry out
the requirements of that notice. The cost of completing the work necessary to
resolve the condition complained of shall be assessed against the property on
the next general assessment roll of the city.
(Ord. 101, adopted 5-10-1982)
Sec. 29-9. TRIMMING AND REMOVAL OF TREES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   A.   Any tree growing on private property and so located as to extend its
branches over a public street, highway, sidewalk, park or other public place or
so located as to become a traffic hazard shall be trimmed or removed by the
property owner on whose property the tree stands, so as to remove the
obstruction from the public street, highway, sidewalk, park or public place and
so as to eliminate the traffic hazard and the menace and the danger to the
public, pursuant to written notice by and under the supervision of the
Superintendent.
   B.   When the notice is given, the property owner will be given a reasonable
and definite time to comply with the order, but not less than ten days.
   C.   If the work is not satisfactorily completed within that time, then the
Superintendent may enter upon the property, make the necessary trimming or
removals and properly dispose of the same; provided that, all or part of the
costs involved in the trimming or removal when done by the Superintendent shall
be assessed against the property on the next general assessment roll of the
city.
   D.   The city shall have the right to trim any tree or shrub on private
property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street
from a street light.
(Ord. 101, adopted 5-10-1982)
Sec. 29-10. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   A.   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is responsible
for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not
less than $500, plus costs and other sanctions, for each violation. Repeat
offenses shall be subject to increased fines as provided by code.
   B.   Imposition of a penalty for a violation of this chapter shall not be
construed as a waiver the city’s right to collect from a violator the costs of
the tree work done by the city which the violator was required to pay, but
failed to pay, under the provisions of this chapter or the right of the city to
collect from the violator the value of any tree illegally damaged or destroyed.
   C.   The city retains the right to seek and obtain injunctive relief in
addition to or as an alternative to the penalties described above in order to
promote the purposes of this chapter.
   D.   Each tree for which there is a violation of the provisions of this
chapter shall constitute a separate violation.
(Ord. 318, adopted 11-12-2001)
Sec. 29-11. ENFORCEMENT AND APPEALS.
   The City Superintendent is designated as the enforcing agency to see that
the provisions of this chapter are obeyed and all complaints as to the
violation of this chapter shall be presented in writing to the City Attorney
and shall be prosecuted in the name of the city. If, at any time, a dispute
arises or shall exist relative to or under the provisions of this chapter, the
dispute shall first be submitted to the Commission for review and
recommendation.
(Ord. 101, adopted 5-10-1982)
CHAPTER 30: YARD WASTE
Section
Article I. Yard Waste
   
30-1   Title, purpose and definitions
   
30-2   Depositing yard wastes upon public or private property
   
30-3   Lots under development
   
30-4   Biodegradable bags
   
30-5   Rules for collection of yard wastes
   
30-6   Loose leaf pick up
   
30-7   Emergency provisions
   
30-8   Violations and penalties
Article II: Waste Management Project
   
30-9   Purpose
   
30-10   Definitions
   
30-11   Citywide residential curbside recycling and semi-annual trash
collection established
   
30-12   Scope of service exceptions
   
30-13   Residential recycling and semi-annual trash collection
   
30-14   Acceptable materials for collection
   
30-15   Waste collection schedule
   
30-16   Recycling of recyclables/disposal of trash
   
30-17   Rates, charges and cost recovery fees
   
30-18   Accumulation of recyclables or trash
   
30-19   Utilization of service conditions
   
30-20   Scattered or unacceptable refuse responsibility
   
30-21   Schedule of collections
   
30-22   Holidays
   
30-23   Penalty
ARTICLE I. YARD WASTE
Sec. 30-1. TITLE, PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS.
   A.   Title. This chapter may be referred to as the “Yard Waste Chapter” and
may be cited as such and referred herein as “this chapter”.
   B.   Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the collection
and disposal of yard wastes in a manner which protects the health, safety and
general welfare of the residents of the city.
   C.   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      BIODEGRADABLE. Capable of being broken down by naturally occurring
organisms.
      COMPOST. A mixture that consists largely of decaying organic matter used
for fertilizer and soil conditioning.
      YARD WASTES. Grass clippings, weeds, leaves, trees and shrubs or parts
thereof and garden residue.
(Ord. 259, adopted 4-9-1990)
Sec. 30-2. DEPOSITING YARD WASTES UPON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or deposit or cause to be
placed or deposited upon public or private property within the city or in any
area under the jurisdiction of the city, any yard wastes except as provided by
this chapter. This section shall not apply to yard waste which is part of a
properly maintained compost pile or program.
(Ord. 259, adopted 4-9-1990)
Sec. 30-3. LOTS UNDER DEVELOPMENT.
   It is not the intent of this chapter to provide for pick up of yard wastes
from lots being cleared for development. When authorized by the City Council,
pickup of wastes from the lots shall be done on a time and material basis.
(Ord. 259, adopted 4-9-1990)
Sec. 30-4. BIODEGRADABLE BAGS.
   Grass clippings, weeds, leaves and garden residue will only be collected in
biodegradable bags placed in the curb lawn area or, where there is no curb,
adjacent to the asphalt street. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any
unauthorized person to print or cause to be printed bags marked “City of
Plainwell Composting Program”. The “Rules for Collection of Yard Wastes” shall
establish cost and distribution points for bags.
(Ord. 259, adopted 4-9-1990)
Sec. 30-5. RULES FOR COLLECTION OF YARD WASTES.
   The “Rules for Collection of Yard Wastes”, as promulgated by the city, shall
establish the dates for pickup. No person shall set out for pick up or cause to
be set out for pick up, any yard wastes prior to 5:00 p.m. on Friday
immediately prior to the established pick up date. Any yard waste set out
subsequent to pick up shall be removed from the curb lawn area within 48 hours.
(Ord. 259, adopted 4-9-1990)
Sec. 30-6. LOOSE LEAF PICK UP.
   Rules for the pick up of loose leaves will be provided for in the “Rules for
Collection of Yard Wastes”.
(Ord. 259, adopted 4-9-1990)
Sec. 30-7. EMERGENCY PROVISIONS.
   Upon consultation with the Mayor, the City Manager is authorized to suspend
the provisions of this chapter in the event of an emergency resulting from
natural disasters such as wind and ice storms.
(Ord. 259, adopted 4-9-1990)
Sec. 30-8. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is responsible for a
municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than
$250, plus costs and other sanctions, for each violation. Repeat offenses shall
be subject to increased fines as provided by code, except that the increased
fine for a repeat offense shall be as follows.
   A.   The fine for any offense which is a first repeat offense shall be not
less than $500, plus costs and other sanctions.
   B.   The fine for any offense which is a second repeat offense or any
subsequent repeat offense shall be not less than $1,000, plus costs and other
sanctions.
(Ord. 318, adopted 11-12-2001)
ARTICLE II: WASTE MANAGEMENT PROGRAM
Sec. 30-9. PURPOSE.
   Sections
30-9 through
30-23 are to establish a waste management project in the city and to regulate
the monthly collection, transportation and recycling of recyclables, as defined
in these sections and the semi-annual collection, transportation and disposal
of trash, as defined in this chapter, generated by residential units and to
authorize the charging of fees for the services. These sections are enacted
pursuant to Public Act 451 of 1994, as amended. The City Council finds that the
establishment of a waste management project and monthly residential recycling
and semi-annual trash collection and related requirements pursuant to this
chapter shall promote the public health, safety and welfare by conserving
natural resources and by preventing the discard of trash, as defined in this
chapter, except by proven waste disposal means and methods.
(Ord. 339, adopted 6-13-2005)
Sec. 30-10. DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BULKY WASTE. Stoves, refrigerators, water tanks, washing machines, furniture
and other similar waste materials generated by a producer, but not including
construction debris, dead animals, hazardous waste or stable matter.
Refrigeration units must have Freon removed by a certified technician,
indicated by a sticker, prior to collection. Except for the items specifically
listed, an item of BULKY WASTE may not weigh more than 60 pounds.
   CITY. The City of Plainwell, Michigan.
   COMPOSTABLES. Common yard waste, such as lawn clippings, leaves, grass,
flower stems, bush clippings.
   CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS. Waste building materials resulting from construction,
remodeling, repair or demolition operations.
   CONTRACTOR. The person, corporation or partnership performing refuse
collection and disposal and recycling under contract with the city.
   DISPOSAL SITE. A refuse depository including, but not limited to, sanitary
landfills, transfer stations, incinerators and waste processing/separation
centers licensed, permitted or approved by all governmental bodies and agencies
having jurisdiction and requiring the licenses, permits or approvals to receive
refuse for processing or final disposal.
   GARBAGE. All putrescible or easily decomposable animal or vegetable waste
matter and normal household garbage generated by a producer.
   PRODUCER. An owner, lessee or occupant of a unit who may generate garbage,
trash, bulky waste, compostables, stable matter and recyclables.
   RECYCLABLES. Newsprint, glass bottles and jars, #1 and #2 plastics, steel
and tin cans and magazines. Additional items may be added as agreed to by the
city and the contractor.
   STABLE MATTER. All manure and other waste matter normally accumulated in or
about a stable or any animal, livestock or poultry enclosure and resulting from
the keeping of animals, poultry or livestock.
   TRASH. All sawdust, printed matter, paper, pasteboard, rags, straw, used and
discarded mattresses, used and discarded clothing, used and discarded shoes and
boots, combustible waste pulp and other products such as are used for
packaging, crockery, glass, ashes, cinders, floor sweepings, mineral or
metallic substances and any and other similar waste materials generated by a
producer. TRASH also includes bulky waste, but does not include construction
debris, compostables, dead animals, hazardous waste, garbage, recyclables or
stable matter.
   UNIT. A dwelling or business within the corporate limits of the city. A UNIT
shall be deemed occupied when either water or light and power services are
being supplied thereto. A condominium dwelling, whether of single- or multi-
level construction and rental apartments shall each be considered a UNIT.
(Ord. 339, adopted 6-13-2005)
Sec. 30-11. CITYWIDE RESIDENTIAL CURBSIDE RECYCLING AND SEMI-ANNUAL TRASH
COLLECTION ESTABLISHED.
   A.   The city shall collect recyclables from the curbside on a monthly basis
and shall collect trash from the curbside on a semi-annual basis.
   B.   The services may be made under the provisions of a contract with a duly
licensed contractor.
(Ord. 339, adopted 6-13-2005)
Sec. 30-12. SCOPE OF SERVICE EXCEPTIONS.
   Monthly curbside recycling and semi-annual curbside trash collection shall
be provided by the city to owners, lessees and occupants of residential units.
These services may also be provided to those owning, leasing or occupying
commercial and industrial units who request the services.
(Ord. 339, adopted 6-13-2005)
Sec. 30-13. RESIDENTIAL RECYCLING AND SEMI-ANNUAL TRASH COLLECTION.
   A.   All persons who are owners, lessees or occupants of a residential unit
shall participate in the monthly curbside recycling and semi-annual curbside
trash collection program established by this chapter.
   B.   Owners, lessees or occupants of commercial and industrial units may
participate in the monthly curbside recycling and semi-annual curbside trash
collection program established by this chapter by request.
(Ord. 339, adopted 6-13-2005)
Sec. 30-14. ACCEPTABLE MATERIALS FOR COLLECTION.
   Only recyclables and trash as those terms are defined in this chapter shall
be collected by the city for purposes of this chapter.
(Ord. 339, adopted 6-13-2005)
Sec. 30-15. WASTE COLLECTION SCHEDULE.
   The city shall provide for a systematic recyclable and trash collection and
disposal system, which shall provide for the collection of recyclables from
suitable curbside locations at least once each month and shall provide for the
collection of trash from suitable curbside locations at least semi-annually.
(Ord. 339, adopted 6-13-2005)
Sec. 30-16. RECYCLING OF RECYCLABLES/DISPOSAL OF TRASH.
   All recyclables and trash collected by the city shall be properly deposited
at a disposal site approved for the purposes by the state.
(Ord. 339, adopted 6-13-2005)
Sec. 30-17. RATES, CHARGES AND COST RECOVERY FEES.
   A.    The rates, including late fees, to be charged for the collection of
recyclables and trash shall be established from time to time by resolution of
the City Council. A fee shall be charged for the services and the charges shall
be made against each lot, parcel or premises to which recyclable and trash
collection services are supplied by the city and the fee shall be paid to the
city by the owners, lessees or occupants thereof.
   B.    No free service shall be allowed for any user of the recyclable and
trash collection system.
   C.    The city may charge a late fee to owners, lessees or occupants of any
unit for failure to make timely payment of the charges for recycling and trash
collection.
   D.    If payment for recyclable and trash collection service is not made
within 90 days of the due date specified on the bill, a notice may be sent by
first class mail that service may be discontinued. The city may discontinue
service from the premises against which the lien created by this chapter has
accrued if a person fails to pay the charges or the city may institute a civil
action for the collection of the same against the owners, lessees or occupants
of the premises. The city’s attempt to collect these charges by civil process
shall not invalidate or waive any lien upon the premises.
   E.    The city shall have, as security for payment of recyclable and trash
collection service charges, for charges to any customer, a lien upon the real
estate to which the service was supplied. The lien shall become effective
immediately upon billing for the service to the real estate.
   F.   The lien may be enforced by the general laws of the state providing for
the enforcement of tax liens. The lien created by this chapter shall have
priority over all other liens, except taxes or special assessments and shall
have equal priority with other liens imposed for city supplied municipal
services.
(Ord. 339, adopted 6-13-2005)
Sec. 30-18. ACCUMULATION OF RECYCLABLES OR TRASH.
   The owner, lessee or occupant of any unit shall not permit the accumulation
of recyclables upon any premises under his or her control for a period of more
than 30 days and shall not permit the accumulation of trash upon any premises
under his or her control for a period of more than six months.
(Ord. 339, adopted 6-13-2005)
Sec. 30-19. UTILIZATION OF SERVICE CONDITIONS.
   The owner, lessee or occupant of any unit participating in the recyclable
collection service shall place accumulated recyclables in containers, bags,
bins and bundles approved by the city or contractor. The containers, bags, bins
and bundles shall be placed by the owner, lessee or occupant of the unit at
curbside (that portion of the right-of-way adjacent to paved or traveled city
roadways, including alleys) in front of the unit no more than one day prior to
the scheduled collection date and no later than 7:00 a.m. on the day of
collection. Containers, bags, bins and bundles shall be placed as close to the
roadway as practicable without interfering with or endangering the movement of
vehicles or pedestrians. Trash shall be set five feet from recycling bins and
all other items shall be set an additional five feet from trash. The
containers, bags, bins and bundles intended for collection shall not be broken.
Any user of this service shall not place or cause to be placed at curbside for
city collection and disposal any unacceptable materials for collection.
(Ord. 339, adopted 6-13-2005)
Sec. 30-20. SCATTERED OR UNACCEPTABLE REFUSE RESPONSIBILITY.
   The owner, lessee or occupant of a unit shall clean up and remove from the
curbside and premises any scattered recyclable and trash resulting from the
breakage or opening of any container, bag, bin or bundle within 24 hours after
the same has been scattered. Any container, bag, bin or bundle contents not
accepted for collection shall be removed from the curbside within 24 hours of
the regularly scheduled collection day.
(Ord. 339, adopted 6-13-2005)
Sec. 30-21. SCHEDULE OF COLLECTIONS.
   The schedule of routes and days for the monthly recyclable collection
service and the semi-annual trash collection created by this chapter shall be
determined by the city.
(Ord. 339, adopted 6-13-2005)
Sec. 30-22. HOLIDAYS.
   Recyclable and trash collections shall not be made on the following
holidays: January 1 (New Year’s Day); the last Monday in May (Memorial Day or
Decoration Day); July 4 (Independence Day); the first Monday in September
(Labor Day); the fourth Thursday of November (Thanksgiving Day); and December
25 (Christmas Day). Whenever collections are interrupted because of one of
these holidays, the collection of recyclables or trash shall be postponed one
day. All regularly scheduled Friday collections interrupted by one of the
foregoing holidays shall be made on Saturday of the same week.
(Ord. 339, adopted 6-13-2005)
Sec. 30-23. PENALTY.
   A.   Any person who violates any of the applicable provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a municipal civil infraction which is punishable by
a fine of $500, plus court costs for each offense.
   B.   Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Increased civil fines may be imposed for repeat violations.
(Ord. 339, adopted 6-13-2005)
CHAPTER 31: BURNING
Section
Article I. Trash and Garbage
   
31-1   Purpose
   
31-2   Definitions
   
31-3   Open burning prohibited
   
31-4   Exceptions to open burning prohibitions
   
31-5   Open burning; general regulations
   
31-6   Incinerators; required to burn trash or garbage
   
31-7   Violations and penalties
Article II. Materials
   
31-8   Burning of materials
   
31-9   Outdoor wood burners
ARTICLE I. TRASH AND GARBAGE
Sec. 31-1. PURPOSE.
   This article is intended to regulate open burning and the burning of trash
or garbage within the city.
(Ord. 289, adopted 7-25-1994)
Sec. 31-2. DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GARBAGE. Solid waste resulting from the processing, handling, preparation,
sale or consumption of food.
   INCINERATOR. Any equipment or device designed and used for the purpose of
destroying or disposing of garbage or trash by fire.
   OPEN BURNING. A fire from which the products of combustion are emitted
directly into the air without passing through a stack or chimney.
   PERSON. Includes any individual, partnership, firm, corporation or other
legal entity.
   TRASH. All waste material other than garbage, including, but not limited to,
yard trimmings such as grass, leaves, twigs, branches, brush, logs, stumps or
other natural refuse; building demolition debris and excess construction
materials; and automobiles, tires, rubber, plastics or other similar materials.
(Ord. 289, adopted 7-25-1994)
Sec. 31-3. OPEN BURNING PROHIBITED.
   Except as expressly provided, no person shall start or maintain any open
burning within the city, nor shall any person cause or permit open burning to
occur upon any premises owned or occupied by the person or under the person’s
control.
(Ord. 289, adopted 7-25-1994)
Sec. 31-4. EXCEPTIONS TO OPEN BURNING PROHIBITIONS.
   The following fires are permitted within the city, subject to the general
regulations for the permitted open burning:
   A.   Fires for outdoor cooking. The burning of wood, charcoal, propane or
other accepted fuel for the preparation of food in any form, in an approved
container or utensil manufactured for that purpose, when used in accordance
with accepted safety standards;
   B.   Fires for building and construction operations. The use of an approved
gaseous or liquid-fired salamander commonly employed in conjunction with
building and construction operations, when used in accordance with accepted
safety standards;
   C.   Fires for roofers, tinners and plumbers. Roofers, tinners, plumbers or
other mechanics pursuing a business requiring the use of fire(s) for the
purpose of heating tar, pitch or other materials used in the regular course of
an appropriate business or trade, while being used in accordance to acceptable
safety standards and conforming to all other applicable codes;
   D.   Fires for training public safety personnel. Open burning for the
specific purpose of training of public safety personnel in fire suppression
techniques; provided:
      1.   The area is adequately protected by public safety personnel and/or
trainees;
      2.   The fire is of short duration;
      3.   The atmosphere is relatively free of pollutants; and
      4.   The burning is conducted in accordance with other applicable local,
state and federal laws and regulations.
   E.   Campfires. A campfire in which dried wood, trees, branches, kindling,
wood chips, compressed wood or any other wood products are burned shall be
allowed; provided:
      1.   The campfire is in an approved container; and the approved container
is made of non-combustible materials, rocks, cement, or metal and is no more
than four feet in diameter (48 inches); and
      2.   The property owner on which the campfire is located has expressly
authorized the campfire in writing or is in attendance.
(Ord. 289, adopted 7-25-1994)
Sec. 31-5. OPEN BURNING; GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   The following regulations shall apply to all open burning permitted by § 
31-4.
   A.   Open burning shall be supervised and kept under control by a competent
adult (of at least 18 years of age) who shall be present at the site of the
fire at all times and until the fire is completely extinguished without
smoldering.
   B.   Adequate fire extinguishing equipment shall be readily available at the
site of the fire.
   C.   Open burning shall not be permitted within 50 feet from any building or
overhead wires.
   D.   Open burning shall not be permitted in any public street, right-of-way,
easement, alley or other public ground.
   E.   No open burning of any garbage or trash shall be permitted.
   F.   No open burning shall be permitted in barrels or other containers for
burning.
   G.   No open burning shall be permitted between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m. of the following morning.
   H.   Materials to be burned must be dry and readily combustible.
   I.   The Fire Chief (or an authorized representative) may order any person
to refrain from starting or if started, to extinguish, any open burning which
is otherwise permitted by this chapter, if, in the Fire Chief’s opinion, the
open burning would be unsafe due to the particular circumstances, including,
but not limited to, unfavorable weather conditions or the size, duration, time
of day, location or manner of burning. It is a violation of this chapter for
any person to fail to comply with an order of the Fire Chief, as provided by
this section.
(Ord. 289, adopted 7-25-1994)
Sec. 31-6. INCINERATORS; REQUIRED TO BURN TRASH OR GARBAGE.
   No person shall destroy or dispose of any trash or garbage by fire within
the city, except within an incinerator which meets all of the following
requirements.
   A.   The combustion chamber of the incinerator must be completely enclosed
within a building and vented through a chimney or stack.
   B.   The incinerator must be designed, constructed and used so as to:
      1.   Prevent the emission of noxious odors;
      2.   Prevent the emission of smoke, fly ash, heat or other air
contaminants in unreasonable quantities or in a manner or to an extent that may
be detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the community; and
      3.   Meet all applicable local, state or federal laws or regulations
including those of Article II herein.
(Ord. 289, adopted 7-25-1994)
Sec. 31-7. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is responsible for a
municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than
$250, plus costs and other sanctions, for each violation. Repeat offenses shall
be subject to increased fines as provided by code; except that, the increased
fine for a repeat offense shall be as follows.
   A.   The fine for any offense which is a first repeat offense shall be not
less than $500, plus costs and other sanctions.
   B.   The fine for any offense which is a second repeat offense or any
subsequent repeat offense shall be not less than $1,000, plus costs and other
sanctions.
(Ord. 318, adopted 11-12-2001)
ARTICLE II . MATERIALS
Sec. 31-8. BURNING OF MATERIALS.
   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this code, no person shall have, start,
use or contribute to any fire or knowingly allow a fire to continue with the
person’s consent or under the person’s supervision or direction or in any place
fully or partially possessed or controlled by that person if the fire is used
for the destruction of any thing or substance, including, but not limited to,
leaves, needles, brush, grass, paper, trash, garbage and refuse.
   B.   No person shall have, start, use or contribute to or allow to be
started, used or contributed to any fire outside of any premises, except for a
fire for cooking purposes burning only gas or charcoal which is entirely
contained in a grill or smoker designed and intended for use for cooking
purposes.
   C.   A violation of this section shall be a municipal civil infraction
punishable as provided in the city code.
Sec. 31-9. OUTDOOR WOOD BURNERS.
   A.   OUTDOOR WOOD BURNERS means any device, appliance, equipment, apparatus
or structure which:
      1.   Is designed, intended and/or used to provide hot water heat, hot
water or steam to any associated structure;
      2.   Operates by burning wood; and
      3.   Is not located within the structure to be heated.
   B.   All outdoor wood burners shall be installed to meet all of the
following requirements:
      1.   Be positioned at least 50 feet from each lot line;
      2.   Be positioned at least 100 feet from the primary structure on each
adjacent lot;
      3.   Be placed in the rear yard, as defined in the city’s zoning
ordinance;
      4.   Be installed by a licensed contractor, according to a mechanical
permit; and
      5.   Be installed with an exhaust stack at least as high as the highest
chimney of the primary structure on the lot on which it is placed or on an
adjacent lot.
   C.   No outdoor wood burner shall be installed, put to use or remain in use
without first obtaining a permit from the City Manager designee after
furnishing the following information:
      1.   A drawing providing and identifying all of the information necessary
to assure compliance with this section;
      2.   Manufacturer’s specifications for the outdoor wood burner; and
      3.   Proof of compliance with all applicable state and federal statutes,
rules, regulations and permit requirements, including, without limitation, all
applicable building and construction codes, fire codes and the zoning
ordinance.
   D.   An area around an outdoor wood burner shall be free of vegetation or
other combustible materials according to the greater distance of the
manufacturers’ specifications and recommendations or ten feet.
   E.   No fuel other than dry, natural hard wood, without additive, may be
burned in an outdoor wood burner.
   F.   Outdoor wood burners and associated installations shall be subject to
inspection by the city’s Zoning Administrator and Mechanical Inspector at any
reasonable time to assure compliance with this section. Inspection by the
Mechanical Inspector shall be required before any wood burner is put into
service.
   G.   Nothing contained here shall authorize any installation that is a
public or private nuisance, regardless of compliance with this section. This
chapter shall not be a defense to any civil claims for nuisance or for any
other cause.
   H.   To the extent that this section conflicts with the provisions of the
zoning chapter the provisions of this section shall control.
   I.   A violation of this section shall be a municipal civil infraction
punishable as provided in the city code.
CHAPTER 32: FALSE ALARM
Section
   
32-1   Title; definitions
   
32-2   False alarms
   
32-3   Appeals
Sec. 32-1. TITLE; DEFINITIONS.
   A.   Title. This chapter shall be known as the “False Alarm Chapter” and may
be cited as such and referred to herein as “this chapter”.
   B.   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      ALARM SYSTEM. A device or assembly of equipment or devices designed or
arranged to signal the presence or existence of a hazard requiring urgent
attention of police or fire personnel. Those systems shall include, but not be
limited to, intrusion alarms, robbery alarms, fire alarms, medical emergency
alarms or other alarms requiring an emergency response by police or fire
personnel. ALARM SYSTEMS monitoring temperature and humidity and alarms which
do not require any police or fire personnel to respond are excluded from this
chapter.
      ALARM USER. Any person, whether owner, occupant or tenant, upon whose
premises an alarm system is maintained or operated within the city, except for
alarm systems on a motor vehicle. If, however, the alarm system on a motor
vehicle is connected with an alarm system at a premises, the person using a
system is an ALARM USER.
      FALSE ALARM. Activation of an alarm system, except caused by fire,
criminal activity or other lawful purpose for which the system is in operation.
Activation of an alarm system as a result of power failure, electrical storms
or other circumstances not under the control of the alarm system user shall not
be considered FALSE ALARMS under this definition.
      PERSON. Any individual, partnership, corporation, unincorporated
association or any group of persons.
(Ord. 254, adopted 5-22-1989)
Sec. 32-2. FALSE ALARMS.
   A.   No alarm user shall maintain, use or allow the use of an alarm system
or alarm systems which signal false alarms in excess of that permitted herein.
   B.   False alarm calls made unintentionally or unknowingly. As an exercise
of its enforcement discretion, the city may waive any fine or penalty for the
first two false alarm calls unintentionally or unknowingly sent or caused to be
sent by any person within one calendar year. However, except as provided by
division C. below for intentionally or knowingly sending a false alarm call,
any person who sends or causes to be sent three or more false alarm calls
within one calendar year is responsible for a municipal civil infraction,
subject to payment of a civil fine, as follows.
      1.   For the third false alarm call within a calendar year period: not
less than $250, plus costs and other sanctions, for each violation.
      2.   For the fourth false alarm call within a calendar year period: not
less than $500, plus costs and other sanctions, for each violation.
      3.   For the fifth and any subsequent false alarm call within a calendar
year period: not less than $1,000, plus costs and other sanctions, for each
violation.
   C.   False alarm calls made intentionally or knowingly. It shall be a
misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $500 or imprisonment for not
more than 90 days or both the fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the
court, for any person to intentionally or knowingly send or cause to be sent, a
false alarm call.
   D.   This chapter shall not apply to the use of an alarm system by federal,
state or local law enforcement personnel.
(Ord. 254, adopted 5-22-1989; Ord. 318, passed 11-12-2001)
Sec. 32-3. APPEALS.
   Appeal of a service fee or other action taken under the provisions of this
chapter may be made to the City Manager.
(Ord. 254, adopted 5-22-1989)
CHAPTER 33: ENVIRONMENTAL CLEANUP AND COST RECOVERY
Section
   
33-1   Purpose
   
33-2   Definitions
   
33-3   Release of hazardous materials prohibited; presumption; public nuisance
   
33-4   Duty to remove
   
33-5   Failure to remove
   
33-6   Liability for cleanup cost recovery
   
33-7   Recovery of costs
   
33-8   Non-exclusive charge
   
33-9   City inspection; report
   
33-10   Violations and penalties
Sec. 33-1. PURPOSE.
   This chapter provides for the recovery by the city from responsible parties
of all costs incurred by the city in responding to a release of hazardous
materials to protect the public health, safety and welfare and the environment.
(Ord. 317, adopted 10-8-2001)
Sec. 33-2. DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CLEANUP ACTIONS. Includes all the actions and activities, whether conducted
on an emergency or more long-term basis, as necessary:
      1.   To respond to a release of hazardous materials at a site, including,
but not limited to, evaluation, remedial action, demolition, health assessments
or studies;
      2.   To contain, isolate, collect, analyze, treat, disperse, remove,
destroy and dispose of hazardous materials released (or threatened to be
released) at the site as necessary to restore the site to its condition prior
to the release; and
      3.   To otherwise prevent, minimize or mitigate injury to the public
health, safety or welfare or to the environment and natural resources.
   CLEANUP COSTS. All costs and expenses incurred by the city (or incurred on
behalf of the city by any person, agency or entity acting at the request or
direction of the city) related in any way to site cleanup actions and
responding to a release or threatened release, including, but not limited to,
the actual labor and material costs of the city, such as employee wages, fringe
benefits, overtime, administrative overhead, standby costs, cost of equipment,
costs of equipment operation, costs of materials, costs of transportation,
costs of material disposal and costs of contracted labor, service charges and
interest, costs of retained experts and consultants, attorney’s fees,
litigation costs and any costs, charges, fines, penalties, sanctions imposed
against the city by any court or governmental entity. By way of further
example, cleanup costs also include, without limitation, the following:
      1.   The costs of providing firefighting, rescue services, medical
services, medical treatment, police services, mutual aid or any other public
safety services;
      2.   The costs of purchasing, renting, leasing, replacement,
decontamination, repair, destruction or disposal of all materials, equipment
and supplies used or obtained as necessary to respond to the release or to
clean up the site, including items such as disposable materials and supplies,
protective equipment, clothing, transportation, technical equipment, laboratory
equipment, medical supplies, fire suppression supplies and equipment, spill
control supplies and equipment;
      3.   The costs of any necessary cleanup actions at the site such as
diking, damming, trenching, covering, diverting, foaming, neutralizing,
isolating, burning, closing, plugging, moving, repairing, transferring,
recycling, monitoring, sampling and analysis;
      4.   The costs of any necessary evacuation, sheltering and feeding of
people, provision of alternative water supplies and other activities to protect
the public’s health and welfare and the environment; and
      5.   The costs of prosecuting any person in connection with the release,
including administrative costs relating thereto or to the production of
witnesses at any court proceedings, actual attorneys’ fees and all other
related legal expenses (including legal expenses incurred for efforts to
recover costs from responsible persons as provided by this chapter).
   DISPOSAL. The discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or
placing of any hazardous material into or on any land or water so that the
hazardous material of any constituent of the hazardous material may enter the
environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any ground water or
surface water.
   ENVIRONMENT. Land, surface water, ground water, subsurface, strata, air,
fish, wildlife or biota within the city.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIAL. Any of the following:
      1.   Hazardous substances as defined in the Comprehensive Environmental
Response, Compensation and Liability Act of 1980, Pub. Law No. 96-510, 94
State, 2767, as amended; or as defined in Part 201 of Public Act 451 of 1994,
as amended; or as defined under other local, state or federal laws, rules or
regulations;
      2.   Hazardous waste as defined under 40 C.F.R. Part 261; or as defined
under Part 111 of Public Act 451 of 1994, as amended; or as defined under other
local, state or federal laws, rules or regulations;
      3.   Any material defined or listed as a toxic waste or pollutant in 40
C.F.R. § 401.15; in the Critical Materials Register promulgated by the State
Department of Environmental Quality: or under other local, state or federal
laws, rules or regulations;
      4.   Petroleum as described in Part 213 of Public Act 451 of 1994, as
amended;
      5.   Any substance or material in quantity or form which, in the
determination of the city, poses a substantial present or potential hazard to
human life, health and safety, welfare, property or the environment and shall
include, but shall not be limited to, such substances as chemicals, explosives,
oxidizers, peroxides, poisons, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum
products, gases, poisons, etiologic (biologic) agents, flammables and
corrosives; and
      6.   Any materials which have otherwise been declared hazardous by any
state or federal agency.
   RELEASE. Includes, but is not limited to, the accidental or intentional,
sudden or gradual, spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying,
discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping or disposing into the
environment or the abandonment or discarding of barrels, containers or other
receptacles containing a hazardous material.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY.
      1.   Any person whose act or omission, whether intentional or
unintentional, causes or contributes to a release or threatened release;
      2.   The owner, operator, occupant or other person responsible for the
operation, maintenance or condition of any land, building, structure or vehicle
which was the situs or cause of the release or threatened release occurred;
      3.   Any person who owned, transported or had custody or control of the
hazardous material at the time of the release or threatened release; and
      4.   Any person who owned, transported or had custody or control of the
container which held the hazardous material at the time of or immediately prior
to the release or threatened release.
   SITE. Any area, place or property where hazardous materials have been
released, deposited, disposed of or otherwise come to be located.
   THREATENED RELEASE. Any circumstance that may reasonably be anticipated to
cause a release.
(Ord. 317, adopted 10-8-2001)
Sec. 33-3. RELEASE OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS PROHIBITED; PRESUMPTION; PUBLIC
NUISANCE.
   A.   It shall be unlawful, whether intentional or unintentional and without
regard to negligence or fault, for any person to release hazardous material
into the environment in a quantity which is or may become injurious to the
public health, safety or welfare or the environment.
   B.   A release shall be presumed unlawful as provided by this chapter if the
level of hazardous materials released exceed the applicable cleanup criteria
for the site as provided by Part 201 of Public Act 451 of 1994, as amended.
   C.   Any prohibited release is declared a public nuisance subject to all
applicable remedies at law or in equity.
(Ord. 317, adopted 10-8-2001)
Sec. 33-4. DUTY TO REMOVE.
   It shall be the duty of any responsible party to immediately remove
hazardous materials released and to undertake and complete all necessary
cleanup actions at the site so as to ensure that the hazardous materials are
fully removed and the area is fully restored to its condition prior to the
release. At a minimum, the cleanup shall meet the conditions or standards
applicable to the site as established by the State Department of Environmental
Quality, pursuant to Part 201 of Public Act 451 of 1994, as amended or by other
applicable laws or regulations, if more restrictive than the conditions or
standards established pursuant to Part 201.
(Ord. 317, adopted 10-8-2001)
Sec. 33-5. FAILURE TO REMOVE.
   A.   Any responsible party who fails to fully comply with § 
33-4 shall be liable to the city, its agents, contractors and employees for any
cleanup costs incurred by the city, including, but not limited to, costs for
the removal and cleanup of any and all hazardous materials, restoration of the
site and responding to any threatened release.
   B.   If any responsible party fails to immediately remove hazardous material
released at a site, the city shall have the right to enter the property
involved with the release and remove and conduct a cleanup of all hazardous
materials, either by city employees or by contractors and agents of the city.
(Ord. 317, adopted 10-8-2001)
Sec. 33-6. LIABILITY FOR CLEANUP COST RECOVERY.
   All cleanup costs incurred by the city under § 
33-5 shall be the responsibility of the responsible parties. The responsible
parties shall fully repay and reimburse the city for all cleanup costs incurred
by the city. Liability shall only be imposed consistent with federal and state
laws.
(Ord. 317, adopted 10-8-2001)
Sec. 33-7. RECOVERY OF COSTS.
   A.   The city shall keep an itemized record of cleanup costs resulting from
a release or threatened release.
   B.   The total amount of costs to be reimbursed by a responsible party as
provided by this chapter shall be determined by the City Council, based upon
the record of costs kept by the city, information and recommendations received
from appropriate city personnel involved in responding to the release or
threatened release and other factors, circumstances and information as
determined appropriate by the City Council.
   C.   The city shall bill the responsible parties for all costs reimbursable
under this chapter. The bill shall require full payment within 45 days from the
date of mailing the bill by first class mail to the responsible party or within
other period for payment as determined appropriate by the City Council.
   D.   If cleanup costs are not paid by a responsible party, the city may take
whatever collection steps deemed appropriate by the city, including the
placement of all charges on the tax roll for the property and to levy and
collect the costs in the same manner as provided for the levy and collection of
real property taxes against the property.
   E.   Cleanup costs incurred by the city as provided by this chapter which
have not been paid by a responsible party shall constitute a lien against the
real property where the release occurred and may be levied as a tax upon the
property if the owner, operator or occupant of the property caused or
contributed to the release.
   F.   The city may pursue any other remedy or may institute any appropriate
action or proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction to collect costs for
which liability is imposed under this chapter. All costs of any court action,
including actual attorney fees, shall also be a cleanup cost recoverable from a
responsible party as provided by this chapter.
   G.   The recovery of charges composed under this chapter does not limit or
modify the liability of any person under local, state or federal laws, rules or
regulations.
   H.   The remedies provided by this chapter shall be in addition to any other
remedies available at law or in equity and penalties as provided by law or
ordinance.
(Ord. 317, adopted 10-8-2001)
Sec. 33-8. NON-EXCLUSIVE CHARGE.
   A.   The reimbursable cleanup costs as provided for by this chapter shall be
in addition to and supplemental to the charges that may otherwise be made by
the city for the costs and expenses of maintaining a Department of Public
Safety.
   B.   Charges may additionally be collected by the city through general
taxation after a vote of the electorate approving the same or by a special
assessment established under the state statutes pertinent thereto. General Fund
appropriations may also be made to cover additional costs and expenses.
(Ord. 317, adopted 10-8-2001)
Sec. 33-9. CITY INSPECTION; REPORT.
   Authorized representatives of the city may, at any reasonable time, enter
and inspect any land, building or structure where hazardous materials are
stored, handled, processed, disposed of or treated, to ensure that there are no
significant or unreasonable present or potential risks to the public health,
safety or welfare or the environment, including persons using or occupying the
premises or persons using or occupying nearby or adjacent premises. A report
listing any violation of applicable laws, regulations and ordinances shall be
prepared by the city and kept on file. A copy of the report shall be provided
to the owner of the land, building or structure inspected.
(Ord. 317, adopted 10-8-2001)
Sec. 33-10. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   A person who violates any provision of this chapter is responsible for a
municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than
$500, plus costs and other sanctions, for each violation. Repeat offenses shall
be subject to increased fines as provided by code.
(Ord. 317, adopted 10-8-2001)
CHAPTER 34: COST RECOVERY
Section
Article I. Hazardous Materials
   
34-1   Purpose
   
34-2   Definitions
   
34-3   Responsible parties
   
34-4   Response activity costs
   
34-5   Charges for services
   
34-6   Applicability of charges regardless of outcome
   
34-7   Additional remedies
   
34-8   Right to appeal
Article II. Assessable Charges
   
34-9   Purpose
   
34-10   Assessable services
   
34-11   Responsible parties
   
34-12   Charges for services
   
34-13   Payment for assessable services
ARTICLE I. HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
Sec. 34-1. PURPOSE.
   This article provides for the recovery by the city from responsible parties
of all costs incurred by the city in responding to a release or threatened
release of hazardous materials to protect the public health, safety and welfare
and the environment.
Sec. 34-2. DEFINITIONS.
   Other terms used in this article shall have the meanings provided in § 20101
of the State Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, Public Act 451
of 1994, as amended, (NREPA), M.C.L.A. § 324.20101.
Sec. 34-3. RESPONSIBLE PARTIES.
   A.   The city shall bill all persons liable under the Natural Resource and
Environmental Protection Act, NREPA, Part 201 for “response activity costs” as
defined in this article and any or all transporters (as defined in NREPA Part
111) of any hazardous substance defined in NREPA § 20101, if a release or
threatened release occurs during transportation of that hazardous substance,
for response activity costs the city incurs due to any release or the
threatened release of hazardous substances. This article does not create or
affect any right of or restriction on the right of, the responsible party to
obtain any indemnification or contribution from the following parties, but only
creates rights for the city to collect from the parties.
      1.   Each owner and operator of a facility and each transporter shall be
jointly and severally liable for payment of the response activity costs
incurred by the city; and
      2.   Parents and/or guardians shall be responsible for payment for
response activity costs incurred by the city due to acts by minors who caused
the release.
   B.   A person otherwise liable under this section shall not be liable if
that person would have a defense to liability under NREPA Part 201.
Sec. 34-4. RESPONSE ACTIVITY COSTS.
   Response activity costs include all of those costs of a response activity as
provided in NREPA Part 201, specifically including, without limitation,
materials, equipment, manpower, administration and other costs incurred by the
City Public Safety Department or other departments; fees, rates and charges
paid to consultants, suppliers and contractors; costs resulting from injuries
or damage to people or property because of a release or a threatened release of
hazardous substances; and any other costs incurred by the city arising from or
related to any release or threatened release. Without limiting the generality
of the foregoing, the following are specific examples, but not an exclusive
list, of the costs:
   A.   Costs incurred to halt, abate, remediate or remedy any spill,
containment or release of any hazardous substances and any liabilities
resulting from the activity;
   B.   Costs incurred to extinguish or fight any fire in or at a structure or
on a property, including, but not limited to, overhauling equipment, fire
extinguishers and foam, any demolition costs if the structure must be
demolished to protect the public safety following the fire and any liabilities
resulting from such; and
   C.   Costs incurred to collect any amounts due under this article after the
first invoice.
Sec. 34-5. CHARGES FOR SERVICES.
   A.   The City Council may from time to time, by resolution, establish a
schedule of fees and charges in amounts reasonably determined to, on average,
recoup the costs of providing the response activities.
   B.   The City Council may, by resolution, establish fixed charges for
certain services instead of tracking the actual costs of the services.
Alternatively or for services for which no fixed fee is established, the city
may recover the actual costs incurred by the city.
   C.   Where one or more city department engages in response activities or
contracts for response activities in connection with an actual or threatened
release, costs incurred by city departments to do so shall be imposed upon
responsible parties, as follows:
      1.   An amount not less than $250 per hour or fraction thereof, for each
fire pumper required, in the opinion of the officer in command, to be utilized
in responding to the release;
      2.   An amount not less than $150 per hour or fraction thereof, for each
water tender utilized in responding to release;
      3.   An amount not less than $125 per hour or fraction thereof, for each
rescue vehicle utilized in responding to release;
      4.   An amount not less than $175 per hour or fraction thereof, for each
additional city owned department vehicle required, in the opinion of the
officer in command, to be utilized in responding to the release;
      5.   All personnel-related costs the city incurs as a result of
responding to the release. The costs may include, but are not limited to,
wages, salaries, benefits and insurance for city employees and overtime pay and
related fringe benefit costs for hourly employees. The personnel-related
charges shall begin after the first hour that the city department has responded
to the hazardous substances release and shall continue until all city
department personnel have concluded release-related responsibilities;
      6.   Other expenses the city incurs in responding to the release,
including, but not limited to, rental or purchase of machinery, equipment,
labor, consultants, legal and engineering fees and the replacement costs
related to disposable personal protective equipment, extinguishing agents,
supplies, water purchased from municipal water systems and meals refreshments
for personnel while responding to the hazardous substances release;
      7.   Charges to the city imposed by local, state or federal government
entities related to the hazardous substances release; and
      8.   Costs incurred in accounting for all hazardous material release-
related expenditures, including billing and collection costs.
   D.   All invoiced amounts shall be due and payable within 30 calendar days
of the date of the statement, unless an appeal is pending. Amounts not paid
when due shall bear interest at the rate of 1% per month or the highest
interest rate permitted by law, whichever is greater.
Sec 34-6. APPLICABILITY OF CHARGES REGARDLESS OF OUTCOME.
   The response activity under this article shall be applicable regardless of
the results or outcome of the activities with regard to the actual or
threatened hazardous substances release.
Sec. 34-7. ADDITIONAL REMEDIES.
   The response activity costs and charges specified by this article are
intended to reimburse the city for its reasonable costs and expenses incurred
and is not penal in nature. Accordingly, any responsible costs billed or
imposed pursuant to this article shall be in addition to any penal fines, fees
or other costs or expenses which may be imposed on the owner of operator of a
facility pursuant to any other law or ordinance.
Sec. 34-8. RIGHT TO APPEAL.
   Any person who receives a statement of costs assessed pursuant to this
article shall have the opportunity to appeal the costs to the City Manager. The
responsible party who wishes to appeal any assessable costs shall file a
written appeal with the City Manager within 14 calendar days of the date of the
statement of the billed costs stating why the costs are miscalculated or are
not assessable. The appeal will stay all payments due until the appeal is
decided by the City Manager. The City Manager shall make a determination
regarding the billed costs in the case appealed. The City Manager shall also
determine the date that any or all billed costs involved in the appeal will
become due.
ARTICLE II. ASSESSABLE CHARGES
Sec. 34-9. PURPOSE.
   A.   The purpose of this article is to authorize the Public Safety
Department to recover costs incurred in connection with certain assessable
services and to provide for the enforcement of this article.
   B.   This article provides for charges for certain assessable services,
defines responsibility for charges, clarifies that any party benefitting from
Public Safety Department services shall be liable for payment of services
rendered and allows the city to bill for other departments or agencies
providing assistance within the city.
Sec. 34-10. ASSESSABLE SERVICES.
   Costs associated with the following actions or services, also referred to as
“assessable services” in this section shall be jointly and severally assessed
to any and all responsible and benefitted parties. Costs incurred by the city
include, but are not limited to, materials, equipment, the wages and salaries
of city employees providing assessable services, all expenses of outside
sources or contractors, injuries or damage to people or property which results
from situations which cause the city to incur assessable costs, all costs
connected with the administration and provision of all chemical tests of blood,
breath or urine; all costs of equipment rental; all costs related to any
prosecution of the person causing the incident and any other factors deemed
relevant by the City Manager or Council. Assessable services also include:
   A.   Extraordinary cost incurred to extinguish or fight any fire in or at a
structure or on a property, including, but not limited to, overhauling
equipment, fire extinguishers and foam, any demolition cost if the structure
must be demolished to protect the public safety following the fire and any
liabilities resulting from such;
   B.   Cost incurred in connection with utility line (electrical power or
natural gas) or facility failure or problem and any liabilities resulting from
such;
   C.   Cost incurred in connection with any water rescue or recovery attempt
and liabilities resulting from such;
   D.   Cost incurred in connection with any technical rescue unit (i.e., the
equipment and/or specially trained rescue and/or recovery team provided by
governmental or private emergency response services to provide emergency
services in situations involving the technical rescue and/or recovery
situation) and any liabilities resulting from such;
   E.   Cost incurred in connection with a motor vehicle accident where one or
more persons were operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of an
alcoholic beverage or controlled substance or the combined influence of an
alcoholic beverage and a controlled substance;
   F.   Cost incurred in connection with the arrest or apprehension of any
person who, while under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or any
controlled substance or the combined influence of an alcoholic beverage and any
controlled substance, operates a motor vehicle when his or her physical or
mental abilities are impaired to a degree that he or she no longer has the
ability to operate a motor vehicle on any public roadway, street, right-of-way
or area open to the public; and
   G.   Costs associated with motor vehicle accident, extrication of individual
from a vehicle or motor vehicle fire, included, but not limited to, “spill
clean up” foam fire extinguishers and any liabilities resulting from such:
      1.   Costs associated with excessive request for emergency assistance,
including, but not limited to, calls made for a particular location or
commercial entity if that location or commercial entity has requested or
received emergency assistance of any type more than two times in the preceding
12 months;
      2.   Cost associated with a false alarm in excess of two times in a one
calendar year time period;
      3.   This article shall be construed to be responsibility and liability
of a civil nature and shall not be construed to conflict, contravene, enlarge
or reduce any criminal liability or responsibility, including fines imposed by
a court; and
      4.   Any assessable cost, including litigation expenses, which become
known to the city following the transmittal of a statement to the responsible
party pursuant to this article shall be billed in the same manner on a
subsequent statement to the responsible party.
Sec. 34-11. RESPONSIBLE PARTIES.
   A.   The city shall bill persons, entities or corporations determined to be
responsible for certain assessable services provided by or through the Public
Safety Department or other city departments.
   B.   Any party benefitting from the services shall be liable for payment of
the full charge for the services rendered. When a particular service rendered
by or through the Public Safety Department or other city department directly
benefits more than one person or property, the owner of each property so
benefitted and/or each person so benefitted, if property protection is not
involved, shall each be liable for the payment of the full charge for services.
Parents and/or guardians shall be responsible for payment for assessable
services incurred by minors who caused the condition or event leading to the
charges.
   C.   Any person who, while under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or
any controlled substance or the combined influence of an alcoholic beverage and
any controlled substance, operates a motor vehicle which results in assessable
services, as defined by this article, shall be liable for those assessable
services.
   D.   For purposes of this article, a person is under the influence of an
alcoholic beverage or controlled substance or the combined influence of an
alcoholic beverage or a controlled substance when his or her physical or mental
abilities are impaired to a degree that he or she no longer has the ability to
operate a motor vehicle with the caution characteristic of a sober person of
ordinary prudence. Further, it shall be presumed that a person was operating a
motor vehicle while under the influence of an alcoholic beverage if a chemical
analysis of his or her blood, urine or breath indicates that the amount of
alcohol in his or her blood rendered him or her impaired.
Sec. 34-12. CHARGES FOR SERVICES.
   The city establishes the following charges for services:
   A.   A flat rate fee of $250 for:
      1.   Spill clean up from motor vehicle accident or motor vehicle fire;
and/or
      2.   Personal injury accident.
   B.   Cost associated with city-owner apparatus when not covered by a flat
rate fee:
      1.   Staff vehicles: $50 per vehicle per hour;
      2.   Rescue vehicles: $125 per vehicle per hour;
      3.   Water rescue boat: $150 per vehicle per hour; or
      4.   Pumper, all types: $250 per vehicle per hour.
   C.   Recovery cost for staff and manpower when not covered by a flat fee:
      1.   Manpower: multiply number of people times their current wage; and
      2.   Recovery cost where flat rate fee is not associated will include all
additional cost from outside agencies, persons or equipment that are used to
halt, abate or remedy the situation as seen fit by the City Manager.
   D.   The City Council may, by a resolution, change these fees or add
additional fees.
Sec. 34-13. PAYMENT FOR ASSESSABLE SERVICES.
   A.   The Public Safety Director or his or her designee, may, within ten days
of receiving itemized costs or any part thereof, incurred for an assessable
services, submit a bill for these costs by first class mail or personal service
to the responsible parties as provided by this article. The bill(s) shall
require full payment in 30 days from the date of service.
   B.   Any failure by a responsible party to pay the bill for assessable
services within 30 days of service shall be considered in default. In case of
default, the city may commence a civil suit to recover the expenses and any
costs allowed by law.
   C.   This article shall be construed to be a responsibility and liability of
a civil nature and shall not be construed to conflict, contravene, enlarge or
reduce any criminal liability or responsibility, including fines imposed by a
court under the State Vehicle Code against a person for operating a motor
vehicle while under the influence of an alcoholic beverage and/or controlled
substance.
CHAPTER 35: SEWER USE
Section
Article I. Purpose and Applicability
   
35-1   Purpose, policy and objectives
   
35-2   Applicability
Article II. Definitions
   
35-3   Definitions
Article III. Disposal of Sewage and Wastewater
   
35-4   Depositing wastes upon public or private property
   
35-5   Sewage and wastewater discharges
   
35-6   Private sewage disposal systems
   
35-7   Private system required if public sewer not available
   
35-8   Soil evaluation test; permit required to install and operate private
system
   
35-9   Inspection of private sewage systems required
   
35-10   Type, capacities, location and layout
   
35-11   Operation and maintenance
   
35-12   Connection to public sewer required if available, time limit
   
35-13   Waste discharge prohibited except through approved sewer connection
   
35-14   Additional requirements
Article IV. Building Sewers and Connections
   
35-15   Building sewer connection permit required
   
35-16   Classes of building sewer connection permits, application
   
35-17   Separate sewer for every building, exception
   
35-18   Existing building sewers
   
35-19   Applicable code provisions, regulations
   
35-20   Elevation
   
35-21   Connection of surface runoff or groundwater prohibited
   
35-22   Connection to public sewer
   
35-23   Inspection and connection
   
35-24   Excavations, conditions of work
   
35-25   Pretreatment of any discharge may be required
   
35-26   Wastewater treatment capacity
   
35-27   Disruption of service
   
35-28   Service inspections
Article V. Extensions to System
   
35-29   Extension of public sewers
Article VI. Discharge to the POTW - Prohibitions, Limitations and Requirements
   
35-30   Storm water and unpolluted discharges
   
35-31   General discharge prohibitions
   
35-32   Specific discharge prohibitions
   
35-33   Pollutant reduction plans
   
35-34   Special alternative limits
   
35-35   Pretreatment standards and requirements
   
35-36   Reserved right of revision
   
35-37   POTW’s right to refuse or condition discharge
   
35-38   Dilution prohibited as substitute for treatment
   
35-39   Pretreatment required prior to point of discharge
   
35-40   Authority for control of discharges to the POTW
Article VII. User Permits
   
35-41   User permit required
   
35-42   Determination of user status
   
35-43   Permit application deadlines
   
35-44   Permit application requirements
   
35-45   Permit issuance, denial, or determination that permit not required
   
35-46   Permit conditions
   
35-47   Permit modifications
   
35-48   Permit duration
   
35-49   Permit reissuance
   
35-50   Continuation of expired permits
   
35-51   Permit suspension and revocation
   
35-52   Limitations on permit transfer
   
35-53   Duty to provide information
   
35-54   Permit appeals
   
35-55   Permits not stayed
   
35-56   Permit fees
Article VIII. Reporting and Notice Requirements
   
35-57   Reporting and notice requirements; compliance
   
35-58   Reports by nondomestic users regarding categorical pretreatment
standards and requirements
   
35-59   Reports required for nondomestic users not subject to categorical
pretreatment standards
   
35-60   Notice by user of potential problems
   
35-61   Notice by user of violation of pretreatment standards
   
35-62   Notice by user of changed discharge or change in user status
   
35-63   Notice by user regarding wastes that are otherwise hazardous
   
35-64   Notice by user regarding installation of new pretreatment facilities
   
35-65   Notice of intent
   
35-66   Other reports and notices required by this article or by other
applicable laws and regulations
   
35-67   Requirements applicable to all required reports, notifications, and
applications
   
35-68   Signature and certification requirements
Article IX. Sampling, Analysis, and Monitoring
   
35-69   Sampling, analysis, and monitoring; requirements
   
35-70   Sampling and analytical techniques and procedures
   
35-71   Sampling frequency
   
35-72   Sample types
   
35-73   Sampling methods, equipment and location
   
35-74   Costs of monitoring, sampling and analyses
   
35-75   Self-monitoring
   
35-76   Sampling and analyses performed by POTW
   
35-77   Split samples and sample results
   
35-78   Maintenance, repair and calibration of equipment
   
35-79   Required sampling structures and devices
   
35-80   Determination of flow
Article X. Accidental Discharges
   
35-81   General
   
35-82   Designation of person in charge of discharge operations
   
35-83   Description of chemicals stored, used or manufactured by user; user
discharges; user premises
   
35-84   Segregation of wastewaters requiring pretreatment
   
35-85   Secondary containment requirements
   
35-86   Submission of pollution incident prevention plan
   
35-87   Posting of accidental discharge information
   
35-88   Notice of accidental discharge
   
35-89   Slug control plan
Article XI. Upset and Additional Affirmative Defenses
   
35-90   Upset
   
35-91   Additional affirmative defenses
Article XII. Bypass
   
35-92   Bypass not violating applicable pretreatment standards or requirements
   
35-93   Bypass prohibited
   
35-94   Required notices
   
35-95   POTW approved bypass
Article XIII. Confidential Information
   
35-96   Confidential information
Article XIV. Records
   
35-97   Maintenance of records
Article XV. Administration of the POTW
   
35-98   Operation and management of POTW
   
35-99   Powers of POTW Superintendent
Article XVI. User Pollution Controls
   
35-100   Provision by users of necessary pretreatment facilities
   
35-101   Proper operation and maintenance
   
35-102   Removed substances
   
35-103   Duty to halt or reduce activity
   
35-104   Duty to mitigate
   
35-105   Duty to pretreat prior to discharge to POTW
   
35-106   Implementation of best management practices or best management
practices plan
   
35-107   FOG interceptors; alternate FOG pretreatment technology; sand traps,
grease, oil and sand interceptors/traps
   
35-108   Additional pretreatment measures
Article XVII. Enforcement
   
35-109   POTW inspection, surveillance and monitoring authority; right of entry
   
35-110   Notice of violation
   
35-111   Orders and supplemental enforcement tools
   
35-112   Service of notices of violations, orders and notices of assessments
   
35-113   Publication of users in significant noncompliance
   
35-114   Municipal civil infractions
   
35-115   Criminal penalties; imprisonment
   
35-116   Continuing violation
   
35-117   Number of violations
   
35-118   Nuisance
   
35-119   Reimbursement of city
   
35-120   Review or approval by city
   
35-121   Severance or suspension of sewer and/or water service
   
35-122   Judicial relief
   
35-123   Cumulative remedies
Article XVIII. Administrative Review and Appeal
   
35-124   Procedures available
   
35-125   Review and reconsideration by the POTW Superintendent
   
35-126   Appeal to Wastewater Board of Appeals
   
35-127   Payment of charges, penalties, fines, and other costs or fees pending
outcome of appeal
   
35-128   Finality of action
   
35-129   Appeals from determination of WBA
Article XIX. Protection from Damage
   
35-130   Protection from damage
Article XX. Municipal Liability
   
35-131   Municipal liability
Article XXI. Industrial Pretreatment Program Fees
   
35-132   Purpose
   
35-133   Fees
   
35-134   IPP fee amounts
   
35-135   Billing and collection of IPP fees; distribution
Article XXII. User Charge System
   
35-136   Generally
   
35-137   User charge system
   
35-138   Commodity charges
   
35-139   Readiness-to-serve charge
   
35-140   Application of user charges
   
35-141   Rates, charges and billing procedure
   
35-142   User charge revisions
   
35-143   No free service
Article XXIII. Discharges from Other Local Units of Government
   
35-144   Wastewater treatment service agreements; local unit sewer use
ordinances
Article XXIV. Severability
   
35-145   Severability
Article XXV. Savings Clause
   
35-146   Savings clause
Article XXVI. Conflict
   
35-147   Conflict
Article XXVII. Publication
   
35-148   Publication
Article XXVIII. Effective Date
   
35-148   Effective date
ARTICLE I. PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY
Sec. 35-1. PURPOSE, POLICY AND OBJECTIVES.
   A.   This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect
contributors into the city’s wastewater collection and treatment system and
enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws as
required by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (also known as the Clean
Water Act), as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.; the General Pretreatment
Regulations (40 C.F.R. Part 403); Part 31 of Public Act 451 of 1994, M.C.L.A.
§§ 324.3101 et seq., as amended (Water Resources Protection); and the rules,
Michigan Administrative Code, R 323.2301 et seq., as amended, promulgated
pursuant to section 3103, 3106 and 3109 of Part 31 of Public Act 451 of 1994,
as amended.
   B.   This chapter is intended to accomplish the following primary purposes,
policies and objectives:
      1.   To establish standards, rules, and regulations with respect to the
use of public and private sewers and drains, private sewage disposal, and use
of the POTW.
      2.   To prevent the discharge of pollutants into the POTW that do not
meet applicable pretreatment standards and requirements; that would interfere
with the operation of the POTW; that would pass through the POTW into the
receiving waters or the atmosphere; that would inhibit or disrupt the POTW’s
processing, use, or disposal of biosolids; that would cause health or safety
problems for POTW workers; that would result in a violation of the city’s NPDES
permit or of other applicable laws and regulations; or that would cause injury
to the public health and safety or the environment.
      3.   To regulate the discharge of wastewater and/or pollutants to the
POTW and to enforce the requirements of this chapter through the issuance of
permits and through other means of enforcement as provided by this chapter.
      4.   To authorize and require all inspection, monitoring, reporting and
enforcement activities as necessary to insure compliance with applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements and other applicable laws and
regulations.
      5.   To provide for a system of charges for connection to and use of the
POTW which equitably distributes the costs of the POTW system.
      6.   To otherwise ensure compliance with state and federal laws and
regulations applicable to discharges to the POTW.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-2. APPLICABILITY.
   A.   This chapter shall apply to all persons, whether within the city or
outside the city, that discharge into the POTW.
   B.   This chapter shall also apply to any person owning, using, constructing
or maintaining any private system or facility intended or used for the disposal
of sewage or wastewater within the city.
   C.   No person shall discharge to the POTW except in compliance with this
chapter.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS
Sec. 35-3. DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE. Any unintentional discharge that could result in
potential problems at the POTW treatment plant and includes, but is not limited
to, the following: (1) an upset in operation which places a user in a temporary
state of noncompliance; (2) a chemical spill to floor drains or which will
otherwise enter the wastewater treatment system; or (3) a discharge including
slug loading that could cause treatment system problems.
   ACT. Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act,
as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.
   ALTERNATIVE FOG PRETREATMENT TECHNOLOGY or AFPT. A device to trap, separate,
and hold FOG from wastewater and prevent it from being discharged into the
POTW, other than an outdoor FOG interceptor.
   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE. When used in reference to a nondomestic user,
means:
      1.   If the user is a corporation, a responsible corporate officer.
RESPONSIBLE CORPORATE OFFICER means: (i) a president, secretary, treasurer, or
vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function,
or any other person who performs similar policy- or decision-making functions
for the corporation; or (ii) the manager of one or more manufacturing,
production, or operating facilities, provided, the manager is authorized to
make management decisions which govern the operation of the regulated facility
including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital
investment recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive
measures to assure long-term  environmental compliance with environmental laws
and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or
actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for control mechanism
requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or
delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.
      2.   If the user is a partnership or proprietorship, a general partner or
proprietor, respectively.
      3.   If the user is a federal, state or local governmental entity, the
principal executive officer, ranking elected official, or director having
responsibility for the overall operation of the discharging facility.
      4.   A duly authorized representative of an individual designated in 1.,
2. or 3. above, if the representative is responsible for the overall operation
of the facilities from which the discharge to the POTW originates.
         a.   To be considered “duly authorized,” the authorization must be
made in writing by an individual designated in 1., 2. or 3. above. The
authorization must specify either an individual or a position having
responsibility for the overall operation of the facility (such as the position
of plant manager, operator of a well or well field, or a position of equivalent
responsibility, or having overall responsibility for the environmental matters
for the company or entity). The written authorization must be submitted to the
POTW Superintendent prior to or together with any reports to be signed by the
authorized representative.
         b.   If an authorization under 4.a. above is no longer accurate
because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall
operation of the facility, or overall responsibility for environmental matters
for the company or entity, a new written authorization must be submitted to the
POTW Superintendent prior to or together with any reports to be signed by the
newly authorized representative.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE or BMP. Any practice, program, procedure, control,
technique or measure (used singularly or in combination), that a user is
required to adopt or implement to control, contain, treat, prevent, or reduce
the discharge of wastewater, pollutants or other substances to the POTW, as
determined necessary by the POTW Superintendent. BMPs include, but are not
limited to: schedules of activities; pollution treatment practices or devices;
prohibitions of practices; good housekeeping practices; pollution prevention,
minimization and reduction measures; educational practices and programs;
maintenance procedures; other management programs, practices or devices;
treatment requirements; notice, reporting, and record-keeping requirements; and
operating procedures and practices to control or contain site runoff, spillage
or leaks, batch discharges, biosolids or water disposal, or drainage from
product and raw materials storage. BMPs may be structural, non-structural, or
both. In determining what BMPs will be required of a user in a particular case,
the POTW Superintendent may consider all relevant technological, economic,
practical, and institutional considerations as determined relevant and
appropriate by the Superintendent, consistent with achieving and maintaining
compliance with the requirements of this article and other applicable laws and
regulations.
   BIOSOLIDS. Solid, semisolid, or liquid residues generated during the
treatment of sanitary sewage or domestic sewage in a treatment works. The term
BIOSOLIDS includes, but is not limited to, scum or solids removed in primary,
secondary, or advanced wastewater treatment processes and any derivative of the
removed scum or solids. Sometimes referred to as SLUDGE.
   BOD (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen used in the
biochemical oxidation of a given amount of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20º Centigrade, expressed in milligrams
per liter.
   BUILDING DRAIN. That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil pipes, waste pipes, and other
drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building
sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. The
building drain shall be deemed to begin five feet outside the inner face of the
building wall.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal (such as a grinder pump). The BUILDING SEWER shall be
deemed to begin five feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
   BYPASS. The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a
user’s treatment process or facility.
   CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. Any regulation containing pollutant
discharge limits promulgated by the U.S. EPA in accordance with Sections 307(b)
and (c) of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1317, which apply to a specific
category of users and which appear in 40 C.F.R. Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts
405-471.
   C.F.R. The Code of Federal Regulations, as amended.
   CHLORINE DEMAND. A measure of oxygen-consuming capacity of inorganic and
organic matter present in water or wastewater. It is expressed as the amount of
oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specified test. It does not
differentiate between stable and unstable organic matter and thus does not
necessarily correlate with biochemical oxygen demand. Also known as oxygen
consumed (OCR) and dichromate oxygen consumed (DO), respectively.
   CITY. The City of Plainwell, or its duly authorized agents or
representatives, including, but not limited to, representatives of the POTW.
   CITY’S COLLECTION SYSTEM. Those portions of the collection system owned,
operated, maintained, and controlled by the city.
   COD (CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The total quantity of oxygen required for
oxidation of a waste to carbon dioxide and water, expressed in milligrams per
liter.
   COLLECTION SYSTEM. All of the sewers, force mains, intercepting sewers,
pipes and other conveyances, lift stations, and pumps, along with any metering
devices and other equipment and facilities, that are installed primarily to
receive discharges of wastewater and pollutants from users for collection and
conveyance to the POTW treatment plant. Unless otherwise expressly provided by
this chapter, the term COLLECTION SYSTEM refers collectively to the city’s
collection system and any regional collection systems.
   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer designed and used to convey both storm water runoff
and sanitary sewage, and which contains lawfully installed regulators and
control devices that allow for delivery of sanitary flow to treatment during
dry weather periods and divert storm water and sanitary sewage to surface
waters during storm flow periods.
   COMMERCIAL. Of or pertaining to any retail or wholesale business engaged in
selling merchandise or a service.
   COMMODITY CHARGES. Charges levied on users of the POTW for the operation and
maintenance costs, and equipment replacement costs of the POTW and its
facilities. COMMODITY CHARGES may also include surcharges.
   COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. A pollutant that, as determined by the POTW
Superintendent, is susceptible to effective treatment by the POTW as designed,
and which will not interfere with, or pass through, the POTW, and which is
otherwise not incompatible with the treatment processes or in excess of the
capacity at the POTW. The term COMPATIBLE is a relative concept that must be
determined on a case-by-case basis. In determining whether or not a pollutant
is compatible with the POTW, the Superintendent may consider, without
limitation, the nature and qualities of the pollutant, and the concentration,
mass, and flow rate at which the pollutant is (or is proposed to be)
discharged. Thus, for example, even pollutants such as BOD, fats, oils or
grease, phosphorous, suspended solids, and fecal coliform bacteria, which may
typically be considered “compatible,” may be determined incompatible by the
Superintendent if discharged in concentrations or flows that would cause
interference or pass through or exceed the POTW’s capacity. Specifically
excluded from COMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS are “heavy” metals, PCBs, mercury, and any
pollutants that may contribute or cause operational or biosolids disposal
problems or unacceptable discharges to the receiving waters.
   COMPOSITE SAMPLE. A series of individual samples, collected on a flow or
time proportional basis, taken at regular intervals over a specific time
period, and combined into a single sample (formed either by continuous sampling
or by mixing discrete samples) representative of the average stream during the
sampling period. For categorical sampling, a composite sample shall consist of
at least four individual samples taken within a 24-hour period.
   COOLING WATER. Water used for cooling purposes only, including both contact
and non-contact cooling water.
   COOLING WATER (CONTACT). Water used for cooling purposes only that may
become contaminated or polluted either through the use of water treatment
chemicals (such as corrosion inhibitors or biocides) or by direct contact with
process materials and/or wastewater.
   COOLING WATER (NON-CONTACT). Water used for cooling purposes only that has
no direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, final product,
or waste, and that does not contain a detectable level of contaminants higher
than that of the intake water (for example, the water discharged from uses such
as air conditioning, cooling, or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant
added is heat).
   COST, COSTS, or COSTS AND EXPENSES AND SIMILAR TERMS. As used generically in
the context of payments or amounts that must be paid by any person to the city,
must be reimbursed to the city, or are due and payable to the city under this
chapter, the terms COST, COSTS, COSTS AND EXPENSES AND SIMILAR TERMS shall be
construed to mean and include, but shall not be limited to, all costs,
expenses, fines, fees, charges, surcharges, penalties, assessments, claims,
losses, liabilities, and damages (direct or indirect), including natural
resource damages, and other amounts, and the full value of any city staff time
(including any required overtime), consultant and engineering fees, and actual
attorney fees and defense costs, as applicable to the circumstances and related
to the intent and purposes of this chapter.
   DAILY MAXIMUM. The maximum discharge of pollutants or flow (expressed in
terms of concentration, mass loading, pounds, gallons or other unit of
measurement) that shall not be exceeded on any single calendar day. Where daily
maximum limitations are expressed in terms of a concentration, the daily
discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of the pollutant concentration
derived from all measurements taken that day. Where daily maximum limitations
are expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass
discharged during the day. If a composite sample is required for a parameter,
the determination whether the daily maximum limitation for that parameter has
been exceeded on a single calendar day shall be based on the composite sample
collected for that parameter on that calendar day. If grab samples are required
for a parameter, the determination whether the daily maximum limitation for
that parameter has been exceeded on a calendar day shall be based on the
average of all grab samples collected for that parameter on that calendar day.
If only one grab sample is collected for a parameter on a given day, the
determination whether the daily maximum limitation for that parameter has been
exceeded for the day shall be based on the results of that single grab sample.
   DAYS. For purposes of computing a period of time prescribed or allowed by
this article, consecutive calendar days.
   DILUTE. To weaken, thin down or reduce the concentration of pollutants in
wastewater.
   DISCHARGE. The introduction of waste, wastewater, effluent or pollutants
into the POTW, whether intentionally or unintentionally, whether bulk or
individually metered, and whether directly (such as through an approved sewer
connection or other approved discharge point as authorized by POTW
Superintendent or through a regional collection system) or indirectly
(including, but not limited to, sources such as inflow and infiltration).
   DOMESTIC USER. A user that discharges only segregated normal strength
domestic waste into the POTW, as determined by the POTW Superintendent.
   DOMESTIC WASTE. Wastewater (or liquid or water-carried waste) of human
origin generated by personal activities from toilet, kitchen, laundry, or
bathing facilities, or by other similar facilities used for normal household or
residential dwelling unit purposes (sanitary sewage). DOMESTIC WASTE shall not
include any waste resulting from industrial or commercial processes, including,
without limitation, any hazardous or toxic pollutants. Wastes emanating from
sources other than residential dwelling units that are to be considered
DOMESTIC WASTES shall be of the same nature and strength and have the same flow
rate characteristics as wastes emanating from residential dwelling units, as
determined by the POTW Superintendent.
   DWELLING UNIT. A room, or rooms connected together, forming a single
habitable unit with facilities that are used or intended to be used for living,
sleeping, cooking and eating. DWELLING UNIT includes, but shall not be limited
to, a single-family residence, as well as each living unit of a multiple family
residence and each living unit in a mixed-use building.
   EFFLUENT. Wastewater or other liquid, partially or completely treated,
flowing from a reservoir, basin, treatment process or treatment plant.
   ENFORCEMENT RESPONSE PLAN or ERP. The plan prepared by the city as required
by 40 C.F.R. Part 403.8(f)(5) which provides a guide as to how the POTW will
investigate and respond to instances of non-compliance and the types of
escalated enforcement actions the POTW will take in response to violations of
applicable standards and requirements.
   EPA. The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
   EXCESSIVE. At such a flow, rate, magnitude or amount that, in the judgment
of the POTW Superintendent, it may cause damage to any facility or the POTW;
may be harmful to the wastewater treatment processes; may adversely affect the
management or operation of the POTW or POTW biosolids management or disposal;
may cause pass through or interference; may violate any pretreatment standard
or requirement; may adversely affect the quality of the receiving waters or the
ambient air quality; may endanger worker health and safety; may constitute a
public nuisance; may be inconsistent with the requirements, purposes or
objectives of this chapter; or may otherwise adversely impact the public
health, safety or welfare or the environment.
   FACILITY UNIT. A flow unit based upon the equivalent sewage flow generated
from a single-family residence, as established by resolution of the City
Council.
   FLOW-PROPORTIONAL COMPOSITE SAMPLE. A combination of individual samples of
equal volume taken at equal intervals of flow without consideration of the time
between individual samples.
   FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT’ or FSE. Any premises where food or beverages are
prepared and served or consumed, whether fixed or mobile, with or without
charge, and whether on or off the premises. FSEs shall include, but are not
limited to, restaurants, hotels, taverns, bars, rest homes, schools, factories,
institutions, camps, grocery stores with on site food preparation, and ice
cream parlors. The following shall not be subject to the interceptor/APT
requirements under § 
35-107 of this chapter except as otherwise determined necessary by the POTW
Superintendent to meet the purposes and objectives of this chapter: (a) A
private residential dwelling unit where the food is prepared and served or
consumed solely by the occupants of the dwelling unit; (b) a premises where the
only food prepared and served or consumed is dispensed from automatic vending
machines; and (c) a TEMPORARY FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT meaning an FSE
operating at a fixed location for not more than 14 consecutive days in
conjunction with a single event or celebration.
   FORCE MAIN. A pressurized wastewater sewer pipe and appurtenances.
   FWPCA. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (also known as the Clean
Water Act) as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.
   GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking,
serving, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, or sale of
produce. It is composed largely of putrescible organic matter and its natural
or added moisture content. To be considered “properly shredded” for purposes of
this chapter, garbage must be shredded to the degree that all particles will be
carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers,
with no particles greater than one-half inch in dimension.
   GENERAL USER PERMIT. A permit issued to any user other than a significant
industrial user as provided by this chapter to control discharges to the POTW
and to ensure compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements.
   GOOD UTILITY PRACTICES. Any of the practices, methods and acts engaged in or
approved by a significant portion of publicly owned treatment works facilities
during the relevant time period or other practices, methods and acts which, in
the exercise of reasonable judgment in light of the facts known at the time the
decision was made, could have been expected to accomplish the desired result
consistent with reliability, safety, expedition, applicable local, state and
federal laws and regulations, and at reasonable cost; the term GOOD UTILITY
PRACTICES is not intended to be limited to the optimum practices, methods or
acts to the exclusion of all others, but rather to constitute a spectrum of
acceptable practices, methods or acts generally accepted by publicly owned
treatment works facilities.
   GRAB SAMPLE. An individual sample that is taken from a wastestream on a one-
time basis without regard to the flow in the wastestream and over a period of
time not to exceed 15 minutes.
   GRINDER PUMP. In a grinder pump system, the device to which the building
sewer connects and which grinds and pumps the sewage to the public sewer for
transportation to the POTW.
   GRINDER PUMP SYSTEM. The publicly owned grinder pump, controls and pressure
discharge pipe, including all control boards, controls, floats, pumps, storage
tanks and appurtenances thereto which provides the connection between the
privately owned building sewer and the public sewer system.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE. Any substance discharged or proposed to be discharged into
the POTW, that (1) if otherwise disposed of would be a hazardous waste under 40
C.F.R. Part 261 or under the rules promulgated under the State Hazardous Waste
Management Act (Part 111 of Public Act 451 1994, M.C.L.A. §§ 324.11101 et seq.,
as amended); or (2) is otherwise a waste or a combination of waste and other
discarded material including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous
material that because of its quantity, quality, concentration, or physical,
chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause or significantly contribute
to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible illness or
serious incapacitating but reversible illness, or may pose a substantial
present or potential hazard to human health or the environment if improperly
treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed, as determined
by the POTW.
   HOLDING TANK WASTE. Any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical
toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks.
   INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Any pollutant that is not a compatible pollutant.
   INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT PROGRAM (IPP) FEES AND CHARGES. A fee and/or charge
levied on users of the POTW for the cost of administering the IPP, including,
but not limited to, user permit and IPP fees as provided by Article XXI of this
chapter.
   INDUSTRIAL USER  Any nondomestic user that contributes, causes or permits
the contribution or introduction of wastewater or pollutants into the POTW,
whether intentional or unintentional, and whether direct or indirect. For the
purposes of this chapter, and notwithstanding any other provision of this
chapter to the contrary, any local unit of government that contributes, or
causes or permits the contribution or introduction of wastewater or pollutants
into the POTW, whether intentional or unintentional, and whether direct or
indirect, shall be considered to be an industrial user.
   INFILTRATION. Any waters entering the POTW from the ground, through means
such as, but not limited to, defective pipes, pipe joints, connections or
manhole walls. INFILTRATION does not include, and is distinguished from,
inflow.
   INFLOW. Any waters entering the POTW from sources such as, but not limited
to, building downspouts; roof leaders; cellar, yard, and area drains;
foundation and footing drains; cooling water discharges; drains from springs
and swampy areas; manhole covers; cross connections from storm sewers and
combined sewers; catch basins; storm waters; surface runoff; street wash
waters; or drainage.
   INSTANTANEOUS MAXIMUM LIMIT. The maximum concentration or other measure of
pollutant magnitude of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any instant in
time (independent of the flow rate or duration of the sampling event). If the
concentration or other measure of pollutant  magnitude determined by analysis
of any grab sample, composite sample, or discrete portion of a composite sample
exceeds the instantaneous maximum limit, the instantaneous maximum limit shall
be deemed to have been exceeded. Any discharge of a pollutant at or above a
specified instantaneous maximum limit is a specific violation of this chapter.
   INSTANTANEOUS MINIMUM LIMIT. The lowest measure of pollutant magnitude of a
pollutant allowed to be discharged at any instant in time (independent of the
flow rate or duration of the sampling event). If the concentration or other
pollutant magnitude determined by analysis of any grab sample, composite
sample, or discrete portion of a composite sample is below the a specified
instantaneous minimum limit, the instantaneous minimum limit shall be deemed to
have been violated.
   INSTITUTION. Any educational, religious, or social organization, such as a
school, church, nursing home, or other similar organization.
   INTERCEPTOR SEWER. A wastewater sewer that receives wastewater from one or
more trunk sewers or a number of other wastewater sewers and conveys wastewater
directly to a lift station or pumping station or directly to the POTW.
   INTERFERENCE. A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources, either: (1) inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its
treatment processes or operations, or its biosolids processes, use or disposal;
or (2) is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW’s NPDES permit
(including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the
prevention of biosolids use or disposal in compliance with the following
statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more
stringent state or local regulations): Section 405 of the FWPCA; the Solid
Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including Title II, more commonly referred to as
RCRA, and including state regulations contained in any state sludge management
plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA); the Clean Air Act; the Toxic
Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries
Act.
   LATERAL SEWER. That portion of the sewer system located under the street or
within the public right-of-way from the property line to the trunk line and
which collects sewage from a particular property for transfer to the trunk
line.
   LIFT STATION or PUMPING STATION. The structure and equipment used to receive
wastewater from a sewer at a low elevation and raise the wastewater by pumping
or some other means to a higher elevation or pressure for discharge into a
wastewater sewer.
   LOCAL LIMITS. A specific enforceable prohibition, standard or requirement
(numerical or non-numerical) applicable to user discharges established by the
POTW to meet the purposes and objectives of this chapter and to comply with
applicable state and federal laws and regulations.
   LOCAL UNIT OF GOVERNMENT or LOCAL UNIT. A city (other than the city),
village, township, or county; or an authority composed of cities, villages,
townships, counties, or any combination thereof.
   MAC. The Michigan Administrative Code.
   MDNRE. The Michigan Department of Natural Resources and Environment (or the
MDNRE’s predecessor department as embodied by the Michigan Department of
Environmental Quality) or the MDNRE’s authorized representatives.
   MEDICAL WASTE. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood
products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding,
surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, or dialysis
wastes, and includes any medical or infectious wastes as defined by the MDNRE.
   mg/l. Milligrams per liter.
   MONTHLY AVERAGE. The sum of the concentrations (or mass loadings, expressed
in terms of pounds per day, or such other unit of measurement) of a pollutant
divided by the number of samples taken during a calendar month. The
concentrations (or loadings or other unit of measurement) that are added are
single numbers for single calendar days for all days during the calendar month
for which analyses are obtained (whether by the user or the POTW), but the
concentrations (or loadings or other unit of measurement) may be based upon a
sample or samples taken over either all or part of that day and upon single or
multiple analyses for that day, as determined by the POTW Superintendent. If no
samples are taken during particular months because less than monthly sampling
is required for a pollutant parameter (e.g., a specified quarterly monitoring
period), the monthly average for each month within the specified period shall
be the sum of concentrations (or loadings or other unit of measurement) for the
period divided by number of samples taken during the period.
   NAICS or NORTH AMERICAN INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM. The system of
classification for business establishments adopted by the U.S. Office of
Management and Budget, as amended.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any naturally formed outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch,
lake or other body of surface or groundwater.
   NEW SOURCE.
      1.   Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there
is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced
after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c)
of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act which will be applicable to the
source if pretreatment standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with
that section, provided that:
         a.   The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed
at a site at which no other source is located; or
         b.   The building, structure, facility or installation totally
replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
         c.   The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of
an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility
is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility
is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should
be considered.
      2.   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located
results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not
create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria
of paragraphs 1.b. or 1.c. of this section but otherwise alters, replaces, or
adds to existing process or production equipment. Commencement of construction
of a new source shall be determined in a manner consistent with 40 C.F.R. Part
403.3(k)(3).
   ng/l. Nanograms per liter.
   NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER. See COOLING WATER (NON-CONTACT).
   NONDOMESTIC USER. Any user other than a domestic user (i.e., any user that
discharges anything other than segregated normal strength domestic waste into
the POTW), including, but not limited to, an industrial user. The determination
of whether or not a user is a NONDOMESTIC USER shall be made by POTW
Superintendent at the Superintendent’s sole discretion as determined necessary
by the Superintendent to achieve the purposes and objectives of this chapter.
Any user that has the reasonable potential, as determined by the POTW
Superintendent, to discharge any waste other than normal strength domestic
waste into the POTW, may be deemed a nondomestic user for purposes of this
chapter. For the purposes of this chapter, and notwithstanding any other
provision of this chapter to the contrary, any local unit of government that
contributes, or causes or permits the contribution or introduction of
wastewater or pollutants into the POTW, whether intentional or unintentional,
and whether direct or indirect, shall be considered to be nondomestic user.
   NONDOMESTIC USER PERMIT. A permit issued to a significant industrial user,
or to such other user as determined appropriate by the POTW Superintendent, as
provided by this chapter to control the discharge of wastewater to the POTW and
to ensure compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.
   NONDOMESTIC WASTE. Any wastewater (or water- or liquid-carried waste) other
than segregated normal strength domestic waste. The determination of whether or
not a waste is a NONDOMESTIC WASTE shall be made by POTW Superintendent at the
Superintendent’s sole discretion as determined necessary by the Superintendent
to achieve the purposes and objectives of this chapter. Any waste that has the
reasonable potential, as determined by the POTW Superintendent, to be not
entirely composed of normal strength domestic waste may be deemed nondomestic
waste for purposes of this chapter.
   NORMAL STRENGTH DOMESTIC WASTE. A domestic waste flow for which the levels
of pollutants (including, but not limited to, BOD, TSS, ammonia nitrogen, or
phosphorous) are below the surcharge levels for any parameter as established by
this chapter. Further, to be considered normal strength, the wastewater must
have a pH between 6.5 and 8.0, must not exceed any local limit, and must not
contain a concentration of other constituents that would interfere with POTW
treatment processes. The determination of whether or not a waste stream is
NORMAL STRENGTH DOMESTIC WASTE shall be made by POTW Superintendent at the
Superintendent’s sole discretion as determined necessary by the Superintendent
to achieve the purposes and objectives of this chapter.
   NPDES PERMIT. A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C.
§§ 1251 et seq. for the discharge of wastewater into the waters of the state.
   OBSTRUCTION. Anything of whatever nature that impedes the flow of wastewater
from the point of origination to the trunk line and anywhere else within the
POTW. This includes, but is not limited to, objects, sewage, garbage, FOG, tree
roots, rocks and debris of any type.
   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COST. All costs, direct and indirect, including
replacement costs, necessary to insure adequate wastewater treatment on a
continuing basis, conform with all related federal, state, and local
requirements, and assure optional long-term facility management. Operation and
maintenance costs do not include expenditures required to retire debts
resulting from capital costs of construction.
   OUTFALL. The point (or points) of discharge by a user to the POTW, approved
by the POTW Superintendent and specified in a user permit.
   OWNER. The owner of record of the freehold of a premises or lesser estate
therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, receiver,
executor, trustee, lessee, or other person, firm or corporation in control of a
premises.
   PASS THROUGH. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the state (or
waters of the United States) in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in
conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a
violation of any requirement of the POTW’s NPDES permit or of any requirement
of applicable local, state or federal laws and regulations (including an
increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation), or otherwise
detrimentally impacts the receiving stream.
   PERSON. Any individual partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
association, society, corporation, joint stock company, trust, estate,
governmental entity, or any other legal entity or their legal representatives,
agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine, the
singular shall include the plural where indicated by the context.
   pH. The quantitative measure of acidity or alkalinity a solution, defined as
the negative logarithm (base 10) of the concentration of hydrogen ions in
moles/liter.
   POLLUTANT. Includes (but is not limited to) all of the following:
      1.   Any material that is discharged into water or other liquid,
including, but not limited to, dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
sewage, garbage, sewage biosolids, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes,
biological materials, radioactive materials, wrecked or discharged equipment,
rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste.
      2.   Properties of materials or characteristics of wastewater, including,
but not limited to, pH, heat, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, and
odor.
      3.   Substances regulated by categorical pretreatment standards.
      4.   Substances discharged to the POTW that are required to be monitored
by a user under this chapter, are limited in the POTW’s NPDES permit, or
required to be identified in the POTW’s application for an NPDES permit.
      5.   Substances for which control measures on users are necessary to
avoid restricting the POTW’s residuals management program; to avoid operational
problems at the POTW; or to avoid POTW worker health and safety problems.
   POTW (PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS). The complete sewage disposal,
transportation and treatment system of the city as defined by the Act and this
chapter, including any devices, processes and systems used in the storage,
treatment, recycling or reclamation of wastewater, sewage or biosolids, as well
as sewers (including all main, lateral and intercepting sewers), pipes and
other conveyances used to collect or convey wastewater or sewage to the
treatment works, as now or hereafter added to, extended or improved. The term
POTW shall also include any sewers outside the city that convey wastewaters to
the POTW from persons who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of
the POTW. References in this chapter to approvals, determinations, reviews,
etc., BY THE POTW shall mean by the POTW Superintendent, or the
Superintendent’s authorized representatives. The term POTW may also be used to
refer to the city as the municipality that has jurisdiction over the discharges
to, and discharges from, the treatment works, or to the wastewater treatment
plant and its designated representatives, as appropriate to the context in
which the term is used.
   POTW SUPERINTENDENT or SUPERINTENDENT. The Superintendent of the City of
Plainwell Water Renewal Department, or the Superintendent’s authorized deputy,
agent, or representative.
   POTW TREATMENT PLANT. That portion of the POTW that is designed to provide
treatment of wastewater, including all devices, processes, facilities and
systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling or reclamation of wastewater,
sewage or biosolids.
   PREMISES. A lot or parcel of land, or a building or structure, having any
connection, direct or indirect, to the POTW, or from which there is a discharge
to the POTW.
   PRETREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of
pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater before or instead of discharging or otherwise introducing the
pollutants into the POTW. The reduction or alteration may be obtained by
physical, chemical, or biological processes; process changes; or other means,
except for the use of dilution, unless expressly authorized by an applicable
pretreatment standard or requirement and the POTW Superintendent.
   PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENT. Any substantive or procedural requirement related
to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard, imposed on a
user.
   PRETREATMENT STANDARD. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits
promulgated by the U.S. EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the
FWPCA which applies to users, including prohibitive discharge limits and local
limits established under MAC R 323.2303 and categorical standards.
   PROCESS WASTEWATER. Any water that, during manufacturing or processing,
comes into direct contact with or results from the production or use of any raw
material, intermediate product, finished product, by-product, or waste product.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal
rights, and which is controlled by public authority. PUBLIC SEWER means the
main sewer line exclusive of sewer leads. Sewer leads shall be considered to be
part of the building sewer.
   REASONABLE POTENTIAL. As used in this chapter, a determination of REASONABLE
POTENTIAL by the POTW Superintendent means a determination made by the
Superintendent that a certain condition, state, result or circumstance exists,
or is likely to exist, based upon the quantitative or qualitative factors or
information deemed by the Superintendent to be relevant and appropriate to the
determination, consistent with the purposes and objectives of this chapter.
   READINESS-TO-SERVE (RTS) CHARGE. A charge levied on the users of the POTW
that is used to accumulate funds adequate to pay principle, interest, and
administrative costs of retiring debt or direct capital costs incurred by the
city for the existing or planned construction, improvements, and expansion of
the POTW. The RTS charge shall be established from time-to-time by resolution
of the City Council, on a frequency and basis as determined by the City
Council.
   REGIONAL COLLECTION SYSTEM. A collection system (or portion thereof)
constructed, owned, operated, and maintained, in whole or in part, by a person
or entity other than the city.
   REPLACEMENT COSTS. Expenditures from the city’s sewer fund made for
obtaining and installing equipment, accessories and/or appurtenances during the
useful life of the POTW, and to improve depreciated equipment and facilities to
nearly new condition or to a condition adequate to ensure reliable operations,
as necessary to maintain the capacity and performance of the POTW for which it
was designed and constructed.
   RESIDENTIAL. Of or pertaining to individual homes or dwelling units,
including mobile homes, apartments, condominiums, single-family dwellings or
multi-family dwellings.
   RESIDENTIAL EQUIVALENT UNIT. A structure or area designated or used for
single-family occupancy, each separate apartment in a multi-family housing
facility, a mobile home when used for housing, or other unit equivalent, as
determined by the city pursuant to applicable city laws and regulations for
users of the wastewater treatment system.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer intended to carry liquid and water-carried wastes
from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, and
to which storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
   SEPTAGE. The liquid or solid material removed from a septic tank, cesspool,
portable toilet, recreational vehicle, type III marine sanitation device, or a
similar system.
   SERVICE CONNECTION. The portion of the public sewer which extends either to
or onto the parcel of land adjacent to the path of the public sewer, and
includes the sewer main, tee/wye, valve, check valve, connector pipes, the
sewer lead, the grinder pump system, electrical controls and connections at the
electric meter (but not including the meter) and appurtenances, but not
including the building sewer.
   SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE. Substantial physical damage to property, damage to
the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial
and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to
occur in the absence of a bypass. SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE does not mean economic
loss caused by delays in production.
   SEWAGE. See WASTEWATER.
   SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT. The POTW Treatment Plant.
   SEWAGE WORKS. The POTW.
   SEWER. Any pipe, tile, or conduit for carrying sewage.
   SEWER FUND. The city enterprise fund that receives and records revenue from
user charges and other financial transactions relating to the operation,
maintenance, replacement, IPP, RTS and capital improvement of the city’s
wastewater treatment plant.
   SEWER LEAD. That portion of the service connection that connects to the
sewer main located in the public right-of-way and extends to the property line.
   SHALL is mandatory; MAY is permissive.
   SIC or STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION CODE. A classification pursuant to
the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the U.S. Office of
Management and Budget.
   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER or SIU. Any user:
      1.   Subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or
      2.   Any other user that:
         a.   Discharges to the POTW an average of 25,000 gallons per day or
more of process wastewater (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiler
blow-down wastewater); or
         b.   Contributes a process waste stream which makes up 5% or more of
the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment
plant; or
         c.   Is otherwise designated by the POTW Superintendent as a
significant industrial user on the basis that the user has a reasonable
potential to adversely affect the operation of the POTW or to violate any
pretreatment standard or requirement or because the POTW Superintendent
determines that a nondomestic user permit for the user’s discharge is required
to meet the purposes and objectives of this chapter. Any local unit of
government that discharges into the POTW may be considered a significant
industrial user for purposes of this chapter.
      3.   The POTW Superintendent may determine that a user that otherwise
meets the criteria of this section is not a significant industrial user if the
Superintendent finds that the user has no reasonable potential to adversely
affect the operation of the POTW or to violate any pretreatment standard or
requirement or that a nondomestic user permit is not required to meet the
purposes and objectives of this chapter. A determination that a user is not an
SIU (or that a permit may therefore not be required) shall not be binding and
may be reversed by the Superintendent at any time based on changed
circumstances, new information, or as otherwise determined necessary by the
Superintendent to meet the purposes and objectives of this chapter.
   SIGNIFICANT NON-COMPLIANCE. A violation (or group of violations) of
applicable pretreatment standards or requirements or any other action (or
failure to act) by a nondomestic user which meets the criteria set forth in § 
35-89 of this chapter, or which will otherwise adversely affect the operation
or implementation of the city’s pretreatment program as determined by the POTW
Superintendent.
   SLUDGE. See BIOSOLIDS.
   SLUG LOADING. Means (1) any discharge of water, sewage or nondomestic waste
which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds
more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or quantity of flow
during normal operation, for any period longer than 15  minutes; or (2) any
pollutant released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration
which will cause interference with the POTW; or (3) any discharge of a non-
routine, episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or
a non-customary batch discharge.
   STATE. The State of Michigan. The term shall include, where applicable, any
administrative agency of the state having jurisdiction in the subject matter of
this chapter, including (but not limited to) the MDNRE.
   STORM SEWER (sometimes termed STORM DRAIN). A sewer or drain, either natural
or artificial, intended to carry storm water, snowmelt, and surface runoff and
drainage, but not wastewater.
   STORM WATER. The excess water running off from the surface of a drainage
area during and immediately after a period of rain or snow melt and is that
portion of the rainfall or snow melt runoff and resulting surface flow in
excess of that which can be absorbed through the infiltration capacity of the
surface of the basin.
   SURCHARGE. An additional treatment or handling charge made by the city for
the treatment of wastewater containing pollutants in excess of specified
concentrations, loadings or other applicable limits.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS). The total suspended matter that either floats on the
surface of, or are in suspension in, water, wastewater, or other liquids, as
determined by standard methods and expressed as milligrams per liter.
   TIME-PROPORTIONAL COMPOSITE SAMPLE. A combination of individual samples of
equal volume taken at equal intervals of time, without consideration of the
volume or rate of flow.
   TOXIC POLLUTANT. Any pollutant or combination of pollutants that is or can
potentially be harmful to the public health, the POTW, or the environment,
including, without limitation, those listed in 40 C.F.R. Part 401.15 as toxic
under the provisions of the Clean Water Act, or listed in the Critical
Materials Register promulgated by the MDNRE, or as provided by local, state or
federal laws, rules or regulations.
   TRADE SECRET. The whole or any portion or phase of any manufacturing
proprietary process or method which is not patented, which is secret, which is
useful in compounding an article of trade having a commercial value, and the
secrecy of which the owner has taken reasonable measure to prevent from
becoming available to persons other than those selected by the owner to have
access for limited purposes. TRADE SECRET shall not be construed, for purposes
of this chapter, to include any information regarding the quantum or character
of waste products or their constituents discharged, or sought to be discharged,
into the POTW.
   TRUCKED OR HAULED WASTE OR POLLUTANTS. Any substance, waste, or wastewater
proposed to be discharged to the POTW from a mobile source, including, but not
limited to, septage and holding tank waste.
   TRUNK LINE. The main public sewer line located under any street or within
any public right-of-way that collects and transmits the sewage of the various
properties served by the sewer system.
   TSS. Total Suspended Solids.
   ug/l. Micrograms per liter.
   UPSET. An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary
noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond
the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to
the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment
facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or
careless or improper operation.
   USER. Any person that contributes, causes or permits the contribution,
introduction or discharge of wastewater or pollutants into the POTW, whether
intentional or unintentional, whether directly or indirectly, and whether on a
bulk-metered, individually metered, or non-metered basis. For the purposes of
this chapter, a local unit of government that discharges into the POTW through
a regional collection system shall be considered a user, separate and distinct
from the individual persons or premises located within the local unit that are
also defined as users by this chapter.
   USER CHARGE. A charge levied on users related to their discharges to the
POTW as required by this chapter and other city laws and regulations,
including, but not limited to, commodity charges, surcharges, RTS charges, and
IPP charges.
   USER PERMIT. A nondomestic user permit or a general user permit issued by
the POTW Superintendent to a user to control discharges to the POTW and/or to
ensure compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements as
provided by this chapter and other applicable laws and regulations.
   WASTEWATER. The liquid and water-carried domestic and nondomestic waste from
dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions
(including, but not limited to, contaminated groundwater and landfill
leachate), whether treated or untreated, that is contributed, introduced or
discharged, directly or indirectly, and whether intentionally or
unintentionally, into the POTW together with any incidental ground water,
surface water or storm water that may be present due to inflow or infiltration.
The term includes any water that has in any way been used and degraded or
physically or chemically altered.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT. Any method, technique, process, or operation used by
or on behalf of the POTW to reduce the amount of pollutants, eliminate
pollutants, or alter the nature of pollutant properties from discharges to the
POTW before the POTW discharges the pollutants into the waters of the state or
otherwise disposes of them, as determined necessary by the POTW Superintendent
to comply with the purposes and intent of this chapter, the POTW’s NPDES
permit, and other applicable local, state, or and federal laws and regulations.
The reduction, elimination, or alteration of pollutants may be obtained by
physical, chemical, or biological processes; process changes; or any other
means.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT CAPACITY. The POTW’s ability, as determined by the POTW
Superintendent, to accept and treat wastewater from any source or user,
consistent with the POTW’s design and condition and in compliance with
applicable local, state and federal laws and regulations, including, but not
limited to, this chapter, the POTW’s NPDES permit, and other applicable local,
state, and federal laws and regulations.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT SERVICE. The acceptance for treatment by the city of a
user’s discharges to the POTW in compliance with this chapter and other
applicable local, state and federal laws and regulations.
   WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously
or intermittently.
   WATERS OF THE STATE. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses,
waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage
systems, and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or
underground, natural or artificial, public or private, that are contained
within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion of the state, and
as otherwise specified by applicable laws and regulations.
   WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES. All waters as defined by 40 C.F.R. Part 122.2
and as otherwise specified by applicable laws and regulations.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
ARTICLE III. DISPOSAL OF SEWAGE AND WASTEWATER
Sec. 35-4. DEPOSITING WASTES UPON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the
city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal
excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-5. SEWAGE AND WASTEWATER DISCHARGES.
   Except as otherwise expressly permitted by local, state and federal laws and
regulations, and subject to obtaining all required permits and approvals from
governmental agencies (including, without limitation, the city, the MDNRE, and
the U.S. EPA) and providing any required treatment, it shall be unlawful to
discharge, or permit or cause to be discharged, either directly or indirectly:
   A.   Polluted water, sewage or wastewater to any natural outlet within the
city, to any waters of the state (or waters of the United States), or to any
public sewer; or
   B.   Unpolluted water of any kind, including, without limitation, storm
water, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, artesian well water, drainage
water (surface or subsurface), industrial non-contact cooling water, air-
conditioning water, swimming pool water, or industrial process waters to any
sanitary sewer.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-6. PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS.
   Except as provided by this chapter, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain within the city any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or
other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage or wastewater.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-7. PRIVATE SYSTEM REQUIRED IF PUBLIC SEWER NOT AVAILABLE.
   All houses, buildings, or properties which are required by law to have
domestic or nondomestic wastewater facilities, and which are located where the
POTW is not available or required as provided by § 
35-12 of this chapter, shall be equipped at the owner’s expense with suitable
wastewater facilities connected to a private wastewater disposal system which
complies with the requirements of this article and with all applicable state
and county health and sanitation requirements.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-8. SOIL EVALUATION TEST; PERMIT REQUIRED TO INSTALL AND OPERATE PRIVATE
SYSTEM.
   Before commencement of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall
first apply to the Allegan County Health Department for a soil evaluation test.
The fee shall be determined by the Allegan County Health Department, and shall
be paid by the property owner to the Allegan County Health Department. If the
soil evaluation test shows positive results, the property owner may apply for a
permit to install and operate the proposed sewage system. The owner shall
include plans, specifications and other information as deemed necessary by the
Allegan County Health Department, and shall pay any additional fees required.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-9. INSPECTION OF PRIVATE SEWAGE SYSTEMS REQUIRED.
   A permit to operate a private sewage disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the
Allegan County Health Department. The County Health Department shall be allowed
to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the
applicant for the permit shall notify the Allegan County Health Department when
the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are
covered. The inspection shall be made within seven days of the receipt of
notice by the Allegan County Health Department. All persons receiving a permit
for a private sewer disposal system shall provide the City Administrator with
copies of all final approved inspection reports issued by the Allegan County
Health Department.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-10. TYPE, CAPACITIES, LOCATION AND LAYOUT.
   The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal
system shall comply with all recommendations of the Allegan County Health
Department. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any
public sewer or waters of the state.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-11. OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE.
   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities
in full compliance with all applicable laws and regulations and in a sanitary
manner at all times, and at no expense to the city.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-12. CONNECTION TO PUBLIC SEWER REQUIRED IF AVAILABLE; TIME LIMIT.
   A.   The owner of any house, building, or property used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the city, and
abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located, or
may in the future be located, a public sanitary or combined sewer of the city,
is hereby required at the owner’s expense to install suitable toilet facilities
therein, and to connect the facilities directly with the proper public sewer in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Connection with the public
sewer under this section shall be required within six months after the date of
official notice to connect, if the public sewer is within 200 feet of the
house, building or property from which sanitary sewage emanates, or if required
by the Allegan County Health Department.
   B.   Any septic tanks, cesspools, or similar wastewater disposal facilities
which are abandoned or discontinued as required by this section shall, within
three months of being connected to the public sewer, be emptied of wastes and
filled with clean gravel, dirt or other suitable material to prevent collapse.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-13. WASTE DISCHARGE PROHIBITED EXCEPT THROUGH APPROVED SEWER
CONNECTION.
   All discharges to a sewer shall be through an approved sewer connection or
at another discharge point expressly approved by the POTW in accordance with
this chapter. No person shall discharge any waste or other substances into a
manhole, catch basin or inlet.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-14. ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with
any additional requirements that may be imposed by the city or other applicable
authorities.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
ARTICLE IV. BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
Sec. 35-15. BUILDING SEWER CONNECTION PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No unauthorized person shall uncover, use, alter, disturb, or make any
connections with or opening into any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written building sewer connection permit from the
City Administrator.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-16. CLASSES OF BUILDING SEWER CONNECTION PERMITS; APPLICATION.
   There shall be two classes of building sewer connection permits, as follows:
Class I, for residential and commercial service; and Class II, for service to
establishments producing industrial and/or manufacturing wastes. In either
case, the owner or the owner’s agent shall apply on a form furnished by the
city and pay the permit and inspection fee required by this section at the time
the application is submitted. The permit application shall be supplemented by
any plans, specifications, or other information considered necessary in the
judgment of the City Administrator to administer this article. The permit and
inspection fees for building sewer connection permits shall be as determined
from time to time by resolution of the City Council in an amount sufficient to
reimburse the city for administrative costs, review of plans and specifications
and field inspections. The city may deny a building sewer connection permit if
the application for the permit shows that anticipated discharges will be
harmful to the POTW or storm sewer, will violate the provisions of this
chapter, or in any other way will hamper the operation of the POTW or storm
sewer.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-17. SEPARATE SEWER FOR EVERY BUILDING; EXCEPTION.
   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building. Independent building sewers and/or control manholes may also be
required for separate uses within a building, as determined necessary by the
POTW Superintendent. However, where one building stands at the rear of another
on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to
the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the
building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and
the whole considered as one building sewer, if the extension conforms with the
adopted plumbing code standards. Exceptions may also be considered by the POTW
Superintendent for integrated manufacturing facilities with process or assembly
connections between buildings. The city assumes no responsibility for damage
caused by or resulting from any single building sewer which serves more than
one building.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-18. EXISTING BUILDING SEWERS.
   Existing building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the Plumbing Inspector, or an
authorized representative, to meet all requirements of this chapter and
applicable plumbing code standards.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-19. APPLICABLE CODE PROVISIONS, REGULATIONS.
   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer,
and the methods to be used in excavating, placing the pipe, jointing, testing
and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the
building and plumbing codes, or other applicable rules and regulations of the
city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the
materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
American Society for Testing Materials (A.S.T.M.) and the Water Pollution
Control Federation (W.P.C.F.) shall apply.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-20. ELEVATION.
   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an
elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building
drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage
carried by the building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer at the expense of the owner.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-21. CONNECTION OF SURFACE RUNOFF OR GROUNDWATER PROHIBITED.
   No person shall make connection of roof down spouts, exterior foundation
drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a
building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer without the prior written permission of
the POTW Superintendent.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-22. CONNECTION TO PUBLIC SEWER.
   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to
the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules
and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications, which shall require that the connections shall be made gas-
tight and water-tight and shall be verified by proper testing. Any deviation
from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved in writing by the
plumbing inspector, or an authorized representative, before installation.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-23. INSPECTION AND CONNECTION.
   The applicant for the building sewer connection permit shall notify the
plumbing inspector when the building sewer is ready for inspection and
connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the
supervision of the Plumbing inspector, or an authorized city representative.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-24. EXCAVATIONS; CONDITIONS OF WORK.
   All excavating for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the
work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the Superintendent of Public
Works.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-25. PRETREATMENT OF ANY DISCHARGE MAY BE REQUIRED.
   Pretreatment of any discharge to the public sewer, including, but not
limited to, grease, oil, and sand interceptors, shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the POTW Superintendent, they are necessary. All pretreatment
facilities shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Superintendent, and
shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-26. WASTEWATER TREATMENT CAPACITY.
   No connections to the public sewer will be allowed unless there is
sufficient wastewater treatment service capacity available (in terms of
concentration, mass, flow or other parameter) as determined by the POTW
Superintendent, in the POTW, including, but not limited to, downstream sewers,
pump stations, interceptors, force mains and the POTW treatment plant.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-27 DISRUPTION OF SERVICE.
   The city shall not be held responsible for claims made against it by reason
of the breaking of any sewer or service laterals, or by reason of any other
interruption of the service caused by the breaking of machinery or stoppage for
necessary repairs; and no person shall be entitled to damages nor have any
portion of a payment refunded for any interruption.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-28. SERVICE INSPECTIONS.
   All premises receiving sanitary sewer service shall at all times be subject
to inspection by duly authorized personnel of the city.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
ARTICLE V. EXTENSIONS TO SYSTEM
Sec. 35-29. EXTENSIONS OF PUBLIC SEWERS.
   The city may extend public sewers under any of the following circumstances:
   A.   After approval of the City Council following a public hearing, the city
may extend sewers to complete or expand the existing sanitary sewer system to
protect the health, safety and welfare of its citizens. Property owners may be
assessed in accordance with an adopted special assessment ordinance.
   B.   At the request of citizens for the city to extend the sewer, by
petition containing the signatures of a majority of the property owner along
both sides of the fronting road.
   C.   At the request of a private developer for the city to extend public
sewers to and through the property of the developer, if the developer advances
to the city the total costs of the project as estimated and approved by the
City Engineer. Applicable facility units shall be paid at the time of
connection to the sewer. If there are properties that will benefit from the
extension of the sewer, the contractor may be refunded accordingly per
contractual agreement.
   D.   At the request of a local unit of government adjacent to the city to
extend the sewer, provided a signed contractual agreement has been made between
the City and the governmental unit making the request.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
ARTICLE VI. DISCHARGE TO THE POTW - PROHIBITIONS,  LIMITATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 35-30. STORM WATER AND UNPOLLUTED DISCHARGES.
   Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage and discharges (including, but
not limited to, industrial non-contact cooling water) shall be discharged to
sewers that are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or
to the waters of the state, but only if all applicable permits and approvals
have first been obtained from the city and other governmental bodies or
agencies, and only if not prohibited by applicable local, state or federal laws
or regulations. If any person drains or discharges any unpolluted water by
means of conductors, sump pumps, eaves troughs, roof downspouts, footing
drains, or otherwise, directly or indirectly, into a storm sewer, or natural
outlet in violation of applicable laws or regulations, or into a sanitary
sewer, the POTW Superintendent shall order its disconnection at the property
owner’s expense, and if the property owner refuses to obey the order of the
POTW Superintendent, then the city shall disconnect the connection and the
costs shall be charged to the property owner.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-31. GENERAL DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.
   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the POTW, directly
or indirectly, any pollutant), including oxygen demanding pollutants, released
in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which causes pass
through or interference. This general prohibition, and the specific discharge
prohibitions in § 
35-32 of this article shall apply to every user whether or not the user is
subject to any other national, state or local pretreatment standards or
requirements, and whether or not the discharge is made pursuant to a user
permit issued pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-32. SPECIFIC DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.
   No person shall discharge or contribute to the POTW, directly or indirectly,
any of the pollutants, substances, or wastewater as provided by this Section.
This Section sets forth the minimum requirements for discharges to the POTW.
Additional or more restrictive requirements may be required of particular Users
under a User Permit, or as otherwise authorized or required by this Chapter or
other applicable laws and regulations.
   A.   Standard Concentration Limits. Except as otherwise provided by Section
35-32(B) (“Headworks Mass Limits”), or unless a Special Alternative Limit for a
pollutant parameter has been developed for a User as provided by Section
35-34, no person shall discharge or contribute to the POTW, directly or
indirectly, pollutants in concentrations that exceed the daily maximum or
instantaneous maximum concentrations listed below in this subsection
35-32(A):
Parameter Daily Maximum (mg/l) Instantaneous Maximum
Parameter            Daily Maximum (mg/l) Instantaneous Maximum
Arsenic              0.23                 - - -
Cadmium              0.2                  - - -
Chromium (T)         2.0                  - - -
Chromium, Hexavalent 0.1                  - - -
Copper               1.0                  - - -
Cyanides (T)         0.1                  - - -
Lead                 0.4                  - - -
Mercury              NQ2                  NQ2
Molybdenum           2.0                  - - -
Nickel               1.0                  - - -
PCBs (T)             ND3                  ND3
Phenol (T)           1.54                 - - -
Selenium             0.27                 - - -
Silver               0.44                 - - -
Zinc                 3.0                  - - -
Ammonia Nitrogen     506                  - - -
(NH3 as N)5
BOD5                 6107                 - - -
Phosphorous (T)5     728                  - - -
TSS4                 5039                 - - -
 
 
Notes
1.   Discharges that contain more than one pollutant that may contribute to fume
toxicity shall be subject to more restrictive limitations, as determined necessary
by the POTW. The more restrictive discharge limits will be calculated based on the
additive fume toxicity of all compounds identified or reasonably expected to be
present in the discharge, including, without limitation, the specific compounds,
if any, listed in this Section
35-32.
See also, Section
35-35(D), regarding application of most restrictive or additional standards or
requirements under local, state, and federal laws and regulations.
In place of using the Standard Concentration Limits, the POTW Superintendent may
allocate specified portions of the available total load to individual Users as
provided by Section
35-32(B) (“Headworks Mass Limits”). A User may also request the POTW
Superintendent to develop alternative concentration limits to be used in place of
the Standard Concentration Limits for specific pollutants (“Special Alternative
Limits” or “SALs”) as provided by Section
35-34.
2.   The instantaneous maximum and daily maximum discharge limit for Mercury is
non-quantifiable concentration, defined as a concentration at or below the
quantification level of 0.2 ug/l using U.S. EPA Method 245.1 (or at or below other
quantification levels applicable under alternative test methods required by the
POTW or by other applicable laws or regulations). Mercury sampling procedures,
preservation and handling, and analytical protocol for compliance monitoring of a
User’s discharge shall be in accordance with U.S. EPA method 245.1, unless the
POTW Superintendent requires U.S. EPA Method 1631 (or other appropriate method).
The quantification level shall be 0.2 ug/l for Method 245.1 or 0.5 ng/l for Method
1631, unless higher levels are approved by the POTW Superintendent because of
sample matrix interference. Any discharge of mercury at or above the level of
quantification is a specific violation of this Chapter.
3.   The instantaneous maximum and daily maximum discharge limit for PCBs is non-
detect. Except as otherwise required by the POTW Superintendent, compliance with
this limit shall be determined as follows:
A compliance limit of “non-detect” shall he used for instantaneous maximum and
daily maximum. Any discharge of PCBs at or above the quantification level is a
specific violation of this Chapter.
PCB sampling procedures, preservation and handling, and analytical protocol for
compliance monitoring of a User’s discharge shall be in accordance with U.S. EPA
method 608. The quantification level shall be 0.1 ug/l, unless higher levels are
determined appropriate by the POTW Superintendent because of sample matrix
interference. Total PCBs shall be defined as the sum of the Aroclors 1016, 1221,
1232, 1242, 1248, 1254 and 1260. In addition, any detected Aroclor-specific
measurements shall be reported.
4.   Total phenol is defined as the sum of any of the following phenolic
compounds: 2-Chlorophenol, 4-Chlorophenol, 2,4-Dicholorophenol, 2,4-
Dimenthylphenol, 2-Methylphenol, 2-Nitrophenol, 4-Nitrophenol and Phenol.
 
 
5.   For Ammonia Nitrogen, BOD, Phosphorous and TSS, the listed daily maximum
limits are the concentrations which may not be exceeded and at which enforcement
begins. The surcharge threshold concentrations as specified in notes 5 through 8
below are the concentrations above which surcharges may be imposed. Discharges
exceeding the surcharge thresholds, but which are less than the daily maximum
limits (and which do not violate any other applicable prohibitions, limitations
or requirements), are not violations of this Chapter, but are subject to
surcharges as provided by this Chapter. All violations of applicable discharge
prohibitions and limitations and all instances of noncompliance with applicable
discharge requirements constitute a violation of this Chapter, subject to
applicable fines, penalties and other enforcement actions. In no event shall the
imposition of a surcharge for a discharge which does not meet the applicable
prohibitions, limitations or requirements be construed as authorizing the
illegal discharge or otherwise excuse a violation of this Chapter.
6.   Any discharge of ammonia nitrogen in excess of 37 mg/l (daily maximum)
shall be subject to surcharge as provided by this Chapter.
7.   Any discharge of BOD in excess of 325 mg/l (daily maximum) shall be subject
to surcharge as provided by this Chapter.
8.   Any discharge of Total Phosphorous in excess of 9 mg/l (daily maximum)
shall be subject to surcharge as provided by this Chapter.
9.   Any discharge of TSS in excess of 350 mg/l (daily maximum) shall be subject
to surcharge as provided by this Chapter.
 
   B.   Headworks Mass Limits. In place of using the Standard Concentration
Limits provided in Section
35-32(A), or a SAL concentration limit developed for a User under Section
35-34, the POTW Superintendent may allocate specified portions of the available
reserve loadings to an individual User as provided by this Section
35-32(B).
      1.   As of the effective date of this Chapter, the maximum allowable
headworks loadings (MAHL), the maximum allowable industrial loadings (MAIL),
and the available reserve loadings for the following pollutant parameters are
as follows:
 
Pollutant  MAHL         MAIL         Available Reserve Loadings
           (pounds/day) (pounds/day) (pounds/day)
BOD5       1373         667          540
TSS        1398         580          475
Ammonia    249          105          95
Phosphorus 64           40           25
 
      2.   The POTW Superintendent may allocate portions of the available
reserve loadings for one or more of the pollutants listed in the table in
Section
35-32(B)(l) to one or more specific individual Users.
      3.   The amounts of the loadings allocated to each User shall be
specified in the User’s User Permit, along with any conditions as determined
necessary by the POTW Superintendent. The allocation may be specified in the
form of an equivalent calculated daily maximum concentration limit (mg/l) or as
a daily maximum loading (pounds/day), as determined appropriate by the POTW
Superintendent based on the quality and quantity of the user’s discharge. Any
discharge by a User in excess of the amount of the loadings allocated to the
User in the User Permit shall constitute a violation of the User Permit and
this Chapter.
      4.   The POTW shall keep a record of how much of the available reserve
loadings for each parameter listed above has been allocated and maintain at all
times a current total of how much remains available for allocation consistent
with the requirements of this Section
35-32(B).
      5.   Before allocating any amount of the available reserve loadings as
provided by this Section 
35-32(B), the POTW Superintendent must determine that the proposed allocation
will not cause the average composite loading of all Users discharging to the
POTW to exceed the MAHL, MAIL, or available reserve loadings as provided by the
table in Section
35-32(B)(1); will not interfere with the POTW’s ability to accept and treat
wastewater as required by the POTW’s NPDES Permit and other applicable laws and
regulations; and that the allocation is otherwise reasonable and appropriate
under all of the circumstances.
      6.   If the POTW Superintendent allocates a portion of the available
reserve loadings for some, but not all, of the pollutant parameters listed in
the table in Section
35-32(B)(1) to a User, any pollutant parameter in the User’s discharge that is
not allocated a portion of the available reserve loadings shall be subject to
Standard Concentration Limits provided by Section
35-32(A), or the Special Alternative Limit for the pollutant parameter, if any,
that has been developed for the User under Section
35-34.
      7.   The allocation of available reserve loadings to an individual User
for a pollutant shall not affect the applicability of surcharges to the
pollutant (or any other pollutant in the User’s discharge) as provided by
Section
35-32(A).
      8.   Unless determined otherwise by the POTW Superintendent, all costs
and expenses, direct and indirect, associated with developing a Headworks Mass
Limit for a User shall be paid for by the User, including, but not limited to,
the costs of reviewing the appropriateness of a proposed Headworks Mass Limit,
all studies and reports, and all monitoring, sampling and generation of data;
the full value of any City staff time (including any administrative and
overhead costs and any required overtime), consultant and engineering fees, and
actual attorney fees (including the POTW’s legal counsel and any special legal
counsel), associated with developing the Headworks Mass Limit for a User.
      9.   At anytime prior to or during the Headworks Mass Limit development
process, the POTW may require a User that will be subject to the limit to post
a performance bond (or other form of surety acceptable to the POTW
Superintendent) sufficient to cover all costs and expenses (direct and/or
indirect) that might reasonably be incurred by the POTW in developing the
limit, as determined necessary by the POTW Superintendent.
      10.   If determined necessary by the POTW Superintendent, an updated
maximum allowable headworks loading (MAHL) study shall be done at the expense
of the User that will be subject to the Headworks Mass Limit. The MAHL shall be
representative of the current flow and loading conditions at the POTW and
demonstrate that there is sufficient available reserve loadings for the
allocation of the specific pollutants to which the Headworks Mass Limit will
apply. The MAHL study shall take into consideration the total load from all
Users and the allocation of load from the study shall be divided as determined
appropriate by the POTW Superintendent.
      11.   The POTW Superintendent may require a User to submit any
information that the POTW determines will be necessary to adequately evaluate
the appropriateness of a proposed Headworks Mass Limit. This information may
include, but shall not be limited to, any of the information that is required
to be provided in a User Permit application as set forth by Section
35-44 of this Chapter. If deemed necessary by the POTW Superintendent, a site
inspection may be required. Further, the POTW Superintendent may require a
review of historical data from sampling and monitoring the User’s discharge,
including, but not limited to, concentration and flow data. The User may be
required to update this data using any means or methods determined necessary by
the POTW Superintendent. The POTW Superintendent may also require a review of
typical discharge concentrations and flows for similar Users, and any
applicable categorical standards.
      12.   After the proposed Headworks Mass Limit and associated monitoring
frequency have been prepared, the POTW Superintendent shall determine whether
or not to approve the limit, or to approve the limit subject to whatever
conditions the POTW Superintendent deems appropriate. If approved, or approved
subject to conditions, the User may accept or reject the Headworks Mass Limit
and associated monitoring frequency. If the User accepts the Headworks Mass
Limit, the POTW Superintendent may modify or reissue the User’s discharge
permit to incorporate the limit and associated monitoring frequency, and any
other conditions or requirements as determined appropriate by the POTW
Superintendent.
      13.   The allocation of load for a pollutant parameter shall not convey
to any person any property rights or privilege of any kind whatsoever, nor
shall it be construed to authorize any injury to private or public property or
any invasion of personal rights, or any violation of local, state or federal
laws or regulations. An allocation may be reviewed, reevaluated, modified, and/
or revoked without notice at any time and for any reason determined appropriate
by the POTW Superintendent. At a minimum, all existing allocations shall be
reviewed whenever the POTW’s NPDES permit is subject to renewal.
      14.   Except as otherwise expressly provided by this Section
35-32(B), the allocation of available reserve loadings for a pollutant as
provided by this Section shall not affect a User’s obligation to comply with
any of the requirements and standards of this Chapter and other applicable laws
and regulations.
   C.   Additional Discharge Prohibitions. In addition to the prohibitions set
forth in Sections
35-32(A) and
35-32(B), no person shall discharge or contribute to the POTW, directly or
indirectly, any of the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater:
      1.   Any liquid, solid, gas or other pollutant (including, but not
limited to, gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel or fuel oil) which by reason of
its nature or quantity is sufficient either alone or by interaction with other
substances to create a fire or explosion hazard or be injurious in any other
way to persons, the POTW, or to the operation of the sewerage system,
including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup flashpoint of
less than 140° F or 60° C using test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
      2.   Pollutants that may cause corrosive structural damage to the POTW,
or that due to their corrosive properties are capable of causing injury to
persons or POTW personnel or harm to fish, animals or the environment.
Discharges that have a pH lower than 6.5 s.u. (instantaneous minimum limit) or
greater than 9.5 s.u. (instantaneous maximum limit) shall not be discharged.
      3.   Any solid, insoluble or viscous substance in concentrations or
quantities which may cause obstruction to the flow in the POTW, may create an
encumbrance to the POTW operations, or which otherwise may result in
interference, including, but not limited to, grease, animal entrails or
tissues, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, whole blood, feathers, ashes,
cinders, sand, cement, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw,
shavings, grass clippings, rags, strings, fibers, spent grains, spent hops,
wastepaper, wood, plastics, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or
processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud or glass grinding or polishing
wastes or tumbling and deburring stones; or any material that can be disposed
of as trash.
      4.   Any pollutant, including, but not limited to, oxygen demanding
pollutants (BOD, etc.), released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration
that may cause pass through or interference with the POTW or constitute a slug
load, or is otherwise discharged to the POTW in excessive amounts.
      5.   Wastewater (or vapor) having a temperature that will inhibit
biological activity in the POTW or result in interference, or heat in such
quantities that the temperature at any lift station or at the POTW treatment
plant exceeds 104° Fahrenheit (40° C). No discharge to the POTW shall have a
temperature less than 40° Fahrenheit (4.4° C) or greater than 135° Fahrenheit
(57.2° C), unless approved in advance by the POTW Superintendent.
      6.   Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral
oil origin in amounts that may cause interference or pass through.
      7.   Pollutants that result in the presence of gases, vapors or fumes
within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety
problems. This prohibition includes, but is not limited to, wastewaters which
contain liquids, solids or gases that cause gases, vapors or fumes from the
discharge to exceed 10% of the immediately dangerous to life and health (IDLH)
concentration. Discharges that contain more than one pollutant that may
contribute to fume toxicity shall be subject to more restrictive limitations,
as determined necessary by the POTW. The more restrictive discharge limits
shall be calculated based on the additive fume toxicity of all compounds
identified or reasonably expected to be present in the discharge.
      8.   Substances that, either alone or by interaction with other
substances, cause or substantially contribute to increases in sewer gas
hydrogen sulfide levels above 10 parts per million vapor (ppmv) concentration
in downstream collection system lift stations, manholes or sewers. If the POTW
Superintendent determines that a User’s discharge is in violation of this
prohibition, the POTW Superintendent may require the User to take whatever
actions are determined necessary and appropriate by the POTW Superintendent to
reduce the concentration of sewer gas hydrogen sulfide levels to less than 10
ppmv.
      9.   Trucked or hauled pollutants, except those introduced into the
system at discharge points designated by the POTW, subject to the prior
approval of the POTW Superintendent and prior issuance of a User Permit.
         a.   The POTW Superintendent shall determine whether to allow the
discharge of trucked or hauled pollutants based on the particular nature,
character or quantity of the proposed discharge in accordance with the
discharge prohibitions, limitations and requirements provided by this Chapter.
         b.   The POTW Superintendent may impose any conditions on the
discharge determined necessary to ensure compliance with this Chapter,
including, without limitation, conditions regarding the time, place, and manner
of discharge, restrictions on the quantity and quality of the discharge, and
sampling requirements.
         c.   The discharge shall not commence without prior notice to, and
authorization from, the POTW Superintendent, and a representative of the POTW
shall be present at all times during the discharge.
         d.   All trucked or hauled wastes to be discharged to the POTW must be
accompanied by a completed waste manifest form signed by the permittee and the
hauler as provided by the minimum requirements of this Subsection. The
permittee shall certify in writing on the manifest as to the source of all
wastes in the load proposed to be discharged and that the wastes have been
pretreated as required by applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.
The hauler shall certify in writing on the manifest that the hauler has
accepted no wastes other than those listed on the manifest. The manifest must
be reviewed by the POTW Superintendent prior to commencing discharge of the
load. Failure to accurately record every load, falsification of data, or
failure to transmit the form to the POTW Superintendent for review prior to
discharge shall constitute a violation of the permit and may result in
revocation of the permit and/or the imposition of fines and penalties as
provided by this Chapter.
         e.   The permittee’s discharge of hauled wastes shall be subject to
sampling by the POTW at any time, including, without limitation, prior to and
during discharge. The POTW Superintendent may require the permittee to refrain
from, or suspend, discharging until the sample analysis is complete.
         f.   Trucked or hauled pollutants will be accepted only if transported
to the POTW in compliance with state and federal hazardous waste and liquid
industrial waste laws.
         g.   Each discharge of trucked or hauled pollutants will be accepted
only after payment to the POTW of a trucked or hauled pollutant discharge fee
to cover the POTW’s administrative, consulting and legal expenses, and any
additional treatment, handling or inspection expenses incurred by the POTW in
connection with the discharge. The fee shall be established, paid, and
collected as provided for IPP fees by Article XXI. This discharge fee shall be
in addition to any sewer rates, fees, charges, or surcharges otherwise required
by this Chapter.
      10.   Wastewater with objectionable color or light absorbency
characteristics that may interfere with treatment processes or analytical
determinations, including, without limitation, dye wastes and vegetable tanning
solutions.
      11.   Any garbage or other solid material that has not been properly
shredded.
      12.   Solvent extractibles, including, without limitation, oil, grease,
wax, or fat, whether emulsified or not, in excess of applicable local limits;
or other substances that may solidify or become viscous (with a viscosity of
110% of water) at temperatures between 32° Fahrenheit and 150° Fahrenheit in
amounts that may cause obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference
with the operation of the POTW.
      13.   Soluble substances in a concentration that may increase the
viscosity to greater than 10% over the viscosity of the water or in amounts
that will cause obstruction to the flow in the POTW resulting in interference.
      14.   Any substance that exerts or causes a high or unusual concentration
of inert suspended solids, as determined by the POTW Superintendent, including,
but not limited to, lime slurries, diatomaceous earth and lime residues.
      15.   Any wastewater that contains suspended solids of such character,
quantity or concentration that special attention is required, or additional
expense inclined, to process such materials at the POTW.
      16.   Any substance that exerts or causes a high or unusual concentration
of dissolved solids, including, but not limited to, sodium chloride or sodium
sulfate.
      17.   Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, fumes, or solids that either
singly or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a public
nuisance, cause workplace conditions in violation of any applicable workplace
health or safety standard, pose a hazard to life, sufficient to prevent entry
into the sewers for maintenance and repair, or cause any hazardous or unsafe
conditions for the general public.
      18.   Anti-freeze, motor oil, brake fluid, transmission fluid, hydraulic
fluid, cleaning solvents, oil-based paint, water-based paint with mercury
biocides and paint thinners.
      19.   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of a half-life or concentration
that may exceed limits established by applicable City, state or federal laws,
rules or regulations.
      20.   Any pollutant that results in excess foaming during the treatment
process. Excess foaming is any foam that, in the opinion of the POTW
Superintendent, may interfere with the treatment process.
      21.   Wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere
with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or
animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the POTW, or to
exceed the limitation set forth in a categorical pretreatment standard.
      22.   Any hazardous waste as defined by this Chapter.
      23.   Any medical waste, or infectious waste as defined by the MDEQ.
      24.   Any substance that may cause the POTW’s effluent or any other
product of the POTW such as residues, sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for
reclamation, reuse or disposal, or otherwise interfere with the reclamation,
reuse, or disposal process. In no case shall a substance discharged to the POTW
cause the POTW to be in non-compliance with sludge use or disposal criteria,
guidelines or regulations developed under Section 405 of the Act; under the
Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including Title II, more commonly referred to
as RCRA, and including State regulations contained in any State sludge
management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA); the Clean Air
Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; the Marine Protection, Research, and
Sanctuaries Act; or any more stringent state or local regulations, as
applicable.
      25.   Any unpolluted water, including but not limited to, non-contact
cooling water, air-conditioning water, swimming pool water, stormwater, surface
water, groundwater, roof runoff, and surface or subsurface drainage (except to
a storm sewer as authorized by this Chapter and other applicable local, state,
and federal laws and regulations, and subject to the prior approval of the POTW
Superintendent and the MDEQ).
      26.   Any contaminated groundwater or landfill leachate determined by the
POTW to have a reasonable potential to adversely affect the operation of the
POTW, to result in pass through or interference, or to violate any pretreatment
standard or requirement.
      27.   Any substance that will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES permit,
the receiving water quality standards, or associated local, state or federal
laws, rules or regulations.
      28.   Any substance which causes a high chlorine demand, including, but
not limited to, nitrite, cyanide, thiocyanate, sulfite and thiosulfate.
      29.   Any wastewater that exceeds applicable categorical pretreatment
standards, requirements or limits prescribed by local, state or federal laws,
rules or regulations.
      30.   Any compatible or incompatible pollutant in excess of the allowed
limits as determined by applicable local, state or federal laws, rules or
regulations.
      31.   Any sludge, precipitate or waste resulting from any industrial or
commercial treatment or pretreatment of any person’s wastewater or air
pollutants.
      32.   Residue (total on evaporation) in an amount that will cause
obstruction to the flow in the POTW resulting in interference.
      33.   Water or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment to only such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction
over discharge to the receiving waters.
      34.   Any nondomestic wastewater before the POTW has approved a Notice of
Intent submitted according to Section
35-65.
      35.   Waste not typically discharged to a sanitary sewer system unless
specifically authorized by the POTW pursuant to policies and procedures
established by the City and subject to limitations set forth in this Chapter.
      36.   Any mass, concentration or volume of a substance in excess of the
amount allowed in the User’s User Permit.
      37.   Any discharge with an average daily flow greater than 2% of the
POTW’s average daily wastewater flow, or having a rate of flow (gallons per
day) greater than 10% of the POTW’s average daily wastewater flow for a period
of one hour or more, except with the prior review and approval of the POTW.
      38.   Any pollutant, substance, or wastewater that, cither directly or
indirectly, and either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, has a
reasonable potential to:
         a.   Create a chemical reaction with any materials of construction to
impair the strength or durability of sewer structures;
         b.   Cause a mechanical action that will damage or destroy sewer
structures;
         c.   Impede or restrict the hydraulic capacity of the POTW;
         d.   Interfere with normal inspection or maintenance of sewer
structures;
         e.   Place unusual demands upon the wastewater treatment equipment or
processes by biological, chemical or physical means; or
         f.   Cause a hazard to human life or create a public nuisance.
(Ord. 372, passed 3-16-2015)
Sec. 35-33. POLLUTANT REDUCTION PLANS.
   If the POTW Superintendent determines that a user has the reasonable
potential to discharge any regulated pollutant (including, but not limited to,
mercury or PCBs) to the POTW in quantities or magnitude that may cause
interference or pass through; adversely impact the POTW, its processes or
beneficial use of biosolids; cause noncompliance with applicable federal or
state laws or regulations; cause the POTW to violate its NPDES permit, or
otherwise fail to meet the purposes and objectives of this chapter, then the
POTW Superintendent may require the user to develop, submit for approval, and
implement a reduction plan (RP) for the pollutant, as provided by this section.
The RP may be imposed as a condition to a user permit, or may be required
independently and even if a user permit has not been issued to the user.
   A.   At a minimum, the RP shall contain such requirements and conditions, as
determined necessary by the POTW Superintendent to ensure that the pollutant
reduction efforts will be effective in achieving the goals of this chapter
(including, but not limited to, requirements and conditions regarding user
source identification; best management practices; schedules of compliance;
monitoring, sampling and analysis; reporting; treatment system for removal of
the pollutant from the discharged wastewater; written procedures for disposal
of contaminated wastes and wastewater; employee training, and on-going employee
training requirements regarding pollutant related issues; elimination, if
feasible, of any purchased materials containing the pollutant; and any other
elements determined necessary and appropriate under the circumstances by the
POTW Superintendent).
   B.   The goal of an RP shall be to maintain the amount of one or more
pollutants or substances at or below the applicable discharge limits or levels,
or such other goals as required by the POTW. The POTW Superintendent may, in
the POTW Superintendent’s discretion, consider cost-effectiveness during the
development and implementation of an RP.
   C.   The POTW Superintendent may require any user to submit an RP that
describes the control strategy designed to proceed toward achievement of the
specified goal and shall at a minimum include, but shall not be limited to, all
of the following as determined necessary by the POTW Superintendent on a case-
by-case basis:
      1.   Periodic monitoring for the pollutant in the user’s discharge.
      2.   Periodic monitoring of the potential sources of the pollutant in the
user’s discharge.
      3.   A commitment by the user that reasonable control measures and/or
best management practices will be implemented when sources of the pollutant are
discovered. Factors to be considered by the POTW may include the following:
         a.   Significance of sources.
         b.   Economic considerations.
         c.   Technical and treatability considerations.
         d.   Such other factors as determined appropriate by the POTW
Superintendent.
      4.   An annual status report. The report shall be sent by the user to the
POTW and shall include, at a minimum, all of the following:
         a.   All RP monitoring results for the previous year.
         b.   A list of potential sources of the pollutant in the user’s
discharge.
         c.   A summary of all actions taken by the user to reduce or eliminate
the identified sources of the pollutant or substance.
   D.   As determined necessary by the POTW Superintendent, the Superintendent
may require a user to develop, submit and implement an RP for any pollutant or
substance regulated by this chapter. The POTW Superintendent may also modify an
approved RP at any time as determined necessary by the POTW Superintendent to
meet the goals and objectives of this chapter.
   E.   Failure to submit an approvable RP within the specified deadlines or to
fully and timely comply with any condition or requirement of an approved RP
shall constitute a violation of this chapter, subject to the fine, penalty, and
other enforcement provisions of this chapter.
   F.   Holding enforcement action in abeyance. Except as provided for in § 
35-33F.3.f., if the effluent sample analysis results of a user’s discharge
exceeds the applicable discharge limit, detection level, or quantification
level for a pollutant, the POTW Superintendent may, in the POTW
Superintendent’s sole discretion, nevertheless allow that discharge to continue
and may hold any enforcement action regarding the prohibited discharge in
abeyance, subject to the terms, conditions, and requirements of this
subdivision F., as follows:
      1.   If an approved RP is already in place: If effluent sample analysis
results exceeds the applicable discharge limit, detection level, or
quantification level for a pollutant for which an approved RP is already in
place, then the POTW Superintendent may, in the POTW Superintendent’s sole
discretion, nevertheless allow that discharge to continue and may hold any
enforcement action regarding the prohibited discharge in abeyance for the
period that the sample represents if the RP (and all terms, conditions and
requirements thereof) is being fully and continually performed in good faith by
the user, as determined by the POTW Superintendent, and subject to all of the
requirements and conditions of § 
35-33F.3..
      2.   If an approved RP is not already in place: If effluent sample
analysis results exceeds the applicable discharge limit, detection level, or
quantification level for a pollutant for which an approved RP is not already in
place, then the POTW Superintendent may, in the POTW Superintendent’s sole
discretion, nevertheless allow that discharge to continue and may hold any
enforcement regarding the prohibited discharge in abeyance, subject to all of
the requirements and conditions of § 
35-33F.3., and provided further as follows: The user with the non-compliant
discharge shall develop and implement an RP approved by the POTW Superintendent
to minimize the user’s discharges of the pollutant in question to the POTW. The
RP shall meet all of the requirements of this division F..
      3.   The following requirements and conditions shall apply to any
situation under this division F. in which an enforcement action is held in
abeyance as provided by this division (regardless of whether or not an RP was
in place at the time of the non-compliance):
         a.   The user with the non-compliant discharge shall have a POTW-
accessible point for monitoring all discharges from the user to the POTW, as
approved by the POTW. All costs and expenses for and related to the
installation and maintenance of this monitoring point and any required sampling
devices shall be paid for solely by the user.
         b.   The user with the non-compliant discharge shall routinely self-
monitor its discharges to the POTW for the pollutant in question using the
sampling methods, procedures, preservation and handling, and analytical
protocol required by the POTW Superintendent and at the frequency specified by
the POTW Superintendent. All costs and expenses of this sampling and analysis
shall be paid for solely by the user.
         c.   The POTW may collect any additional samples of the user’s
discharge as determined necessary by the POTW Superintendent, all costs and
expenses to be paid for by the user.
         d.   If the user complies with all of the requirements and conditions
for the RP as specified by the POTW Superintendent; and if the POTW
Superintendent determines that all reasonable and cost-effective actions based
on the economic, technical, and treatability considerations, including, but not
limited to, all elements of the user’s RP, have been, and continue to be, fully
and satisfactorily implemented by the user; and if the user’s discharge does
not cause interference or pass through; adversely impact the POTW, its
processes or beneficial use of biosolids; cause noncompliance with applicable
federal or state laws or regulations; cause the POTW to violate its NPDES
permit, or otherwise fail to meet the purposes and objectives of this chapter,
then the POTW may, in its discretion, hold enforcement action in abeyance and
allow the user to continue the non-compliant discharge.
         e.   Notwithstanding any provision of this division F. to the
contrary, and regardless of whether a user fully complies with all requirements
and conditions of this section and/or of an approved RP, the POTW
Superintendent shall have the unconditional right to prohibit and terminate any
non-compliant discharge at any time and without prior notice, and to take any
enforcement action in response thereto, including any enforcement action that
had previously been held in abeyance under this division F..
         f.   Notwithstanding any provision of this division F. to the
contrary, the POTW Superintendent shall not hold an enforcement action in
abeyance as provided by this subdivision for any pollutant parameter other than
mercury and PCBs unless the POTW Superintendent has first obtained approval
from the MDNRE to implement the requirements of this division F. for the
specific pollutant parameter in question.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-34. SPECIAL ALTERNATIVE LIMITS.
   Notwithstanding the Standard Local Limits provided by Section
35-32(A), the POTW may, but shall in no case be required to, develop
alternative User-specific maximum limits (“Special Alternative Limits” or
“SAL”) for specific pollutants, as provided by this Section
35-34.
   A.   Prerequisites For SAL Development. Special Alternative Limits for
specific pollutants may be developed for a User, and the resulting SAL may be
implemented, subject to meeting all of the following conditions, as determined
by the POTW Superintendent:
      1.   All costs and expenses, direct and indirect, associated with
developing a SAL for a User shall be paid for the User, including, but not
limited to, the costs of reviewing the User’s request for a SAL, all studies
and reports, and all monitoring, sampling and generation of data; the full
value of any City staff time (including any administrative and overhead costs
and any required overtime), consultant and engineering fees, and actual
attorney fees (including the POTW’s legal counsel and any special legal
counsel), associated with developing the SAL for the User.
         At anytime prior to or during the SAL development process, the POTW
Superintendent may require a User that requests the development of a SAL to
post a performance bond (or other form of surety acceptable to the POTW
Superintendent) sufficient to cover all costs and expenses (direct and/or
indirect) that might reasonably be inclined by the POTW as a result of the
User’s request, as determined necessary by the POTW Superintendent.
      2.   A maximum allowable headworks loading (MAHL) study has been done
that is representative of the current flow and loading conditions at the POTW
and that demonstrates sufficient capacity for the change in the specific
pollutant. The MAHL study shall take into consideration the total load from all
Users and the allocation of load from the study shall be divided as determined
appropriate by the POTW Superintendent.
      3.   Any change to the load limits resulting from the SAL shall not (1)
significantly hinder the capacity of the POTW to accept additional waste from
new or existing domestic or nondomestic customers; or (2) exceed the capacity
of the POTW.
      4.   The POTW Superintendent has determined that the SAL is reasonable
and appropriate under all of the circumstances, and that it is consistent with
the purposes and objectives of this Chapter, the POTW’s NPDES permit, and other
applicable laws and regulations.
      5.   The proposed change to the load limits as a result of the SAL has
been submitted to the MDEQ and has received MDEQ approval before
implementation.
   B.   SAL Review Process. The process for the POTW Superintendent to
determine whether replacing a Standard Local Limit with a SAL is reasonable and
appropriate shall be as follows, as determined applicable by the POTW
Superintendent:
      1.   The User shall request in writing that the POTW develop a SAL for a
particular specific pollutant.
      2.   The POTW Superintendent may review the User’s request and may
require the User to submit any additional information that the POTW
Superintendent determines will be necessary to adequately evaluate the User’s
request. This information may include, but shall not be limited to, any of the
information that is required to be provided in a User Permit application as set
forth in Section
35-44 of this Chapter. If deemed necessary by the POTW Superintendent, a site
inspection may be required.
      3.   The POTW Superintendent may require a review of historical data from
sampling and monitoring the User’s discharge, including, but not limited to,
concentration and flow data. The User may be required to update this data using
any means or methods determined necessary by the POTW Superintendent. The POTW
Superintendent may also require a review of typical discharge concentrations
and flows for similar Users, and any applicable categorical standards.
      4.   The POTW Superintendent shall review the status of the current
Maximum Allowable Industrial Loadings (“MAIL”) for the pollutant for which the
SAL is being requested to determine if sufficient loading remains to
accommodate all, any part, or none, of the requested SAL.
      5.   After the proposed SAL and associated monitoring frequency have been
prepared, the POTW Superintendent shall determine whether or not to approve the
SAL, or to approve the SAL only subject to whatever conditions the
Superintendent deems appropriate.
      6.   If approved, or approved subject to conditions, the User may accept
or reject the SAL and associated monitoring frequency. If the User accepts the
SAL, the POTW Superintendent may revise and reissue the User’s discharge permit
to incorporate the SAL and associated monitoring frequency, and any other
conditions or requirements as determined appropriate by the POTW
Superintendent.
      7.   The development of a SAL or implementation of a SAL in a User’s
discharge permit shall not convey to any person any property rights or
privilege of any kind whatsoever, nor shall it be construed to authorize any
injury to private or public property or any invasion of personal rights, nor
any violation of local, state or federal laws or regulations. A SAL may be
reviewed, reevaluated, modified, and/or revoked by the POTW Superintendent
without notice at any time and for any reason determined appropriate by the
POTW Superintendent. At a minimum, all existing SALs shall be reviewed whenever
the POTW’s NPDES permit is subject to renewal.
(Ord. 372, passed 3-16-2015)
Sec. 35-35. PRETREATMENT STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS.
   A.   Compliance with applicable standards and requirements. The categorical
pretreatment standards when finalized for specific industries shall become a
part of the requirements of this chapter in accordance with federal and state
laws and regulations. A user shall comply with all categorical pretreatment
standards and any other pretreatment requirements established under the FWPCA
that are applicable to that user. A user shall also comply with all applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements established under this chapter and
other state laws and regulations.
   B.   Deadlines for compliance with categorical pretreatment standards.
Compliance by existing sources with categorical pretreatment standards shall be
within three years of the date the standard is effective unless a shorter
compliance time is specified by 40 C.F.R. Chapter I, Subchapter N. Existing
sources that become nondomestic users subsequent to promulgation of an
applicable categorical pretreatment standard shall be considered existing
nondomestic users except where such sources meet the definition of new source.
New sources shall install and have in operating condition, and shall start-up
all pollution control equipment required to meet applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements before beginning to discharge. Within the shortest
feasible time (not to exceed 90 days), new sources must meet all applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements.
   C.   Alternative categorical limits. Categorical pretreatment standards
shall apply to a user subject to categorical standards, unless an enforceable
alternative limit to the corresponding national categorical standards is
derived using any of the methods specified in MAC R 323.2313 (regarding removal
credits, fundamentally different factor variances, net/gross calculations,
equivalent mass per day limitations, and combined wastestream formula
alternative limitations). If local limits are more stringent than derived
alternative categorical limits, the local limits shall control.
   D.   Most restrictive standards and requirements apply. Notwithstanding any
provision of this chapter to the contrary, the most stringent or restrictive
standard or requirement applicable to a user’s discharge shall control, whether
established by this chapter, by any notice, order, permit, decision or
determination promulgated, issued or made by the POTW under this chapter, by
state laws or regulations, including the POTW’s NPDES permit, or by federal
laws or regulations. Further, if state or federal laws or regulations provide
for standards and requirements not covered by this chapter that are otherwise
applicable to a user’s discharge, those standards and requirements shall apply
to the user in addition to those required by this chapter, and the most
restrictive of those additional standards or requirements shall control and
shall be complied with by the user within the time period required by the law
or regulation.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-36. RESERVED RIGHT OF REVISION.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, the
city reserves the right to revise this chapter and other local laws and
regulations to establish more restrictive prohibitions, limitations or
requirements for discharges to the POTW (and to revise or revoke user permits
accordingly) or as otherwise necessary to prevent interference or pass through,
to protect the POTW, to comply with applicable federal or state laws or
regulations, to comply with the POTW’s NPDES permit, or as otherwise determined
necessary by the POTW Superintendent.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-37. POTW’S RIGHT TO REFUSE OR CONDITION DISCHARGE.
   The POTW may refuse to accept, or may condition its acceptance of, all or
any portion of any proposed or existing discharge to the POTW, regardless of
whether or not a wastewater discharge permit has been issued for the discharge,
if the POTW Superintendent determines that the discharge has a reasonable
potential to adversely affect the operation of the POTW; result in pass through
or interference; violate any pretreatment standard or requirement; cause the
POTW to violate its NPDES permit; or if the impacts of the discharge on the
POTW or the POTW’s discharge are uncertain or unknown (because, for example, no
local limits or headworks analysis has been conducted for particular pollutants
in the discharge). If the POTW Superintendent denies any person permission to
commence or continue all or any portion of a discharge to the POTW, the person
shall refrain from commencing to discharge or shall immediately terminate the
discharge to the POTW and shall not thereafter recommence discharge without
written authorization from the POTW Superintendent. Similarly, if the POTW
Superintendent denies any person permission to commence or continue all or any
portion of a discharge to the POTW except subject to conditions determined
necessary and appropriate by the POTW Superintendent, the person shall refrain
from commencing or continuing the discharge except in full compliance with
those conditions.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-38. DILUTION PROHIBITED AS SUBSTITUTE FOR TREATMENT.
   Except where expressly authorized to do so by an applicable pretreatment
standard or requirement (and subject to the prior written approval of the POTW
Superintendent), no user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in
any other way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute
for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a pretreatment standard or
requirement. The POTW may impose mass limitations on users that are using
dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements and in other
cases where the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-39. PRETREATMENT REQUIRED PRIOR TO POINT OF DISCHARGE.
   Unless specified otherwise in an user’s permit, the prohibitions and
limitations provided by this article shall apply at the point where wastewater
and pollutants are discharged or caused to be discharged into the POTW and any
required pretreatment shall be effected before that point of discharge is
reached.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-40. AUTHORITY FOR CONTROL OF DISCHARGES TO THE POTW.
   If any user discharges, or proposes to discharge wastewaters or pollutants
to the POTW which are prohibited or limited by this chapter, the Superintendent
may take any action as authorized by this chapter or other applicable law or
regulation to assure and require compliance with the provisions of this
chapter, including, but not limited to, the issuance of orders, the imposition
of surcharges, and the assessment of fines and penalties.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
ARTICLE VII. USER PERMITS
Sec. 35-41. USER PERMIT REQUIRED.
   A.   Nondomestic user permits. It is unlawful and prohibited for any
significant industrial user (SIU), or any other user as determined necessary by
the POTW Superintendent to carry out the purposes of this chapter, to discharge
to the POTW without a nondomestic user permit as provided by this article.
   B.   General user permits. For any person or user that is not an SIU (or
that is not otherwise required to obtain a nondomestic user permit), the POTW
Superintendent may require the person or user to obtain a general user permit
to discharge to the POTW, subject to such terms and conditions as are
determined necessary and appropriate by the POTW Superintendent to achieve the
purposes, policies and objectives of this chapter.
      1.   A general user permit may contain, but shall not be required to
contain, any of the terms and conditions that would apply to a nondomestic user
permit issued to a SIU as provided by this article to comply with the general
and specific discharge prohibitions of this chapter, including, but not limited
to, discharge limitations, and requirements regarding sampling and monitoring;
pretreatment; pollution prevention, minimization or reductions plans;
accidental discharge, spill prevention, and containment requirements; flow
equalization; and implementation of best management practices or a best
management practices plan.
      2.   To the extent determined appropriate by the POTW Superintendent on a
case-by-case bask otherwise applicable to permits for SIUs. However, all
general user permits shall be non-transferable, and are subject to the permit
fee and permit appeals provisions of this chapter.
      3.   It is unlawful and prohibited for any person required by the POTW
Superintendent to obtain a general user permit to discharge to the POTW without
a general user permit as provided by this article.
      4.   Failure to comply with a general user permit issued under this
subdivision constitutes a violation of this chapter.
      5.   In no case shall a general user permit be construed to authorize the
illegal discharge or otherwise excuse a violation of this chapter.
   C.   Exception. Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the
contrary, if determined necessary by the POTW Superintendent to achieve the
goals and purposes of this chapter, the Superintendent may issue a user permit
to any person without first requiring the person to submit or complete a permit
application or if a person has failed or refused to submit or complete a permit
application upon the POTW Superintendent’s request.
   D.   Violation. Any violation of the terms or conditions of a user permit is
a violation of this chapter, subject to the fine, penalty, and other
enforcement provisions of this chapter. Obtaining a user permit shall not
relieve a person of the obligation to obtain other permits or approvals that
may be required by other local, state or federal laws or regulations.
   E.   Permit limits. The issuance of a user permit shall not convey to any
person any property rights or privilege of any kind whatsoever, nor shall it be
construed to authorize any injury to private or public property or any invasion
of personal rights, nor any violation of local, state or federal laws or
regulations.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-42. DETERMINATION OF USER STATUS.
   A.   The POTW may require any person to submit information to the POTW for
its use in determining the person’s status as a user, including, but not
limited to, whether the user is a SIU, as well as to determine changes or the
absence or inadequacy of changes in a user’s facilities.
   B.   The POTW shall notify a user of the POTW’s belief that the user is, or
may be, a SIU. Upon such notification, the user must complete and submit an
application for a nondomestic user permit on a form furnished by the POTW. The
failure of the POTW to so notify a user shall not relieve any SIU of the duty
to obtain a permit as required by this chapter.
   C.   Upon determination that user permit is required, no connection to the
POTW shall be made and no discharge thereto shall occur until a permit is duly
issued; provided, however, that the POTW may at its discretion issue a written
authorization in place of a permit, which authorization shall be valid for a
period not to exceed 60 days.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-43. PERMIT APPLICATION DEADLINES.
   Each user must file an application for a user permit on the form provided by
the POTW within the following deadlines:
   A.   Existing SIUs. Any SIU discharging into the POTW as of the effective
date of this chapter shall submit a completed permit application form to the
POTW as provided by this article within 60 days of being so directed and
provided a form by the POTW.
   B.   Proposed new SIUs. Any SIU proposing to commence (or recommence)
discharging into the POTW after the effective date of this chapter shall, at
least 60 days prior to the anticipated date on which discharging will commence
(or recommence), request a permit application form and submit the completed
application to the POTW.
   C.   Categorical users subject to new standard. A user which becomes subject
to a new or revised national categorical pretreatment standard, and which has
not previously submitted an application for a permit as required herein, shall
apply to the POTW for a nondomestic user permit within 90 days after the
promulgation of the applicable national categorical pretreatment standard. The
POTW may also initiate this action; however, the failure of the POTW so to do
shall not relieve a user of its obligation to obtain a permit.
   D.   Other users. Any other user directed by the POTW to complete and submit
a user permit application shall do so within 60 days of being so directed by
the POTW and provided a form by the POTW. Any user not required to obtain a
user permit for existing discharges must apply for and receive a user permit
prior to changing the user’
   E.   Others required to file. The POTW Superintendent may also require any
other person to file the information required by § 
35-44 of this chapter (whether or not that person is currently a user, and
whether or not that person is otherwise currently discharging to the POTW, a
storm sewer, or receiving waters), if the Superintendent determines that there
is a reasonable potential for the person to discharge to the POTW, a storm
sewer, or receiving waters, whether due to an accidental spill or for any other
reason. Any person directed by the POTW Superintendent to submit the required
shall do so within the time frame as directed by the POTW Superintendent.
   F.   Failure/refusal to submit/complete an application. The failure or
refusal of any person to submit or complete a permit application shall not in
any way relieve the person from the duty to comply with a permit issued by the
POTW Superintendent. In no case shall the receipt or non-receipt of a completed
permit application prevent the issuance of a permit by the Superintendent or
relieve a person from the duty of fully complying with a permit that is issued
by the Superintendent.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-44. PERMIT APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   All users shall submit the information required by this section on the user
permit application form supplied by the POTW (or attached thereto) at a level
of detail and in units and terms as determined necessary by the POTW to
adequately evaluate the application, accompanied by payment of a permit
application review fee. A separate application and supporting documentation
shall be submitted for each separate location for which a user permit is
required.
   A.   The name, address, and location of the facility or premises from which
discharge will be made, including the names of the owner(s) and operator(s) of
the facility or premises.
   B.   Corporate or individual name, federal employer identification number,
address and telephone number of the applicant.
   C.   Whether the User is a corporation, partnership, proprietorship, or
other type of entity, and the name of the person(s) responsible for discharges
by the user.
   D.   Name and title of the local authorized representative of the user who
will have the authority to bind the applicant financially and legally, and who
is authorized by the applicant as its agent to accept service of legal process,
and the address and telephone number of such representative.
   E.   The standard industrial classification (SIC) numbers of all processes
at the location for which application is made, according to the Standard
Industrial Classification Manual, as amended (or, if applicable, the North
American Industrial Classification System (NAICS) designation).
   F.   Actual or proposed wastewater constituents and characteristics for each
parameter listed in the permit application, including, but not limited to, any
pollutants that are limited or regulated by any federal, state, or local
standards or requirements. The information provided for such parameters shall
include all of the following:
      1.   Pollutants having numeric or narrative limitations as provided by
this chapter.
      2.   Pollutants limited by National Categorical Pretreatment Standards
regulations for similar industries.
      3.   For each parameter, the expected or experienced maximum and average
concentrations during a one-year period shall be provided.
      4.   For industries subject to National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards or requirements, the data required shall be separately shown for each
categorical process wastestream and shall include all information required in
§ 
35-58A. for a baseline monitoring report.
      5.   Combined wastestreams proposed to be regulated by the combined
wastestream formula shall be specified.
   G.   For purposes of information required by the application, sampling and
analysis shall be performed in accordance with the following: Procedures
established by U.S. EPA pursuant to Section 304 (g) of the Act and as contained
in 40 C.F.R. Part 136, as amended. If 40 C.F.R. Part 136 does not include a
sampling or analytical technique for the pollutant in question, sampling and
analysis shall be performed in accordance with the procedures in U.S. EPA
publication Sampling and Analysis Procedures for Screening of Industrial
Effluents for Priority Pollutants, April 1977, and amendments or revisions
thereto, or where appropriate and applicable, in accordance with any other
sampling and analytical procedures approved by EPA, or as otherwise specified
by the POTW Superintendent.
   H.   A listing and description of the following: plant activities, plant
facilities, and plant processes on the premises for which the permit is being
applied. Processes, which are subject to National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards or requirements, shall be so designated, and identification of which
pollutants are associated with each process shall be stated.
   I.   A listing of raw materials and chemicals that are either used in the
manufacturing process or could yield the pollutants referred to in this
section. Any user claiming immunity from having to provide such information
shall furnish proof of such immunity that is acceptable to the POTW
Superintendent and in accordance with all applicable local, state, and federal
laws and regulations.
   J.   1.   A statement containing information on the spill containment and
prevention of accidental/spill discharges program for each of the pollutants
referred to in this section. The information provided shall include the
following:
         a.   The approximate average and maximum quantities of such substances
kept on the premises in the form of the following: (a) raw materials; (b)
chemicals; and/or (c) wastes therefrom; and
         b.   The containment capacity for each of the above items.
      2.   The following requirements apply for purposes of the spill
containment and prevention statement required by this subdivision:
         a.   For raw materials, chemical solutions or waste materials that do
not contain any substance on the critical materials register promulgated by the
MDNRE, only substances which are in a form which could readily be carried into
the sewerage system and which constitute a concentration of 5% or greater on a
dry weight basis in the raw material, chemical solution or waste material are
required to be included in the statement. Volumes of less than 55 gallons or
the equivalent need not be included unless lesser quantities could cause
interference or pass through to the sewerage system.
         b.   For raw materials, chemical solutions or waste materials that
contain any amount of any substance on the critical materials register
promulgated by the MDNRE, the statement shall include the name of the substance
and the expected concentration so that the POTW Superintendent can determine
whether or not it may constitute a threat to the POTW if a spill occurs.
   K.   The name and address of each laboratory performing analytical work for
the user submitting the application.
   L.   A description of typical daily and weekly operating cycles for each
process in terms of starting and ending times for each of the seven days of the
week.
   M.   Average and maximum 24-hour wastewater flow rates, including 30-minute
peak wastewater flow rates, and daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any;
and a list of each national categorical process wastestream flow rate and the
cooling water, sanitary water and storm water flow rates separately for each
connection to the POTW, and list showing each combined wastestream.
   N.   A drawing showing all sewer connections and sampling manholes by the
size, location, elevation and points or places of discharges into the POTW,
storm sewer, or receiving waters;
   O.   A flow schematic drawing showing which connections receive each
national categorical process wastestream or other process wastestreams, and
which connections receive storm water, sanitary water or cooling water;
   P.   A schematic drawing showing which sewers handle each combined
wastestream.
   Q.   Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and the
rate of production as pertains to processes subject to production-based limits
under national categorical standards or requirements shall be specified.
   R.   Actual or proposed hours of operation of each pretreatment system for
each production process.
   S.   A description and schematic drawing showing each pretreatment facility,
identifying whether each such facility is of the batch type or continuous
process type.
   T.   If other than potable water is used, identification of the user’s
source of intake water together with the types of usage and disposal method of
each water source and the estimated wastewater volume from each source.
   U.   A statement certified by a qualified professional regarding whether the
requirements of this chapter and the national categorical pretreatment
standards and requirements are being met on a consistent basis; and if not,
what additional operation and maintenance work and/or additional construction
is required for the user to comply with applicable standards and requirements.
   V.   A list of all environmental permits (and, if requested by the POTW
Superintendent, a copy of any environmental permit) held by the User applicable
to the premises for which the user permit is being sought.
   W.   Whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional
pretreatment is required for the user to meet all applicable federal, state and
local pretreatment standards and requirements. If additional O&M or additional
pretreatment will be required to meet the applicable standards and
requirements, then the user shall indicate the shortest time schedule necessary
to accomplish installation or adoption of the additional O&M and/or
pretreatment. The completion date in this schedule shall not be longer than the
compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. The
following conditions shall apply to this schedule:
      1.   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates
for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction
and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the
applicable pretreatment standards (including, without limitation, hiring an
engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing
contracts for major components, commencing construction, completing
construction, beginning operation, and conducting routine operation). No
increment referred to above shall exceed nine months, nor shall the total
compliance period exceed 18 months.
      2.   No later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the
final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the POTW
including, at a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of
progress, the reason for any delay, and if appropriate, the steps being taken
by the user to return to the established schedule. In no event shall more than
nine months elapse between submissions of the progress reports to the POTW.
   X.   Any other information determined necessary by the POTW to adequately
evaluate the application. To the extent that actual data is not available for a
new source, the applicant shall supply estimated or expected information.
   Y.   All applications (and reapplications) shall be signed and certified by
an authorized representative of the user as defined by this chapter.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-45. PERMIT ISSUANCE, DENIAL, OR DETERMINATION THAT PERMIT NOT REQUIRED.
   A.   The POTW shall evaluate the application information furnished by a user
and may require additional information as necessary to complete and properly
review the application. No action shall be taken by the POTW on an application
(and the 120-day review period as provided by this division shall not begin to
run) until the application is determined to be complete by the POTW
Superintendent. Within 120 days after the submission of a complete application
(unless the POTW and the applicant agree to extend this time period), the POTW
shall either issue a user permit subject to terms and conditions provided by
this chapter, deny the application, or determine that a permit is not required
as provided by this chapter.
   B.   A user permit may be denied by the POTW:
      1.   If the POTW determines that the proposed discharge, or continued
discharge, will not comply with all applicable standards and requirements of
this chapter;
      2.   If the user refuses, fails or declines to accept the terms and
conditions of a permit as proposed to be issued by the POTW;
      3.   For any reason that would support a suspension or revocation of the
permit as provided by this chapter;
      4.   If the POTW determines that the POTW cannot adequately or reasonably
treat the user’s discharge (due to insufficient capacity, the quality or
quantity of the pollutants, available POTW resources etc.);
      5.   If the POTW is not satisfied that the user has not taken all
reasonable steps to prevent, minimize or reduce pollutants in the user’s
discharge;
      6.   To prevent the discharge of pollutants into the POTW, singly or in
combination with other pollutants, for which there is a reasonable potential,
as determined by the POTW Superintendent, to:
         a.   Not meet applicable pretreatment standards and requirements;
         b.   Interfere with the operation of the POTW;
         c.   Pass through the POTW into the receiving waters or the
atmosphere;
         d.   Inhibit or disrupt the POTW’s processing, use, or disposal of
sludge;
         e.   Cause health or safety problems for POTW workers; or
         f.   Result in a violation of the POTW’s NPDES permit or of other
applicable laws and regulations;
      7.   If the POTW determines that there is not, or will not be, sufficient
capacity available (in both wastewater volume and strength) for a proposed
discharge in all downstream sewers, pump stations, interceptors, and force
mains, including, but not limited to, adequate capacity to accept, treat and
dispose of BOD, TSS, or similar materials as required by applicable local,
state or federal laws, rules or regulations; or
      8.   For any other reason determined by the POTW Superintendent as
necessary and appropriate to protect the POTW or to meet the purposes and
intent of this chapter.
   C.   1.   If a permit is issued, the an authorized representative of the
permittee (as defined by § 
35-3 of the this chapter) shall sign the following certification and dated and
the signed original shall be returned to the POTW Superintendent within the
time specified by the permit prior to commencing any discharge under the
permit:
         “I certify that I have read, understand, and agree to be bound by all
of the provisions, standards, requirements and conditions of this Permit.
Further, I agree to fully comply with all applicable requirements of the Sewer
Use Ordinance and other applicable state and federal pretreatment laws and
regulations.”
      2.   It is a violation of this chapter to commence or continue to
discharge to the POTW without signing the certification and returning a permit
as required by this section. A permittee’s failure or refusal to sign and/or
return the permit shall have no effect on the issuance or effectiveness of the
permit. If a permittee fails or refuses to sign the certification and return
the permit as required by this section, the POTW Superintendent may take any of
the following actions, as determined necessary by the Superintendent:
         a.   Suspend or revoke the permit and require termination of the
discharge, if any.
         b.   Proceed on the basis that the permit has been issued and is
effective as written.
         c.   Undertake enforcement proceedings for any violations associated
with the discharge, including, but not limited to, the permittee’s failure to
sign and return the permit as required by this section.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-46. PERMIT CONDITIONS.
   A.   User permits shall be subject to all provisions of this chapter and all
other applicable regulations, user charges, and fees established by the POTW.
Further, user permits incorporate by reference all provisions, regulations and
requirements of the ordinance without setting them forth in full therein.
   B.   Nondomestic user permits shall at a minimum include all of the
conditions required by MAC 323.2306(a)(iii). In addition, user permits shall
include any conditions determined reasonably necessary by the POTW
Superintendent to prevent pass through or interference, to protect the quality
of the receiving waters, to protect worker health and safety, to facilitate
POTW sludge management and disposal, to protect ambient air quality, to protect
against damage to the POTW, or to otherwise achieve the objectives of this
chapter, including, but not limited to, the following:
      1.   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of
discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization.
      2.   Limits on the average and/or maximum concentration, mass, or other
measure of identified wastewater constituents or properties.
      3.   Requirements for installation of pretreatment technology or
construction of appropriate containment devices, or similar requirements
designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into
the treatment works.
      4.   Development and implementation of slug discharge control plans,
spill control plans, or other special conditions, including additional
management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental or
unanticipated discharges.
      5.   Requirements for installation, maintenance, repair, calibration and
operation of inspection and sampling facilities and discharge flow monitors.
      6.   Specifications for monitoring programs which shall include, but are
not limited to, sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types, and
standards for tests, and reporting schedules.
      7.   Compliance schedules.
      8.   Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge
reports.
      9.   Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to
wastewater discharge as specified by the POTW and affording the POTW access to
those records.
      10.   Requirements for notifying the POTW if self-monitoring indicates a
violation as provided by § 
35-61 of this chapter, and for repeat sampling and analysis as provided by § 
35-75 of this chapter.
      11.   Requirements for notification of any new introductions of
wastewater constituents or of any substantial change in the volume or character
of the wastewater being introduced into the POTW, including listed or
characteristic hazardous waste for which the user has submitted initial
notification under MAC R 323.2310(15).
      12.   Requirements for the notification of any change in the
manufacturing and/or pretreatment process used by the permittee.
      13.   Requirements for notification of accidental or slug discharges, or
discharges that exceed a discharge prohibition.
      14.   Requirements for notification and need for prior approval from the
POTW Superintendent for any proposed change in a sampling location.
      15.   A statement regarding limitations on transferability of the permit.
      16.   A statement of the duration of the permit.
      17.   A statement that compliance with the permit does not relieve the
permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements, including those that become effective during the
term of the permit.
      18.   Requirements for a written certification signed by the permittee
that acknowledges that the permittee has read and fully understands all terms
and conditions of the permit; and acknowledges that the permittee accepts all
of the terms and conditions of the permit as written and accepts full
responsibility for complying with the permit as approved.
      19.   A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for
violation of discharge limitations, pretreatment standards and requirements,
and compliance schedules.
      20.   Requirements regarding development by a user of a pollutant
prevention, minimization or reduction plan (e.g., for mercury or PCBs) or
requirements regarding use of best management practices to control, contain,
treat, prevent, or reduce the discharge of wastewater, pollutants or other
substances to the POTW, or otherwise meet the purposes, policies and objectives
of this chapter.
      21.   Other conditions as determined necessary by the POTW Superintendent
to ensure compliance with this chapter and other applicable laws, rules and
regulations.
   C.   If the POTW determines that a user is discharging substances of a
quality, in a quantity, or in a location that may cause problems to the POTW or
the receiving stream, the POTW has the authority to develop and enforce
effluent limits applicable to the user’s discharge.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-47. PERMIT MODIFICATIONS.
   A user permit may be modified by the POTW at any time and for any reason
determined necessary by the POTW Superintendent to assure compliance with the
requirements of this chapter and other applicable laws and regulations,
including, without limitation, any of the following reasons:
   A.   To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local pretreatment
standards or requirements, or other applicable requirement of law or
regulation.
   B.   Material or substantial changes or additions to the permittee’s
operations, processes, or the character or quality of discharge that were not
considered in drafting or issuing the existing permit. It shall be the duty of
a user to request an application form and to apply for a modification of the
permit within 30 days of any such change(s). The POTW may modify a permit on
its own initiative based on its findings or upon reasonable cause to believe
that any such change(s) has occurred or threatens to occur.
   C.   A change in any condition in the permittee’s discharge, facility,
production or operations, or in the POTW, that requires either a temporary or
permanent reduction or elimination of the permittee’s discharge to assure
compliance with applicable laws, regulations or the POTW’s NPDES permit.
   D.   Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to
collection or treatment systems; the POTW’s processing, use, or disposal of
sludge; POTW personnel; or the receiving waters.
   E.   Violation of any terms or conditions of the user’s permit.
   F.   Misrepresentation or failure to disclose fully all relevant facts in
the permit application or in any required report or notice.
   G.   Revision of, or a grant of a variance from, applicable categorical
standards pursuant to 40 C.F.R. Part 403.13.
   H.   To correct typographical or other errors in the permit.
   I.   To reflect transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation to a new
owner or operator.
   J.   To add or revise a compliance schedule for the permittee.
   K.   To reflect changes or revisions in the POTW’s NPDES permit.
   L.   To ensure POTW compliance with applicable sludge management
requirements promulgated by EPA.
   M.   To incorporate any new or revised requirements resulting from
reevaluation of the POTW’s local limits.
   N.   To incorporate a request for modification by the permittee, as
determined appropriate by the POTW and provided the request does not create a
violation of any applicable requirement, standard, law, rule or regulation.
   O.   The permittee shall be informed of any changes in the permit at least
30 days prior to the effective date of the change, unless a shorter time is
determined necessary by the POTW to meet applicable laws, to protect human
health or the environment, or to facilitate an enforcement action.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-48. PERMIT DURATION.
   A.   Nondomestic user permits shall be issued for a specified time period,
not to exceed five years, subject to modification, reissuance, suspension or
revocation as provided by this article. At the discretion of the POTW, a
nondomestic user permit may be issued for a period less than five years and may
be stated to expire on a specific date.
   B.   General user permits may be issued for any time period determined
appropriate by the POTW Superintendent, subject to modification, reissuance,
suspension or revocation as provided by this article.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-49. PERMIT REISSUANCE.
   A.   To apply for reissuance of an existing user permit, a user must submit
a complete permit application to the POTW accompanied by payment of an
application fee at least 90 days prior to the expiration of the user’s existing
permit (or at least 180 days prior to the expiration of a five-year permit).
The application shall be submitted in a form prescribed by the POTW. It shall
be the responsibility of the user to make a timely application for reissuance.
   B.   All user permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance
of a new user permit to that user.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-50. CONTINUATION OF EXPIRED PERMITS.
   An expired user permit will continue to be effective until the permit is
reissued only if:
   A.   The user has submitted a complete permit application (in a form and
containing the information required by the POTW Superintendent) at least 90
days prior to the expiration date of the user’s existing permit (or at least
180 days prior to the expiration date of a five-year permit); and
   B.   The failure to reissue the permit, prior to expiration of the previous
permit, is not due to any act or failure to act on the part of the user:
provided, however, in no case may a permit continue for a period of more than
five years from the date of issuance. In all other cases, discharge to the POTW
following expiration of a permit is unlawful.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-51. PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   User permits may be suspended or permanently revoked by the POTW for any
reason determined necessary by the POTW to assure compliance with the
requirements of this chapter, the POTW’s NPDES permit, or other applicable laws
and regulations, including, without limitation, any of the following reasons:
   A.   Falsifying self-monitoring reports.
   B.   Tampering with monitoring equipment.
   C.   Failure to allow timely and reasonable access to the permittee’s
premises and records by representatives of the POTW for purposes authorized by
this chapter, including, without limitation, inspection or monitoring.
   D.   Failure to meet effluent limitations.
   E.   Failure to pay fines or penalties.
   F.   Failure to pay sewer charges.
   G.   Failure to pay permit fees.
   H.   Failure to meet compliance schedules.
   I.   Failure to comply with any term or condition of the permit, an order,
the requirements of this chapter, or any final judicial order entered with
respect thereto.
   J.   Failure to comply with any reporting or notice requirement.
   K.   Failure to disclose fully all relevant facts in the permit application
or during the permit issuance process, or misrepresentation of any relevant
fact at any time.
   L.   Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the user permit application.
   M.   As determined by the POTW, the discharge permitted by the permit has a
reasonable potential to endanger human health or the environment and the threat
can be abated only by suspension or revocation of the permit.
   N.   Upon suspension or revocation of a permit, a user shall immediately
terminate its discharge to the POTW and shall not thereafter recommence
discharge without further authorization from the POTW Superintendent as
provided by this chapter. The POTW may reissue a revoked permit upon a showing
satisfactory to the POTW Superintendent that the permittee has corrected the
violation or condition that led to the revocation. A person who has had a
permit revoked may apply for a new permit.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-52. LIMITATIONS ON PERMIT TRANSFER.
   A.   A user permit is issued to a specific user for discharge from a
specific facility and operation and shall not be assigned or transferred or
sold to a new or different owner, operator, User, discharger, facility or
premises, or to a new or changed facility or operation, without the prior
written approval of the POTW. If the transfer of a permit is approved, any
succeeding transferee permittee must also comply with the terms and conditions
of the existing permit. The POTW shall approve the transfer of a permit only if
all of the following conditions are met:
      1.   The transferor (permittee) shall give at least 60-days’ advance
notice to the POTW of the proposed transfer of the permit (unless a shorter
notice period is approved by the POTW in advance). The notice shall include a
written certification signed by the proposed transferee that (a) states that
the transferee has no present intent to change the facility’s operations and
processes; (b) identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur;
(c) acknowledges that the transferee has read and fully understands all terms
and conditions of the permit; and (d) acknowledges that the transferee accepts
all of the terms and conditions of the permit as written and accepts full
responsibility for complying with the existing permit if the transfer is
approved.
      2.   As of the date of the proposed transfer, there are no unpaid
charges, fines, penalties or fees of any kind due to the POTW from the
transferor or the transferee related to use of the POTW.
      3.   Except as to the identity of the new discharger (the transferee),
the application materials for the permit to be transferred as originally filed
by the transferor, as well as the terms and conditions of the permit itself,
are completely accurate with respect to, and fully applicable to, the
discharge, facilities, and activities of the transferee.
      4.   The permit transfer fee as established by the POTW has been paid to
the city.
   B.   If the transfer of a permit is approved and the permit transfer fee has
been paid to the city, the POTW shall make the necessary minor modifications to
the permit to show the transferee as the permittee, and a copy of the permit
shall be provided to the transferee for signature and certification by the
transferee as provided by § 
35-68 of this chapter. The transferor (permittee) shall remain liable for any
discharges to the POTW from the facility (along with any other persons actually
discharging from the facility to the POTW) until a transfer of the permit has
been approved as provided by this section.
   C.   This section is not intended to, and shall not be construed to, limit
in any way the transfer of ownership of the property involved.
   D.   Any attempt to transfer a user permit that does not comply with the
requirements of this section renders the permit void as of the date of the
invalid transfer.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-53. DUTY TO PROVIDE INFORMATION.
   Users shall furnish to the POTW any available information that the POTW
requests to determine whether cause exists for modifying, revoking and
reissuing, or terminating a User Permit, to determine compliance with a permit,
to determine whether a permit is required, or as otherwise determined necessary
by the POTW. Users shall also, upon request, furnish to the POTW copies of any
records required to be kept by a permit. The information and records requested
by the POTW shall be provided by the user to the POTW within 24 hours of the
request, unless an alternative time frame is specified by the POTW when making
the request or unless the POTW allows additional time for the user to submit
the requested information based on a showing by the user of good cause for any
delay. The user’s failure to submit the requested information to the POTW
within 24 hours (or within any alternate time period approved by the POTW as
provided by this section) shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-54. PERMIT APPEALS.
   Except as otherwise provided by this section, an appeal to the Wastewater
Board of Appeals (WBA) of any final decision made by the POTW Superintendent in
connection with issuing or implementing a user permit shall be governed by
Article XVIII of this chapter. An appealing party must specify in its notice of
appeal the action of the POTW being appealed and the grounds for the appeal. If
a particular permit provision is objected to, the notice of appeal must specify
the reasons for the objection, and the alternative provision, if any, sought to
be placed in the permit. The effectiveness of a permit or any final decision
made by the POTW Superintendent shall not be stayed pending a decision by the
WBA. If, after considering the record on appeal including any statements
provided by the POTW in response to the appeal, the WBA determines that a
permit or any provision of a permit should be reconsidered, the WBA shall
remand the matter to the POTW Superintendent for further action as determined
appropriate by the WBA. Specific provisions of a permit that are remanded by
the WBA for reconsideration by the POTW Superintendent shall be stayed pending
further final action taken by the POTW Superintendent as required by the
decision of the WBA. A decision of the WBA not to remand any matter shall be
considered final administrative action for purposes of judicial review.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-55. PERMITS NOT STAYED.
   Except as otherwise expressly provided by § 
35-54, no action taken or request filed by any permittee shall operate to stay
the effect of any permit or of any provision, term or condition of any permit,
including, without limitation, a request for permit modification, reissuance,
or transfer, or a notification of planned changes or anticipated noncompliance.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-56. PERMIT FEES.
   User permit fees shall be established, paid and collected as provided by
this article and Article XXI.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
ARTICLE VIII. REPORTING AND NOTICE REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 35-57. REPORTING AND NOTICE REQUIREMENTS; COMPLIANCE
   All users shall comply with the minimum reporting and notice requirements
provided by this article, as follows.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-58. REPORTS BY NONDOMESTIC USERS REGARDING CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT
STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS.
   A.   Baseline monitoring reports. Within 180 days after the effective date
of a categorical pretreatment standard, or 180 days after the final
administrative decision made upon a category determination submission under MAC
R 323.2311(2) whichever is later, an existing nondomestic user subject to the
categorical pretreatment standards and that currently discharges or is
scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit a report to the POTW as
required by MAC R 323.2310(2). At least 90 days prior to commencement of
discharge, new sources, and sources that become nondomestic users subsequent to
the promulgation of an applicable categorical pretreatment standard shall
submit the reports to the POTW as required by MAC R 323.2310(2). Any changes to
the information required to be submitted by a nondomestic user pursuant to MAC
R 323.2310(2)(a) through (e) shall be submitted by the user to the POTW within
60 days of when the user becomes aware of the change.
   B.   Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline.
Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standard or, in the case of a new source, following
commencement of the discharge to the POTW, any nondomestic user subject to
categorical pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit the reports to
the POTW required by MAC R 323.2310(3).
   C.   Periodic reports on continued compliance. Any nondomestic user subject
to a categorical pretreatment standard, after the compliance date of the
categorical pretreatment standard, or, in the case of a new source, after
commencement of the discharge into the public sewer or POTW, shall submit the
periodic reports to the POTW required by MAC R 323.2310(4). These periodic
reports shall be submitted at least once every six months (during the months of
June and December unless alternate months are approved by the POTW), unless
required more frequently by the applicable pretreatment standard, by the POTW,
or by the state. The reports shall include a record of all average and maximum
daily flows during the prior six-month reporting period, except that the POTW
may require more detailed reporting of flows. All flows shall be reported on
the basis of actual measurement unless the POTW Superintendent agrees, due to
cost or nonfeasibility, to accept verifiable estimates of the average and
maximum flows estimated using techniques approved by the POTW Superintendent.
The combined wastestream formula may be used for reporting purposes after the
initial information has been furnished to the POTW, provided there has been no
change to the elements composing the combined wastestream. The results of
sampling of the discharge and analysis of pollutants appearing in the report
shall be cross-referenced to the related flow and mass to determine compliance
with National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. In cases where the
pretreatment standard requires compliance with a best management practice (or
pollution prevention alternative), the user shall submit documentation required
by the POTW Superintendent or the pretreatment standard necessary to determine
the compliance status of the user.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-59. REPORTS REQUIRED FOR NONDOMESTIC USERS NOT SUBJECT TO CATEGORICAL
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.
   A.   All nondomestic users not subject to categorical pretreatment standards
shall submit to the POTW periodic reports providing information regarding the
quality and quantity of wastewater and pollutants discharged into the POTW
(including, without limitation, information regarding the nature, concentration
(or mass), and flow of the discharge). These reports shall be based on sampling
and analysis performed in the period covered by the report in accordance with
the sampling, analysis and monitoring requirements provided by Article IX of
this chapter.
   B.   For significant industrial users, the reports shall be submitted at
least once every six months for the preceding six months (during the months of
April and October unless alternate months are specified by the POTW
Superintendent), unless required more frequently by the POTW Superintendent.
   C.   If required by the POTW Superintendent for nondomestic users other than
significant industrial users, the reports shall be submitted at least once
every 12 months for the preceding 12 months (during the month of October unless
an alternate month is specified by the POTW Superintendent), unless required
more frequently by the POTW Superintendent.
   D.   The reports for all nondomestic users shall be submitted on forms
provided by (or in a format required by) the POTW, and shall include, without
limitation, the volume of wastewater; the concentration of pollutants; the
names of all person(s) responsible for operating and maintaining any
pretreatment equipment, pretreatment processes, or responsible for wastewater
management at the user’s facilities, with a brief description of each person’s
duties; information regarding materials or substances that may cause
interference or pass through; and any other information deemed necessary by the
POTW Superintendent to assess and assure compliance with applicable discharge
requirements or to safeguard the operation of the POTW.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-60. NOTICE BY USER OF POTENTIAL PROBLEMS.
   All nondomestic users, whether or not subject to categorical pretreatment
standards, shall notify the POTW immediately by telephone of all discharges by
the user that could cause problems to the POTW, including, without limitation,
accidental discharges, slug loadings, discharges of a non-routine, episodic
nature, non-customary batch discharge, or discharges that exceed a discharge
prohibition or limitation provided by this chapter. The notification shall
include available information regarding the location of the discharge, its
volume, duration, constituents, loading and concentrations, corrective actions
taken and required, and other available information as necessary to determine
what impact the discharge may have on the POTW. A detailed written report
providing the same and any additional available information (including
specifying the measures that will be taken by the user to prevent similar
future discharges) shall also be provided by the user to be received by the
POTW Superintendent within five days of the incident.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-61. NOTICE BY USER OF VIOLATION OF PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.
   If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user shall notify
the POTW within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation (and shall comply
with other applicable requirements provided by § 
35-75 regarding repeat sampling and analysis).
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-62. NOTICE BY USER OF CHANGED DISCHARGE OR CHANGE IN USER STATUS.
   A.   A nondomestic user shall promptly notify the POTW in advance of any
substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in its discharge,
or of any facility expansion, production increase, or process modifications
that could result in a substantial change in the volume or character of
pollutants in its discharge.
   B.   For purposes of this section, PROMPTLY means as soon as reasonably
possible, but in no event less than 60 days before the change.
   C.   For purposes of this section, SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE includes, without
limitation, any of the following:
      1.   The discharge of any amount of a pollutant not identified in the
user’s permit application or in the permit issued.
      2.   An increase in concentration (or degree) of any pollutant that
exceeds 10% of the concentration (or degree) for the pollutant as indicated in
any report required under §§ 
35-58 or
35-59;
      3.   An increase in discharge volume that exceeds 10% of the volume as
indicated in any report required under §§ 
35-58 or
35-59.
      4.   Any increase in the amount of any hazardous wastes discharged,
including, without limitation, the hazardous wastes for which the user has
submitted initial notification under § 
35-63 of this chapter.
      5.   The discharge of any ground waters purged for a removal or remedial
action.
      6.   The discharge of any pollutants that are present in the discharge
due to infiltration.
      7.   A change in discharge that may convert a nondomestic user into a
significant industrial user, or a nondomestic user into a categorical user.
      8.   A change in discharge that would cause a change in the categorical
standards that apply to the user.
   D.   In determining whether to accept any changed discharge, or, if so,
under what conditions, the POTW Superintendent shall evaluate the changed
discharge pursuant to the general and specific discharge prohibitions under § 
35-30 and other applicable provisions of this chapter. The user may be required
to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed
condition, including the submission of a user permit application.
   E.   No user shall implement the planned changed conditions until and unless
the POTW Superintendent or his or her designee has responded to the user’s
notice.
   F.   This section shall not be construed to authorize a discharge that
exceeds a discharge prohibition or limitation provided by this chapter or a
permit.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-63. NOTICE BY USER REGARDING WASTES THAT ARE OTHERWISE HAZARDOUS.
   Any user that discharges to the POTW a substance that, if disposed of other
than by discharge to the POTW, would be a hazardous waste under 40 C.F.R. Part
261 or under the rules promulgated under the state hazardous waste management
act (Part 111 of Public Act 451 of 1994, M.C.L.A. §§ 324.11101 et seq., as
amended) shall notify the POTW Superintendent, the U.S. EPA Region V Waste
Management Division Director, and the state hazardous waste authorities of the
discharge as required by MAC R 323.2310(15).
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-64. NOTICE BY USER REGARDING INSTALLATION OF NEW PRETREATMENT
FACILITIES.
   Within five days after completing installation of new pretreatment
facilities, the user shall notify the POTW Superintendent in writing of the
time and date when it intends to commence operation of the new facilities, and
the identity of the person who will conduct any tests to be performed. The
pretreatment facilities shall not be placed in regular operation until adequate
tests have been conducted to establish that the discharges will comply with the
requirements of this chapter and other applicable laws and regulations. Upon
prior written request by the POTW Superintendent, the user shall allow a
representative of the POTW to observe the tests at the time they are conducted.
The cost of the tests shall be paid by the user.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-65. NOTICE OF INTENT.
   A.   At least 60 days before commencing or changing a discharge, each of the
following persons shall submit a notice of intent to the POTW for approval by
the POTW Superintendent:
      1.   A person proposing to discharge any nondomestic wastewater not
previously reported to the POTW.
      2.   A person taking possession or control of an existing facility that
discharges or may discharge process wastewater into the POTW.
      3.   A person constructing a new facility that will discharge process
wastewater into the POTW.
      4.   A person commencing or modifying a discharge of hazardous wastes
that requires reporting under § 
35-63.
   B.   The notice of Intent shall be submitted in writing on a form provided
by the POTW and shall be accompanied by a payment of any fees established by
the city. It shall include sufficient information to allow the POTW
Superintendent to evaluate the effect of the proposed discharge on the POTW and
operations and to assure compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-66. OTHER REPORTS AND NOTICES REQUIRED BY THIS ARTICLE OR BY OTHER
APPLICABLE LAWS AND REGULATIONS.
   Users shall comply with all other reporting or notice requirements as
provided by this chapter, by any notice, order or permit issued under this
chapter, or as required by any other applicable law or regulation, including,
without limitation, the reporting and notice requirements in connection with
accidental discharge (Article X), upset (Article XI), bypass (Article XII), and
any other reports or notice requirements determined necessary by the POTW
Superintendent to assess and assure compliance with the requirements of this
chapter.
Sec. 35-67. REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO ALL REQUIRED REPORTS, NOTIFICATIONS, AND
APPLICATIONS.
   All reports, notifications, and applications submitted by a user to the POTW
as required by this chapter (or by any order, permit or determination issued or
made pursuant to this chapter) shall meet the following requirements:
   A.   All reports, notifications, applications and requests for information
required by this chapter shall be based upon data obtained through appropriate
sampling and analysis performed during the period covered by the report,
notification, application or request. The data shall be representative of
conditions occurring during the applicable reporting period. If a pretreatment
standard requires compliance with a best management practice or pollution
prevention alternative, the user shall submit documentation as required by the
POTW or the applicable standard to determine compliance with the standard.
   B.   If a user monitors any pollutant (or measures flow) more frequently
than required by this chapter or a user permit, using the monitoring, sampling
and analytical procedures as required by § 
35-70, the results of all such additional monitoring shall be included in any
report or notification submitted pursuant to this chapter.
   C.   The POTW Superintendent may require that reports, notifications, and
other required documents and data be submitted in a standardized format, as
specified by the POTW Superintendent.
   D.   If the POTW instead of a user collects all of the information,
including flow data, required for a report required by §§ 
35-58 or
35-59, the POTW Superintendent may in his or her discretion waive the
requirement that the report be submitted by the user.
   E.   The reports, notifications, and other documents and data required to be
submitted or maintained by this chapter shall be subject to all of the
provisions as specified by MAC R 323.2310(13).
   F.   Written reports, notifications, and applications will be deemed to have
been submitted to the POTW, unless otherwise specified by the POTW
Superintendent, as follows:
      1.   If mailed, on the date postmarked.
      2.   The date of receipt of the report shall govern for reports,
notifications, or applications which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a
mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, including, but not
limited to, reports, notifications, or applications that are hand-delivered,
faxed, or emailed.
      3.   Written reports, notifications, and applications may be submitted to
the POTW by fax or email (or by any means other than mail or hand-delivery)
only with the prior approval of the POTW Superintendent on a case-by-case
basis. The report or notification shall be sent to the fax number or email
address specified by the POTW.
   G.   All written reports, notifications, and applications submitted by mail
or hand-delivery shall be sent or delivered to the address stated in the user
permit, or if there is no user permit, then to the following address:
      Plainwell Water Renewal Plant
      Attn: Bryan Pond, POTW Superintendent
      141 N. Main Street
      Plainwell, Michigan 49080
   H.   Failure to provide the reports, notifications, and applications
required by this chapter constitutes an independent violation of this chapter.
However, compliance with applicable reporting and notification requirements
shall not relieve a user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability that
may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other
damage to person or property; nor shall such report or notification relieve a
user of any fines, penalties, or other liability that may be imposed by
applicable laws or regulations. Further, the reporting and notification
requirements required by this chapter shall not be construed to authorize a
discharge that exceeds a discharge prohibition or limitation under this chapter
or other applicable laws or regulations.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-68. SIGNATURE AND CERTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   All written reports, notifications, and applications required by this
chapter shall be signed and certified as follows:
   A.   Required signatures. The reports, notifications, and applications shall
be signed by an authorized representative of the user as defined in § 
35-3 of this chapter.
   B.   Required certification. The reports, notifications, and applications
shall include the following certification statement:
      “I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments
were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system
designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the
information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage
the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the
information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and
belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant
penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine
and imprisonment for knowing violations.”
   C.   Exception. If the POTW elects to perform instead of the user all or any
portion of the sampling or analysis otherwise required for a report or
notification, the user will not be required to comply with the certification
requirements for the sampling and analysis (or portion thereof) performed by
the POTW.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
ARTICLE IX. SAMPLING, ANALYSIS, AND MONITORING
Sec. 35-69. SAMPLING, ANALYSIS, AND MONITORING; REQUIREMENTS.
   This article provides the sampling, analysis and monitoring requirements
applicable to users of the POTW. It does not apply to domestic users except as
may be determined appropriate in specific cases by the POTW. All users required
by this chapter (or by any permit, order, decision or determination issued or
made under this chapter) to sample, monitor and analyze their discharges to the
POTW shall do so according to the minimum requirements provided by this
article. Additional or more restrictive sampling, analytical or monitoring
requirements may be required for a particular user by a permit, order, decision
or determination issued or made under this chapter.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-70. SAMPLING AND ANALYTICAL TECHNIQUES AND PROCEDURES.
   All sampling, measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of
discharges to the POTW shall be performed in accordance with the procedures
approved by the U.S. EPA contained in 40 C.F.R. Part 136. If, as determined by
the POTW Superintendent, the sampling and analytical techniques contained in 40
C.F.R. Part 136 are not available, do not apply to the discharge or pollutants
in question, are not appropriate under the circumstances for application to the
discharge or pollutants in question, or where one or more alternate techniques
are available under 40 C.F.R. Part 136, sampling and analysis shall be
performed using validated sampling and analytical methods and procedures
approved or required by the POTW Superintendent.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-71. SAMPLING FREQUENCY.
   Users shall sample their discharges to the POTW at a frequency necessary to
assess and assure compliance with the requirements of this chapter, any permit
or order issued pursuant to this chapter, all applicable pretreatment standards
and requirements, other applicable state and federal laws and regulations, or
as otherwise determined necessary by the POTW Superintendent consistent with
the purposes and intent of this chapter. At a minimum, all significant
industrial users shall sample their effluent two times per year (once every six
months) or as often as provided by their permits, whichever is more frequent,
and report the results to the POTW. Each discharge point to the POTW shall be
sampled and reported individually.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-72. SAMPLE TYPES.
   A.   Where representative samples are required to be taken for facilities
for which historical sampling data does not exist (or if otherwise requested by
the POTW Superintendent), a user shall take a minimum of four grab samples for
pH, temperature, cyanide, phenols (T), residual chlorine, oil and grease,
sulfide, and volatile organics (and any other parameters designated by the POTW
Superintendent), unless a greater number of grab samples is required in advance
by the POTW Superintendent. For facilities for which historical sampling data
is available, or under other circumstances determined appropriate by the POTW
Superintendent, the Superintendent may authorize a lower minimum number of grab
samples. In all cases, users shall take the minimum number of grab samples
determined necessary by the POTW Superintendent to assess and assure compliance
by users with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. Grab samples
may be required to show compliance with instantaneous minimum or instantaneous
maximum discharge limits. For all other pollutants and sampling, 24-hour
composite samples must be obtained through flow-proportional composite sampling
techniques, unless time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is
authorized by the POTW Superintendent. Where time-proportional composite
sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the POTW Superintendent, the samples
must be representative of the discharge and the decision to allow the
alternative sampling must be documented in the user file for that facility or
facilities. Using protocols (including appropriate preservation) specified in
40 C.F.R. Part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples
collected during a 24-hour period may be composited prior to the analysis as
follows: For cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the samples may be composited
in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and oil & grease the
samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite samples for other
parameters unaffected by the compositing procedures as documented in approved
EPA methodologies may be authorized by the POTW Superintendent, as appropriate.
   B.   The POTW Superintendent may require any user (categorical or non-
categorical) to conduct continuous pH monitoring instead of using grab samples.
A user required to conduct continuous monitoring will be subject to enforcement
under § 35-117H..
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-73. SAMPLING METHODS, EQUIPMENT AND LOCATION.
   A.   General. A user shall use the sampling methods, sampling equipment, and
sampling location specified by the user’s user permit, or, in the absence of a
permit, as otherwise required by the POTW Superintendent.
   B.   Contaminated groundwater. For discharges to the POTW from remedial
actions related to leaking underground storage tanks or other sources of
contaminated groundwater, the POTW Superintendent may require the following
analyses or such other analyses as determined appropriate by the
Superintendent:
      1.   Samples shall be analyzed for benzene, ethylbenzene, toluene and
xylene using the latest methods approved by U.S. EPA.
      2.   For total petroleum hydrocarbons, samples shall be analyzed
according to the latest methods approved by U.S. EPA.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-74. COSTS OF MONITORING, SAMPLING AND ANALYSES.
   All required monitoring, taking of samples, and sample analyses, whether
performed by the POTW or by a user, including, but not limited to, the costs or
fees associated with inspection or surveillance, shall be at the sole cost of
the user.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-75. SELF-MONITORING.
   A.   Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, self-monitoring shall be
conducted by each nondomestic user to insure compliance with all applicable
requirements of this chapter and other applicable laws and regulations.
   B.   A user performing its own sampling shall submit the samples for
analysis to a laboratory (which may include the user’s own laboratory) approved
by the POTW Superintendent.
   C.   A user performing its own sampling or monitoring shall record and
maintain for all samples and monitoring (including any sampling and monitoring
associated with best management practices) the date, exact location (which
shall match sampling locations identified in the user’s user permit, as
applicable), time (including start time and stop time) and method of sampling
or measurement, and the name(s) of person(s) taking the samples or
measurements; sampler programming information; the sample preservation
techniques or procedures used; the full chain-of-custody for each sample; the
dates the analyses were performed and completed; who performed the analyses;
the analytical techniques and methods used; the detection limits and/or
quantification level used per parameter; quality assurance/quality control (QA/
QC) procedures used and QA/QC data; and the results of the analyses.
   D.   If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user shall
notify the POTW Superintendent within 24 hours of becoming aware of the
violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the
results of the repeat analysis to the POTW within 30 days after becoming aware
of the violation. If the POTW has performed the sampling and analysis in lieu
of the user, the POTW must perform the repeat sampling and analysis unless the
POTW notifies the user of the violation and requires the user to perform the
repeat sampling and analysis. The user shall not be required to resample if (a)
the POTW performs sampling at the user at a frequency of at least once per
month, or (b) the POTW performs sampling at the user between the time when the
user performs its initial sampling and the time when the user or the POTW
receives the results of the sampling that indicates the violation.
   E.   If a user uses its own laboratory for sample analysis, the POTW
Superintendent may require the user to send split samples to an independent
laboratory at a frequency specified by the Superintendent as a quality control
check.
   F.   Users required to do monthly sampling shall submit sample results to
the POTW Superintendent by the tenth day of the following month, unless
specified otherwise in the user’s user permit.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-76. SAMPLING AND ANALYSES PERFORMED BY POTW.
   A.   The sampling and analysis required by this chapter may be performed by
the POTW instead of the user, as determined necessary by the POTW
Superintendent for purposes of this chapter. The POTW shall provide the user
with copies of analytical results prepared by the POTW. If the results of any
sampling and analysis performed by the POTW instead of the user show that a
pretreatment standard has been violated, the POTW shall provide the user with
copies of the analytical results within ten days after the results are
available.
   B.   If the POTW performs the required sampling and analysis for a user, the
user shall pay a sampling fee to the POTW to fully reimburse the POTW for the
sampling, including administrative and overhead costs. The POTW may contract
with an independent firm to perform the sampling and analysis and the user
shall fully reimburse the POTW for amounts paid by the POTW to the independent
firm.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-77. SPLIT SAMPLES AND SAMPLE RESULTS.
   A.   If requested by the POTW, the POTW shall be provided with splits of any
sample taken by a user. The user shall provide splits to the POTW at no cost to
the POTW.
   B.   If requested by a user prior to the collection of a sample of the
user’s discharge, the POTW shall leave a portion of the sample of the discharge
taken from any sampling point on or adjacent to the premises for the user’s
independent analysis.   
   C.   In cases of disputes arising over split samples, the portion taken and
analyzed by the POTW shall be controlling unless proven invalid. The burden of
proving the POTW’s results invalid shall be on the user and at the user’s sole
cost.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-78. MAINTENANCE, REPAIR AND CALIBRATION OF EQUIPMENT .
   A.   A user who performs self-monitoring shall contract with an independent
company (unless the requirement to use an independent company is waived in
advance by the POTW Superintendent as determined appropriate by the
Superintendent) to maintain, repair, and calibrate the sampling and flow
measurement equipment and instruments used to monitor the user.
   B.   The maintenance, repair, and calibration shall be performed as often as
necessary to ensure that monitoring data is accurate and representative, and
consistent with the accepted capability of the type of equipment used, and
shall be at the sole cost of the user.
   C.   A user shall keep a complete and accurate written record of all
calibrations, inspections and maintenance done (including, without limitation,
the date and time of the activity, a description of what was done and the
methods used, the names of persons conducting the activity, and any required or
recommended follow-up). The record shall also include a description of all
problems discovered regarding the equipment whether in response to a regularly
scheduled inspection or otherwise.
   D.   The POTW, in any event, may inspect and test a user’s sampling and flow
measurement equipment and instruments at all times.
   E.   In no case shall a user’s failure to keep its equipment, instruments
and facilities in good working order constitute grounds for the user to claim
that sample results are not representative of its discharge.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-79. REQUIRED SAMPLING STRUCTURES AND DEVICES.
   A.   The POTW may require any user to install suitable control structures
(such as sampling manholes or sampling vaults) and necessary measuring and
sampling devices (including automatic devices) to facilitate the observation,
sampling, and measurement of the quantity, composition, and concentrations of
discharges to the POTW. The POTW may require the user to install control
structures and measuring and sampling devices at every discharge point and/or
outfall. Further, multiple separate and discrete building sewers, control
structures, and measuring and sampling devices may be required for a single
user, premises, building, facility or user, as determined necessary by the POTW
Superintendent. The structures and devices shall be maintained at all times in
a safe, clean and proper operating condition at the sole expense of the user.
   B.   There shall be ample room in or near the control structure to allow
accurate monitoring, measuring, sampling and preparation of samples for
analysis, as determined necessary by the POTW Superintendent. At a minimum, all
sewers shall have an inspection and sampling manhole or structure with an
opening of no less than 24 inches in diameter and an internal diameter of no
less than 36 inches containing flow measuring, recording and sampling equipment
as required by the POTW Superintendent to assure compliance with this chapter.
   C.   Any temporary or permanent obstruction for safe and easy access to the
facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user
at the verbal or written request of the POTW and shall not be replaced. The
costs of clearing such access shall be borne solely by the user.
   D.   The location and complexity of the required control structure or
devices may vary with sampling requirements determined necessary by the POTW
Superintendent to protect the POTW and to comply with applicable laws and
regulations.
   E.   The required sampling structures and devices shall be constructed and
installed at the user’s sole expense in accordance with plans submitted to the
POTW, and in compliance with all applicable local construction standards and
specifications. Users shall submit to the POTW plans and specifications for
construction or modification of monitoring facilities at least 30 days before
the proposed commencement of construction or modification. If a user constructs
or modifies monitoring facilities before POTW approval or without an inspection
during construction and the POTW determines that the monitoring facilities are
not acceptable, then the user shall at its cost reconstruct or modify the
monitoring facilities according to the requirements of the POTW. Construction
shall be completed within 90 days following written notification by the POTW,
or within such other shorter or longer time period specified by the POTW
Superintendent as required by the particular circumstances to meet the
requirements of this chapter. The structures and devices shall be operated and
maintained by the user at the user’s sole expense so as to be safe and
accessible to POTW personnel at all times and so as to provide accurate and
representative monitoring data. If a user fails to install or maintain a
required structure or device, the POTW may do so and charge the costs to the
user. No person shall use a required control structure for any purpose other
than the sampling and monitoring activities specifically approved by the POTW.
   F.   The sampling structures and devices must be provided on the user’s
premises as approved by the POTW, but the POTW may, if it determines that such
a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship to the user, allow the
facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so
that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles.
   G.   Samples shall be taken at a control structure approved by the POTW.
However, in the absence of a suitable control structure as required by this
section, samples shall be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment
facilities if pretreatment facilities exist, or immediately downstream from the
regulated process if no pretreatment facilities exist. If other wastewaters are
mixed with a regulated process wastestream prior to pretreatment, the user must
measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined
wastestream formula under MAC R 323.2311(7) or other methods required by the
POTW to evaluate compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements.
   H.   No user shall change monitoring points or monitoring methods without
first notifying and receiving the approval of the POTW Superintendent. The POTW
Superintendent shall not approve any change in a user’s monitoring point or
points that would allow the user to substitute dilution for adequate treatment
to achieve compliance with applicable standards.
   I.   A user shall allow the POTW access to all sampling and monitoring
facilities as provided by § 17(B) of this chapter.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-80.   DETERMINATION OF FLOW.
   The city may use any of the following methods, singly or in combination, to
determine the amount of wastewater flow discharged to the POTW from a user’s
premises, as determined appropriate by the city:
   A.   If the premises are metered, the amount of water supplied to the
premises by the city or a private water company as shown by the water meter;
   B.   If the premises are supplied with river water or water from private
wells, the city may estimate the amount of water supplied from such sources
based on the water, gas or electric supply to the premises;
   C.   If the premises are used for an industrial or commercial purpose of
such a nature that the water supplied to the premises cannot be (or is not)
entirely discharged to the POTW, the city may estimate the amount of amount of
wastewater discharged to the POTW based on the water, gas or electric supply to
the premises;
   D.   The city may determine the amount of wastewater discharged to the POTW
based on measurements and samples taken by the city from a manhole installed by
the owner of the premises, at the owner’s sole expense, as required by the city
under this chapter; or
   E.   The city may determine the amount of wastewater discharged to the POTW
from a premises using a combination of any of the above methods, or using any
other method determined appropriate by the city.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
ARTICLE X. ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES
Sec. 35-81. GENERAL.
   This article sets forth minimum requirements for nondomestic users (and any
other users as required by the POTW Superintendent) to prepare for, respond to,
and report, accidental discharges to the POTW. Additional or more restrictive
requirements may be required for particular users under a user permit, a slug
control plan, or by other applicable laws and regulations.
   A.   Each nondomestic user shall provide and continuously maintain
protection from accidental discharge of materials or other substances regulated
by this chapter as provided by this article. The city may refuse to accept
current or proposed discharges from any user that fails to comply with the
requirements of this article.
   B.   Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide
the protections required by this article shall be submitted to the POTW for
review prior to construction of the facilities. All existing users shall submit
the required plans and information with their permit applications or upon
request of the POTW. For new sources, facilities and operating procedures to
provide the protections required by this article shall be approved by the POTW
prior to commencing discharge. No user who commences discharging to the POTW
after the effective date of this chapter shall be permitted to introduce
pollutants into the system until accidental discharge facilities and procedures
as provided by this section are in place and have been approved by the POTW.
   C.   Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of regulated materials or
substances shall be provided and maintained at the user’s cost and expense.
Review and approval by the POTW of plans and operating procedures shall not
relieve the user from the responsibility to modify the user’s facility as
necessary to
252   Plainwell - Code of Ordinances
meet the requirements of this chapter. Compliance with the requirements of this
article shall not relieve a user of any expense, loss, damage, or other
liability that may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, or for any
other damage to persons or property, or for any other liability that may be
imposed under this chapter or under other applicable laws and regulations.
   D.   No change shall be made in any plan or procedure approved by the POTW
as provided by this section without the prior review and approval of the POTW.
   E.   All users shall notify the POTW in writing within five days of any
change in the information required to be provided to the POTW as set forth
below in this section (including, without limitation, information regarding the
person in charge of discharge operations, the description of chemicals stored,
used or manufactured by the user, the description of user discharges, and the
description of user premises).
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-82. DESIGNATION OF PERSON IN CHARGE OF DISCHARGE OPERATIONS.
   Each nondomestic user shall designate at least one person to be in charge of
and responsible for the user’s discharges to the POTW, including responsibility
for maintaining pretreatment facilities and operations, if any, and prevention
of accidental discharges (person in charge). The person so designated shall be
an individual with knowledge of all toxic wastes or hazardous substances
routinely or potentially generated by the user, and of all process alterations
that could, in any manner, increase or decrease normal daily flow or waste
strength to the POTW. The names of the person (or persons) designated as
provided by this section and a phone number where the person can be reached for
24-hour contact shall be submitted by each user to the POTW.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-83. DESCRIPTION OF CHEMICALS STORED, USED OR MANUFACTURED BY USER; USER
DISCHARGES; USER PREMISES.
   Unless the POTW Superintendent determines that all of the following
information has already been appropriately provided to the POTW pursuant to
other requirements of this chapter, each nondomestic user shall:
   A.   Catalog all chemicals stored, used, or manufactured by the user at the
user’s premises. The list of chemicals shall include specific chemical names
(not just manufacturer’s codes) and shall be provided to the POTW.
   B.   Provide the POTW with a written description of the user’s discharge
practices, including an estimate of daily average flows, waste strengths, and
flow types, separated according to appropriate categories including process,
cooling, sanitary, etc.
   Sewer Use   253
   C.   Provide to the POTW a detailed, scaled professionally prepared drawing
of the user’s plant building(s), including the location of pretreatment
equipment, process and chemical storage areas, waste storage areas, floor
drains located near process and storage areas, manhole or other control
structures, and sewer locations at the user’s point of discharge into the POTW.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-84. SEGREGATION OF WASTEWATERS REQUIRING PRETREATMENT.
   Nondomestic users shall segregate wastewaters requiring pretreatment
(including, without limitation, spent concentrates, toxics, and high strength
organic wastes) as necessary to prevent pollutants from interfering with or
passing through the POTW. All sludges generated by pretreatment shall be used
and disposed of only as permitted by applicable local, state and federal laws
and regulations.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-85. SECONDARY CONTAINMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   A.   Each nondomestic user must provide and maintain at the user’s sole
expense secondary spill containment structures (including diking, curbing or
other appropriate structures) adequate to protect all floor drains from
accidental spills and discharges to the POTW of any pollutants or discharges
regulated by this chapter.
   B.   The containment or curbing shall be sufficient to hold not less than
150% of the total process area tank volume and not less than 150% of liquid
polluting material stored or used, unless a lesser containment area or
alternate control measures are approved in advance by the POTW Superintendent.
   C.   The containment area shall be constructed so that no liquid polluting
material can escape from the area by gravity through the building sewers,
drains, or otherwise directly or indirectly into the POTW. All floor drains
found within the containment area must be plugged and sealed.
   D.   Spill troughs and sumps within process areas must discharge to
appropriate pretreatment tanks.
   E.   Emergency containment shall also be provided for storage tanks that may
be serviced by commercial haulers and for chemical storage areas.
   F.   Solid pollutants shall be located in security areas designed to prevent
the loss of the materials to the POTW.
   G.   Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide
the protection required by this section shall be submitted to the POTW
Superintendent for review, and shall be approved by the Superintendent before
construction. Construction of approved containment for existing sources shall
be completed within the time period specified by the POTW Superintendent.
254   Plainwell - Code of Ordinances
   H.   No new source shall be permitted to discharge to the POTW until
emergency containment facilities have been approved and constructed as required
by this section.
   I.   The POTW Superintendent may order a user to take interim measures for
emergency containment as determined necessary by the Superintendent under the
circumstances.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-86. SUBMISSION OF POLLUTION INCIDENT PREVENTION PLAN.
   A.   Each user required to develop a pollution incident prevention (PIP)
plan as provided by Part 5 of the Michigan Water Resources Commission Rules,
1979 ACR 323.1151 et seq., as amended (promulgated pursuant to Part 31 of
Public Act 451 of 1994, M.C.L.A. §§ 324.3101 et seq., as amended), shall submit
a copy of that plan to the POTW Superintendent.
   B.   The PIP Plan shall be submitted to the Superintendent within 60 days of
the effective date of this chapter for an existing source, or 30 days prior to
the date of discharge for a new source.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-87. POSTING OF ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE INFORMATION .
   All nondomestic users shall post a clearly legible set of instructions in
the area where the user manages wastewater so that the applicable reporting and
notice requirements are made known and are available to the user’s employees.
In addition, all nondomestic users shall instruct their employees on the
applicable reporting and notice requirements of this section.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-88. NOTICE OF ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE.
   A.   In the case of an accidental discharge, a user shall immediately notify
the POTW of the incident by telephone.
   B.   The notification shall include the name of the person placing the call,
the name of the user, and all available information regarding the location of
the discharge, its volume, duration, constituents, loading and concentrations,
corrective actions taken and required, and other available information as
necessary to determine what impact the discharge may have on the POTW.
   C.   A detailed written report providing the same and any additional
available information (including specifying the measures that will be taken by
the user to prevent similar future discharges) shall also be provided by the
user to the POTW Superintendent within five days of the incident.
   Sewer Use   255
   D.   Providing notice of an accidental discharge shall not relieve a user of
any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result
of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property;
nor shall such notice relieve a user of any fines, civil penalties, or other
liability which may be imposed by this chapter or other applicable law.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-89. SLUG CONTROL PLAN.
   A.   Each significant industrial user shall prepare and implement an
individualized slug control plan. Existing significant industrial users shall
submit a slug control plan to the POTW for approval within 90 days of the
effective date of this chapter. New sources that are significant industrial
users shall submit a slug control plan to the POTW for approval before
beginning to discharge. Upon written notice from the POTW, nondomestic users
that are not significant industrial users may also be required to prepare and
implement a slug control plan, and the plan shall be submitted to the POTW for
approval as specified in the notice. All slug control plans shall contain at
least the following elements:
      1.   A description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch
discharges;
      2.   A description of stored chemicals, raw materials, and waste;
      3.   The procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of slug
discharges, including any discharge that would violate any discharge
prohibition, limitation or requirement under this article, and procedures for
follow-up written notification within five days of the discharge;
      4.   The procedures to prevent adverse impact from accidental spills,
including inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of
materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site run-off,
worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for
containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents), and measures and
equipment for emergency response.
   B.   If a user has submitted to the POTW plans or documents pursuant to
other requirements of local, state or federal laws and regulations which meet
all applicable requirements of § 35-89A., the POTW may in its discretion
determine that the user has satisfied the slug plan submission requirements of
this section.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
256   Plainwell - Code of Ordinances
   ARTICLE XI. UPSET AND ADDITIONAL AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES
Sec. 35-90. UPSET.
   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for
noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if all of the
requirements of division A., below, are met. However, in the event of an upset,
the user may still be liable for surcharges for exceeding applicable discharge
limitations as provided by this chapter. In any enforcement proceeding, the
user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of
proof.
   A.   Conditions necessary to demonstrate upset. A user seeking to establish
the affirmative defense of upset must demonstrate, through properly signed,
contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence, all of the
following:
      1.   An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the
upset;
      2.   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance
procedures;
      3.   The user has submitted the following information to the POTW within
24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided
orally, a written submission containing the same information must be provided
within five days of becoming aware of the upset):
         a.   A description of the discharge and cause of non-compliance;
         b.   The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or,
if not corrected, the anticipated time the non-compliance is expected to
continue; and
         c.   The steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
   B.   User responsibility in case of upset. The user shall control production
or all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with
categorical pretreatment standards and other applicable limits upon reduction,
loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an
alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the
situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the
treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
   Sewer Use   257
Sec. 35-91. ADDITIONAL AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES.
   A user shall have an affirmative defense in any action brought against it
alleging a violation of the general prohibitions under § 35-31 and specific
prohibitions under §§ 35-32.B.(5), (6), (7) or (8) if the user can demonstrate
that all of the conditions necessary to establish the defense under MAC R
323.2303(3)(a) and (b) are met. However, even if the affirmative defense is
established, the user may still be liable for surcharges for exceeding
applicable discharge limitations as provided by this chapter. In any
enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the affirmative defenses
provided by MAC R 323.2303 (3) shall have the burden of proof.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
   ARTICLE XII. BYPASS
Sec. 35-92. BYPASS NOT VIOLATING APPLICABLE PRETREATMENT STANDARDS OR
REQUIREMENTS.
   A nondomestic user may allow any bypass to occur that does not cause
pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if the bypass
is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. A bypass that meets
the requirements of the preceding sentence of this section is not subject to
the provisions in §§ 35-93, 35-94, and 35-95. However, nothing in this section
shall be construed to authorize a discharge that exceeds a discharge
prohibition or limitation under this chapter or other applicable laws or
regulations; nor to relieve a user for any expense, loss, damage, or liability
that may be incurred as a result of the bypass, such as damage to the POTW,
fish kills, or any other damage to person or property; nor to relieve the user
of any fines, penalties or other liability that may be imposed by applicable
laws or regulations as a result of the bypass.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-93. BYPASS PROHIBITED.
   Except as provided by § 35-92, the bypass of industrial wastes from any
portion of a user’s facility is prohibited, and shall be subject to enforcement
action, unless all of the following apply:
   A.   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or
severe property damage.
   B.   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of
auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated waste, or maintenance
during normal periods of equipment downtime. (This condition is not satisfied
if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the exercise of
reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass that occurred during normal
periods of equipment downtime or preventative maintenance.)
258   Plainwell - Code of Ordinances
   C.   The user submitted the notices as required under § 35-94.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-94. REQUIRED NOTICES.
   A.   Anticipated bypass. If a user knows in advance of the need for a
bypass, it must submit prior notice of the bypass to the POTW. Such notice
shall be submitted to the POTW as soon as the user becomes aware of the need
for the bypass, and if possible, at least ten days before the date of the
bypass.
   B.   Unanticipated bypass. A user shall submit oral notice of an
unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards to the POTW
within 24 hours from the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. A written
submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes
aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the
bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and
times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is
expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The POTW Superintendent may waive the
written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received
within 24 hours.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-95. POTW APPROVED BYPASS.
   The POTW Superintendent may approve an anticipated bypass after considering
its adverse effects, if the Superintendent determines that it meets the
conditions set forth in §§ 35-93A., B. and C.. It shall be a violation of this
chapter for a user to allow an anticipated bypass to occur without the prior
approval of the Superintendent.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
   ARTICLE XIII. CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
Sec. 35-96. CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   The following provisions shall apply regarding the treatment by the city of
confidential information submitted to or obtained by the city in the
administration of this chapter:
   A.   Information and data regarding a user obtained from reports,
questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs, and from
inspections shall be presumed to be non-confidential and shall be available to
the public or other governmental agency without restriction
   Sewer Use   259
unless the user specifically requests at the time of submission, and is able to
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the POTW, that the release of such
information would divulge information, processes or methods of production
entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user.
   B.   Information submitted by a user for which confidentiality is requested
shall be clearly marked on each page as to the portion or portions considered
by the user to be confidential and shall be accompanied by a written
explanation of why the user considers the information to be confidential or why
the release of the information would divulge information, processes or methods
of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user.
   C.   The portions of a report or information that may disclose trade secrets
or trade secret processes, and for which the user has requested confidentiality
as provided by this section, shall not be made available for inspection by the
general public; however, that information shall be made available to
governmental agencies upon written request by governmental agencies for uses
related to this chapter (including, but not limited to, the pretreatment,
biosolids, or NPDES programs) and shall be made available for use by the state,
any state agency, or the city in judicial review or enforcement proceedings
that involve the user that furnished the information.
   D.   Information furnished to the city on the volume or characteristics of
wastewater or pollutants discharged or proposed to be discharged into the POTW
shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without
restriction.
   E.   If a user has mass-based limits as allowed by certain categorical
pretreatment standards on a production basis, the production data necessary to
determine compliance must also be provided by the user to the city, and shall
be available to the public. If application of the combined waste stream formula
is necessary to apply categorical pretreatment standards to a user, the flow
measurements and other data used in the calculation must be provided by the
user to the city, and shall be available to the public.
   F.   Observations made by city inspectors shall be subject to the
confidentiality provisions of this section as if they were in writing if the
user specifies to the city in writing for which particular observations made by
the city inspector the user seeks confidentiality.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
260   Plainwell - Code of Ordinances
   ARTICLE XIV. RECORDS
Sec. 35-97. MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS.
   All users shall retain and preserve records, including, without limitation,
all books, documents, memoranda, reports, correspondence and similar materials,
related to matters regulated by this chapter as provided by the minimum
requirements of this section or as provided by a permit or order issued
pursuant to this chapter.
   A.   Discharge records. A user shall retain, preserve, and make available to
the POTW for inspection and copying, for the period specified in § 35-97C. all
records related to matters regulated by this chapter, including, without
limitation, all documents, memoranda, correspondence and similar materials;
copies of all required reports, notifications, and applications; all
calibration and maintenance records and all original strip chart recordings for
continuous monitoring instrumentation; copies of results of all sampling,
monitoring, measurements and analyses; all documentation associated with best
management practices; and records of all data used to complete the application
for a permit. Any user subject to the sampling, monitoring, analysis, or
reporting requirements of this chapter shall maintain copies of all records and
information pertaining to those requirements or resulting from any monitoring
activities (whether or not such monitoring activities are required by this
chapter). For all samples, the records shall include, at a minimum, the
information required to be recorded by § 35-75 of this chapter.
   B.   Hazardous or solid waste. A user shall retain and preserve all records
regarding its generation, treatment, storage, or disposal of hazardous waste or
solid waste for the period specified in § 35-97C., and shall make them
available to the POTW for inspection and copying, subject to the provisions in
this chapter regarding confidential information. (As used in this section, the
terms HAZARDOUS WASTE and SOLID WASTE shall have the same definition as
provided in the State Hazardous Waste Management Act, Part 111 of Public Act
451 of 1994, M.C.L.A. §§ 324.11101 et seq., as amended, and the rules
promulgated under that Act.)
   C.   Retention period. Users subject to the reporting requirements of this
chapter (or of any permit or order issued pursuant to this chapter) shall
retain the records specified in §§ 35-97A. and B. for a period of at least
three years from (a) the date the record was created or (b) the date the record
was first used or relied upon by the User, whichever is later. The three-year
retention period shall be extended during any administrative or judicial
action, enforcement proceeding or litigation regarding matters regulated by
this chapter (or regarding discharges of the POTW under its NPDES permit),
until all such actions, proceedings, or activities have concluded and all
periods of limitation with respect to any and all appeals have expired. The
three-year retention period may also be extended at any time at the request of
the POTW, the MDNRE, or the U.S. EPA. The POTW shall retain all records,
notices and other information regarding discharges to the POTW submitted to it
by users of the POTW for a period of not less than three years.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
   Sewer Use   261
   ARTICLE XV. ADMINISTRATION OF THE POTW
Sec. 35-98. OPERATION AND MANAGEMENT OF POTW.
   Except as otherwise expressly provided by this chapter, the operation,
maintenance, alteration, repair and management of the POTW shall be under the
supervision and control of the POTW Superintendent. The Superintendent is
charged with the duty of investigating, preventing and abating violations and
enforcing the provisions of this chapter. The city may employ additional
persons as necessary or advisable to carry out the efficient management and
operations of the system and may make any rules, orders and regulations as
determined necessary by the city to assure the efficient management and
operation of the system, including the setting of rates, surcharges, fees,
penalties, fines, or other charges, for the use of the POTW.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-99. POWERS OF POTW SUPERINTENDENT .
   The Superintendent is empowered (either directly or through authorized
representatives) to:
   A.   Supervise the implementation of this chapter.
   B.   Review plans submitted by users for pretreatment equipment.
   C.   Make inspections and tests of existing and newly installed,
constructed, reconstructed, or altered sampling, metering, or pretreatment
equipment to determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
   D.   Verify the completeness, accuracy and representativeness of self-
monitoring data submitted and/or maintained by users.
   E.   Investigate complaints of violations of this chapter, make inspections
and observations of discharges, and maintain a record of the investigations,
complaints, inspections and observations.
   F.   Issue orders and notices of violation and take other actions as
necessary to require compliance with this chapter.
   G.   Develop and implement a Control Authority Enforcement Response (CAER)
Plan as required by 40 C.F.R. Part 403.8(f)(5). The CAER Plan shall provide
procedures for the POTW to investigate and respond to instances of
noncompliance by users. The CAER Plan and any associated regulations developed
by the POTW Superintendent shall become effective upon approval by the city.
262   Plainwell - Code of Ordinances
   H.   With the approval of the city, and in conjunction with the city’s legal
counsel, institute necessary civil or criminal judicial legal actions and
proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction against all users violating
this chapter to prosecute violations of this chapter, to compel the abatement
or prevention of violations, to compel compliance with this chapter and any
order, determination, permit or agreement issued or entered into under this
chapter, and to pursue other necessary or advisable judicial relief or remedies
with respect to violations of this chapter.
   I.   In conjunction with the city’s legal counsel, commence a municipal
civil infraction action against any user violating this chapter, and issue
municipal civil infraction citations and municipal civil infraction violation
notices for violations of this chapter.
   J.   Make recommendations to the city for amendments to this chapter as
required or as necessary to comply with applicable laws and regulations.
   K.   Encourage voluntary cooperation in water pollution control.
   L.   Collect and disseminate information on water pollution control.
   M.   Coordinate activities under this chapter with planning and zoning
agencies to promote conservation and management of the water resources of the
city.
   N.   Cooperate with federal, interstate, state, county, district, municipal,
or other agencies concerned with water pollution with respect to studies,
abatement programs, public complaints, and other matters to conserve and
improve the natural resources of the city.
   O.   Perform any other actions authorized by this chapter, or as necessary
or advisable for the supervision, management and operation of the POTW and the
enforcement of this chapter and other applicable laws and regulations.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
   ARTICLE XVI. USER POLLUTION CONTROLS
Sec. 35-100. PROVISION BY USERS OF NECESSARY PRETREATMENT FACILITIES.
   Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply
with all applicable pretreatment standards and requirements within the time
limitations specified by applicable law or regulation, and as required to
comply with the requirements of a user permit or order issued pursuant to this
chapter. All facilities required to pretreat discharges shall be provided,
operated, and maintained at the user’s sole expense. Detailed, professionally
signed and sealed plans showing the pretreatment facilities, specifications,
and operating procedures shall be submitted to the POTW for review and
   Sewer Use   263
approval prior to construction. The POTW Superintendent may approve, approve
with conditions, or disapprove the plans, specifications and operating
procedures. A user shall not begin discharging from the treatment facilities
until facilities have been approved and all conditions and requirements of the
approval have been met as determined by the POTW Superintendent. The review and
approval by the POTW Superintendent of such plans and operating procedures does
not in any way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the
facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the POTW
Superintendent under the provisions of this chapter. Any subsequent changes in
the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be
approved by the POTW Superintendent prior to the user’s initiation of the
changes. (Users shall notify the POTW regarding the installation of new
pretreatment facilities or modification of existing facilities as provided by
§ 35-64 of this chapter.)
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-101. PROPER OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE.
   A user shall at all times properly operate and continuously maintain, at the
user’s sole expense, all facilities and systems of treatment and control (and
related appurtenances) that are installed or used by the user to comply with
the requirements of this chapter. Proper operation and maintenance includes,
without limitation, effective performance, adequate funding (including
replacement costs), adequate operator staffing, and adequate quality assurance/
quality control (QA/QC) procedures for sampling and analysis, so as to provide
adequate wastewater collection and treatment on a continuing basis, to conform
with all local, state and federal laws and regulations, and to assure optimum
long-term management of the facilities and system.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-102. REMOVED SUBSTANCES.
   Solids, biosolids, filter backwash, or other pollutants removed in the
course of treatment or control of wastewaters shall be disposed of in
accordance with Section 405 of the Clean Water Act and Subtitles C and D of the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, and other applicable local, state, and
federal laws and regulations.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-103. DUTY TO HALT OR REDUCE ACTIVITY.
   Upon reduction of efficiency of operation, or loss, or failure of all or
part of a user’s pretreatment equipment or facility, the user shall, to the
extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards
and other applicable standards, requirements, and limits, control its
production and all discharges until operation of the equipment or facility is
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement
applies in situations, including, without limitation, where the
264   Plainwell - Code of Ordinances
primary source of power for the pretreatment equipment or facility is reduced,
lost, or fails. It shall not be a defense for a user in an enforcement action
that it would have been necessary to halt or reduce the permitted activity in
order to maintain compliance with the conditions of this chapter.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-104. DUTY TO MITIGATE.
   A user shall take all reasonable steps to minimize or correct any adverse
impact to the POTW or the environment resulting from noncompliance with this
chapter, including such accelerated or additional monitoring as necessary to
determine the nature and impact of the noncomplying discharge.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-105. DUTY TO PRETREAT PRIOR TO DISCHARGE TO POTW.
   Except as otherwise expressly required by this chapter, by a user permit, by
an order or other determination of the POTW Superintendent, or by other
applicable law or regulation, the prohibitions and limitations provided by this
chapter or a user permit shall apply at the point where wastewater and
pollutants are discharged or caused to be discharged into the POTW and any
required pretreatment shall, at a minimum, be completed before that point of
discharge is reached.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-106. IMPLEMENTATION OF BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES OR BEST MANAGEMENT
PRACTICES PLAN.
   A.   The POTW Superintendent may require any user to develop and implement
best management practices to control, contain, treat, prevent, or reduce the
discharge of wastewater, pollutants or other substances from the User’s
premises to the POTW, as determined necessary by the Superintendent.
   B.   In addition, the POTW Superintendent may require a user to develop and
submit a best management practices plan (BMPP), including an enforceable
implementation schedule, for review and approval by the Superintendent. The
BMPP shall be submitted within 30 days after notification by the Superintendent
or as otherwise required by a user permit. The BMPP shall be directed at
preventing the entrance of pollutants, directly or indirectly, into the POTW.
The BMPP shall be available for inspection at all times at the user’s premises.
At a minimum, a user’s BMPP shall contain all of the following elements, as
determined necessary by the POTW Superintendent, at a level of detail and in
units and terms as determined necessary by the Superintendent to adequately
evaluate the plan:
      1.   A statement of the purpose and objectives of the plan.
      2.   A description of the strategies, methods, policies and procedures to
prevent, minimize or reduce the introduction of pollutants into the user’s
discharge and to minimize waste generation.
   Sewer Use   265
      3.   A description of the options available to the user to control
accidental spillage, leaks and drainage.
      4.   A description of best available or practicable control technologies
available for the user’s specific circumstances.
      5.   A detailed facility layout and site diagram showing points of entry
into the POTW.
      6.   A description of the waste handling, treatment and discharge
disposal facilities, including flow diagrams and process schematics.
      7.   A description of operating and maintenance processes and procedures.
      8.   Inventory of raw materials and a list of waste sources, including a
list of all chemicals used or stored at the facility.
      9.   A description of employee training programs, policies and
procedures; continuing education programs; and participation.
      10.   A description of documentation, including record keeping and forms.
      11.   A description of monitoring activities.
      12.   Information log of facility personnel, organization chart,
emergency phone numbers, contact persons and maintenance or service
representatives.
      13.   Certification by a qualified professional that the plan is adequate
to prevent spills, leaks, slug loads, or non-customary discharges of regulated
substances, directly or indirectly, to the POTW.
      14.   Such other information, documents or diagrams as required by the
POTW Superintendent, including, but not limited to, any of the information
required under § 35-44 of this chapter.
   C.   The BMPs or BMPP required of a user or approved for a user shall be
incorporated in a user permit issued to the user. If the user already has a
user permit, the existing permit may be modified to incorporate the BMP
requirements. If the user does not currently have a user permit, a permit shall
be issued for that purpose.
   D.   The POTW Superintendent may require revisions to users BMPP if the
Superintendent determines that the plan contains elements that are inadequate,
or as otherwise determined necessary by the Superintendent to ensure compliance
with applicable requirements of this chapter. Review of a BMPP by the
Superintendent shall not relieve the user from the responsibility to modify its
facility as necessary to comply with local, state and federal laws and
regulations.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
266   Plainwell - Code of Ordinances
Sec. 35-107. FOG INTERCEPTORS; ALTERNATE FOG PRETREATMENT TECHNOLOGY; SAND
TRAPS, GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS/TRAPS.
   A.   General requirements applicable to all FOG interceptors; alternate FOG
pretreatment technology; and sand traps.
      1.   Any user required to install a FOG interceptor, an Alternate FOG
Pretreatment Technology (AFPT), or a sand trap to prevent the discharge of
fats, oils, grease, sand, or other materials to the POTW shall comply with the
minimum requirements as provided by this section or as otherwise specified by
the POTW Superintendent.
      2.   Interceptors, AFPTs, and traps that are required by this section
shall be provided, cleaned, maintained in proper operating condition, and kept
in continuously efficient operation at all times, at the sole expense of the
owner of the premises.
      3.   All interceptors, AFPTs, and traps shall be of a design, type,
construction, and capacity approved in advance by the POTW Superintendent.
      4.   The installation of all interceptors, AFPTs, and traps shall be
subject to the POTW Superintendent’s review and approval.
      5.   All interceptors, AFPTs, and traps shall be located so as to be
readily and easily accessible for maintenance, cleaning and inspection.
      6.   All users required to install and maintain an interceptor, AFPT, or
trap shall develop and carry out a system of maintenance and cleaning for the
interceptor, AFPT, or trap, and shall keep accurate, detailed written records
of the following:
         a.   The maintenance and cleaning schedule;
         b.   The names of the persons who maintained and cleaned the
interceptor, AFPT, or trap, and the dates that the interceptor, AFPT, or trap
was maintained and cleaned; and
         c.   The method of cleaning and disposal location for removed
materials for each maintenance and/or cleaning.
      7.   At a minimum, all interceptors, AFPTs, and traps shall be inspected,
cleaned and maintained according to the manufacturer’s specifications or as
otherwise provided by this section, whichever requirements are more stringent,
at the property owner’s expense.
   Sewer Use   267
      8.   All written records and documentation required to be kept by this
section with regard to interceptors, AFPTs, and traps shall be kept by the user
on the premises for at least three years and shall be available for review by
the POTW Superintendent during all operating hours. The user shall provide
copies of required records to the POTW Superintendent upon the Superintendent’s
request at the user’s sole cost.
      9.   Any problems with or damage to an interceptor, AFPT, or trap shall
be reported immediately to the property owner and to the POTW Superintendent.
      10.   Any problems with or damage to an interceptor, AFPT, or trap shall
be rectified and/or repaired immediately by the property owner at the owner’s
sole cost.
      11.   Interceptor, AFPT, or trap clean-out material, including, but not
limited to, accumulated fats, oils, grease, and sand, shall not be discharged
into the POTW.
      12.   Bacteriological, chemical, or enzymatic products shall not be used
to maintain or clean interceptors, AFPTs, or traps.
   B.   Requirements for FOG interceptors and AFPTs.
A FOG interceptor or AFPT shall be required for all food service establishments
(FSEs), and may also be required for any other user, premises, or establishment
determined by the POTW Superintendent to have a reasonable potential to
adversely affect the POTW due to discharges of FOG.
      1.   Outdoor FOG interceptors. 
         a.   Outdoor FOG Interceptors required. All FSEs shall install,
operate, and maintain an outdoor FOG interceptor of a type, design,
construction, and size approved in advance by the POTW; provided that if the
POTW Superintendent determines that installation of an outdoor FOG interceptor
would not be economically and/or technically feasible due to existing
circumstances unique to the premises in question, the Superintendent may
instead allow the installation of alternate FOG pretreatment technology as
provided by § 35-107B.2.. In all cases, the user shall bear the burden of
demonstrating to the POTW Superintendent, at the user’s sole cost, that the
installation of an outdoor FOG interceptor is not feasible and that an
alternate FOG pretreatment technology should instead be allowed.
         b.   Compliance schedule.
            (1)   Existing FSEs/users. Any FSE discharging into the POTW as of
the effective date of this chapter (and any other existing user determined by
the POTW Superintendent to have a reasonable potential to adversely affect the
POTW due to discharges of FOG) shall, upon notification from the POTW
Superintendent, submit plans for an outdoor FOG interceptor for approval by the
POTW Superintendent, and shall install and begin operation of the interceptor,
in compliance with the schedule specified by the POTW Superintendent.
268   Plainwell - Code of Ordinances
            (2)   New FSEs/users. Any FSE that proposes to commence discharging
into the POTW after the effective date of this chapter (and any other new user
determined by the POTW Superintendent to have a reasonable potential to
adversely affect the POTW due to discharges of FOG) shall submit plans for an
outdoor FOG interceptor to the POTW Superintendent for the Superintendent’s
approval, and shall install and begin operation of the interceptor in
compliance with the schedule specified by the POTW Superintendent. In all
cases, the interceptor plans must be approved by the POTW Superintendent prior
to submitting plans to the city for a building permit; and the city shall not
issue a building permit for the premises until the POTW has approved the
proposed interceptor plans. Further, the city shall not issue a certificate of
occupancy for the premises until the interceptor has been installed and deemed
acceptable by the POTW Superintendent.
         c.   Minimum design and installation requirements for outdoor FOG
interceptors. Outdoor FOG interceptors shall comply with all of the following
minimum design and installation requirements:
            (1)   The interceptor shall provide a minimum capacity of 1,500
gallons, unless the POTW Superintendent determines that a smaller minimum
capacity is adequate for the premises.
            (2)   The interceptor shall have a minimum of two compartments with
fittings designed for FOG retention.
            (3)   The interceptor shall be constructed of impervious materials
capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature.
            (4)   The interceptor shall be installed at a location, subject to
the prior approval of the POTW Superintendent, where it can be easily
accessible for inspection, cleaning, and removal of intercepted FOG, but shall
not be located in any part of a building where food is handled.
            (5)   Access manholes, with a minimum diameter of 24 inches, shall
be provided over each outdoor FOG interceptor chamber and sanitary tee. The
access manholes shall extend at least to finished grade, and be designed and
maintained to prevent water inflow or infiltration. The manholes shall also
have readily removable covers to facilitate inspection, FOG removal, and
sampling which, when bolted into place, shall be gastight and watertight.
         d.   Minimum inspection, maintenance, and cleaning requirements for
outdoor FOG interceptors. Outdoor FOG interceptors shall comply with all of the
following minimum maintenance, cleaning, and inspection requirements:
            (1)   At a minimum, an outdoor FOG interceptor shall be inspected
monthly by the property owner, or more often if dictated by site-specific
conditions or if required more frequently by the POTW Superintendent.
   Sewer Use   269
            (2)   Pump-out of all accumulated FOG, water, and sludge shall
occur quarterly at a minimum, or more often if the combined height of
floatables and settled solids (including both the top and bottom layers of
solids) exceed 25% of any interceptor compartment operating depth; if there is
a visible discharge of FOG; or if required more frequently by the POTW
Superintendent. The operating depth of a trap shall be determined by measuring
the internal depth from the outlet water elevation to the bottom of the trap.
            (3)   Each pump-out of the interceptor shall be complete and remove
all contents, including removal of the entire grease mat, liquids, sludges, and
solids from screens, baffles, air-relief chambers, and wash down of interior
walls. The interceptor shall be refilled with clear water before being returned
to service.
            (4)   The interceptor shall be kept free of inorganic solid
materials such as grit, rocks, gravel, sand, eating utensils, cigarettes,
shells, towels, rags, etc., which could reduce the effective volume for FOG and
sludge accumulation.
            (5)   Water removed during pump-out shall not be returned to the
interceptor, and accumulated FOG and sludge shall not be re-introduced into any
drainage piping leading to the public sewer.
            (6)   Sanitary wastes shall not be discharged to sewer lines
serviced by an outdoor FOG interceptor without specific prior approval by the
POTW Superintendent.
            (7)   The pump-out operation and disposal of the accumulated FOG,
water, and sludge shall be done only by a licensed contractor. The POTW
Superintendent shall be notified prior to any scheduled pump-out so that the
operation can be witnessed if desired.
      2.   Alternate FOG pretreatment technology.
         a.   Superintendent to make determination on installation. If the POTW
Superintendent determines that installation of an outdoor FOG interceptor is
not required as provided by § 35-107B.1.a., then the Superintendent may instead
authorize the installation of an alternate FOG pretreatment technology (AFPT)
approved by the Superintendent as provided by this section.
         b.   Superintendent to make determination on designs, etc. The design,
type, construction, capacity, installation, operation, and maintenance
requirements for an AFPT for a user’s proposed or existing discharge shall be
as determined by the POTW Superintendent based on nature of the discharge and
the unique circumstances applicable to the premises in question.
270   Plainwell - Code of Ordinances
         c.   Indoor grease traps. If the AFPT approved by the POTW
Superintendent is an indoor grease trap, the following requirements shall
apply:
            1.   Indoor grease traps shall be installed in all waste lines from
sinks, drains, and other fixtures or equipment where grease may be discharged
to the POTW; provided that no food waste disposal unit, dishwasher, wastewater
or other liquid in excess of 140º Fahrenheit (60º Centigrade) shall be
discharged into an indoor grease trap. Further, no acidic or caustic cleaners
shall be discharged into an indoor grease trap.
            2.   Traps shall never be operated without the flow restrictor
supplied by the unit’s manufacturer.
            3.   Sizing and installation of the indoor grease traps shall be
subject to the POTW’s prior review and approval.
            4.   Traps shall be inspected and cleaned at least once per week,
or more often if dictated by site-specific conditions, as needed to be
maintained in fully functional and efficient operation, or as otherwise
specifically required by the POTW Superintendent.
            5.   FSEs with indoor grease traps shall employ kitchen best
management practices (BMPs) for pre-cleaning of plates, pots, pans, and similar
methods to minimize grease loadings to the drainage system.
         d.   Other AFPT. If the proposed AFPT is a technology other than
indoor grease traps, the FSE shall submit design plans, installation details,
and operation and maintenance procedures to the POTW Superintendent for prior
review and approval.
   C.   Sand and oil interceptors and traps. Oil and sand interceptors and
traps may be required by the POTW Superintendent in any premises where the
Superintendent has determined that there is a reasonable potential for sand,
oil, flammable wastes, or other harmful ingredients to enter the premise’s
discharges. If a plug or backup occurs that is caused by sand and/or oil, the
POTW Superintendent may require that premises to install an oil and sand
interceptor or trap. Oil and sand interceptors and traps shall be required for
all premises engaged in the repair, storage, and/or washing of motor vehicles.
   D.   Failure to comply.
      1.   The city shall have the right to enter and inspect any premises
where an interceptor, AFPT, or trap is required to be installed for purposes of
determining compliance with the requirements of this section and as otherwise
provided by § 35-109 of this chapter.
      2.   If a user fails to provide or maintain a required interceptor/AFPT,
the city may do so (or cause the same to be done) and charge all of the costs
to the user.
   Sewer Use   271
      3.   The failure of any premises where an interceptor/AFPT is required to
comply with this section may subject the violator to enforcement action and the
remedies that are available by law and the terms of this chapter, including,
but not limited to, termination of the discharges from the premises to the
POTW.
   E.   Permits. The POTW Superintendent may issue and/or require user permits
for any user discharging FOG or sand to the POTW. The user permits may include
requirements that are more stringent than, or in addition to, the requirements
specified by this section, as determined appropriate by the POTW
Superintendent.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-108. ADDITIONAL PRETREATMENT MEASURES.
   The POTW Superintendent may require users to take additional pretreatment
measures, as determined necessary by the POTW, including, but not limited to,
the following:
   A.   Whenever deemed necessary, the POTW Superintendent may require users to
restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain
wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate
points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams from industrial waste
streams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and
determine the user’s compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
   B.   The POTW Superintendent may require any person discharging into the
POTW to install and continually maintain, on their property and at their
expense, a suitable storage and flow control facility to ensure equalization of
flow, subject to approval by the POTW.
   C.   Users with the reasonable potential to discharge explosive or flammable
substances may be required to install and maintain an approved explosion hazard
meter, combustible gas detection meter, or similar device, as determined
appropriate by the POTW Superintendent.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
272   Plainwell - Code of Ordinances
   ARTICLE XVII. ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 35-109. POTW INSPECTION, SURVEILLANCE AND MONITORING AUTHORITY; RIGHT OF
ENTRY.
   A.   In general. The POTW is authorized to carry out all inspection,
surveillance, sampling and monitoring activities and procedures, as necessary
to determine, independent of information supplied by users or any other
persons, compliance or noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements, with this chapter, and with other applicable laws and
regulations. This authority includes, but is not limited to, the authority:
      1.   To verify the completeness, accuracy and representativeness of self-
monitoring data submitted by users.
      2.   To determine compliance with the terms, conditions and requirements
of this chapter or of any permit, order, notice or agreement issued or entered
into under this chapter.
      3.   To support enforcement actions taken by the POTW against non-
compliant users.
      4.   To determine if users have corrected problems identified in previous
inspections.
      5.   To identify which (and to what degree) users influence the quality
of the POTW’s influent, effluent and biosolids quality.
      6.   To evaluate the impacts of the POTW’s influent on its treatment
processes and receiving stream.
      7.   To evaluate the need for revised local limits.
      8.   To maintain current data on each user.
      9.   To assess the adequacy of each user’s self-monitoring program and
user permit.
      10.   To provide a basis for establishing sampling and monitoring
requirements for users.
      11.   To evaluate the adequacy of each user’s operation and maintenance
activities on its pretreatment system.
      12.   To assess the potential for spills and/or slug discharge control
measures, and evaluate the effectiveness of spill and slug discharge control
measures.
      13.   To gather information for user permit development.
   Sewer Use   273
      14.   To evaluate compliance with existing enforcement actions.
      15.   To require any user to submit one or more representative samples of
the wastewater discharged or that the user proposes to discharge into the POTW.
      16.   To determine compliance with requirements regarding implementation
of best management practices; accidental discharge controls and protections;
spill prevention or containment measures; and pollution prevention,
minimization or reduction measures.
   B.   Right of entry.
      1.   The POTW Superintendent and other authorized representatives of the
city bearing proper credentials and identification are authorized to enter a
nondomestic user’s premises (and any other person’s premises, as determined
necessary by the POTW Superintendent) to conduct inspection, surveillance and
monitoring activities as necessary to determine compliance with this chapter,
and in that regard shall have, but shall not be limited to, the following
minimum authority:
         a.   To enter into any premises in which a discharge source, treatment
system or activity is located or in which records are required to be kept as
provided by this chapter, for the purpose of inspecting, observing, measuring,
sampling and testing the wastewater discharge, removing samples of wastewater
for analysis, and inspecting and making copies of required records. This shall
include the right to take photographs.
         b.   To set up and maintain on the person’s property such devices as
are necessary to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring and/or
metering operations, or to require the discharger to do so, at the person’s
sole expense.
         c.   To randomly sample and analyze the effluent from persons and
conduct surveillance activities to identify occasional and continuing
noncompliance with applicable standards and requirements. The POTW shall
inspect and sample the effluent from each significant industrial user at least
once a year.
         d.   To inspect any production, manufacturing, fabrication, or storage
area where pollutants, subject to regulation under this chapter, could
originate, be stored, or be discharged to the POTW.
         e.   To enter all private properties through which the city or other
governmental agency holds an easement for the purposes of, but not limited to,
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any
portion of the POTW or wastewater transmission facilities lying within the
easement.
274   Plainwell - Code of Ordinances
      2.   POTW representatives entering a person’s premises for purposes
authorized by this chapter shall comply with the person’s plant safety
requirements regarding such matters as entry into confined spaces, use of
safety glasses, and hearing protection requirements, as requested by the
person. Entry shall be commenced and completed as expeditiously as practicable,
consistent with the purposes for which the entry was made.
   C.   Access without delay required. A person shall allow the POTW ready
access at all reasonable times to all parts of the person’s facility where
wastewater governed by this chapter is created, handled, conveyed, treated or
discharged, or where any production, manufacturing, fabrication, or storage
area where pollutants regulated under this chapter could originate, be stored,
or be discharged to the POTW, or where wastewater records are kept, for the
purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination, or in the performance of
any of the POTW’s duties. If a person has security measures in force that would
require proper identification and clearance before entry into the premises by
the POTW, the person shall make necessary arrangements in advance with its
security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification,
authorized representatives of the POTW (or authorized state or federal
personnel) will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of
performing their specific responsibilities. Upon arrival at a person’s
premises, POTW representatives shall inform the person or the person’s
employees that inspections, sampling, compliance monitoring, metering or other
POTW procedures are to be performed and that the person has the right to
accompany the POTW employee/representative during the performance of the
person’s duties.
   D.   Refusal to allow entry. If a person refuses to permit access to an
authorized POTW representative or to permit the representative to obtain, take,
and remove samples or make copies of documents or undertake other authorized
inspection, surveillance and monitoring activities as provided by this chapter,
the POTW Superintendent may order the termination of the discharge of
wastewater to the POTW; order the person to permit access within a time
certain; issue the person a notice of violation of this section; or take other
appropriate action as provided by this chapter and other applicable laws and
regulations (including, but not limited to, seeking the issuance of a search
warrant). Further, the refusal to permit access (or causing an unreasonable
delay in access) as provided by this section shall constitute a violation of
this chapter.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-110. NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   A.   Any person found to be violating a provision of this chapter may be
served with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a
reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction of the violation. The
person shall, within the period of time stated in notice, permanently cease all
violations. The notice of violation (NOV) shall be served and shall contain the
information as provided by § 35-112 of this chapter.
   Sewer Use   275
   B.   Unless otherwise specified by the NOV, the following provisions shall
apply: Within 30 days of the date of the NOV, the person shall submit to the
POTW a written explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory
correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions.
Submission of the required plan shall not in any way relieve the person of
liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of
violation.
   C.   Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the city or the
POTW to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement
action, without first issuing a notice of violation, or otherwise require the
city or the POTW to first issue a notice of violation before initiating a civil
or criminal action against a person for violating this chapter. Further,
receipt, or non-receipt, of a notice of violation shall in no way relieve the
affected user of any and all liability associated with any violation.
   D.   Failure to comply with any requirement of a notice of violation shall
constitute a separate violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-111. ORDERS AND SUPPLEMENTAL ENFORCEMENT TOOLS.
   The POTW Superintendent may issue an order to any person as determined by
the Superintendent to be appropriate under the circumstances, as provided by
this section. Multiple orders may be issued simultaneously or in combination as
a single order with respect to a single person.
   A.   Service. An order shall be served upon a person and shall contain the
information as provided by § 35-112 of this chapter. However, orders to
immediately cease and desist discharge, or to terminate sewer services, or
other emergency orders where delay might endanger human health, the
environment, or the POTW, may be oral and may be served by telephone, to be
followed within five days by written confirmation of the oral order by the POTW
Superintendent.
   B.   Types of orders. The POTW Superintendent may issue the following types
of orders:
      1.   Order to immediately cease and desist discharge. The POTW
Superintendent may issue an order to cease and desist from discharging any
wastewater, pollutant, or discharge not in compliance with this chapter. The
order shall have immediate effect if the POTW Superintendent determines that
the actual or threatened discharge to the POTW presents, or may present,
imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or to
the environment; or causes, or may cause, interference or pass through; or may
cause the POTW to violate any term or condition of its NPDES permit. The POTW
Superintendent shall implement whatever action is necessary to halt or prevent
the discharge, including, but not limited to, emergency suspension of service.
The person shall be assessed for any penalties, fines, charges, surcharges,
expenses, or losses incurred due to the actual or threatened discharge of
pollutants as provided by this chapter.
      2.   Order to cease discharge within a time certain. The POTW
Superintendent may issue an order to cease and desist from discharging any
wastewater, pollutant, or discharge not in compliance with this chapter by a
certain time and date. The proposed time for remedial action shall be specified
in the order. In addition to any other circumstances as determined appropriate
by the POTW Superintendent, an order may be issued under this section for the
failure to pay applicable permit fees or to comply with any term of a user
permit.
      3.   Order to effect pretreatment. The POTW Superintendent may issue an
order to a user requiring the user to pretreat its discharge in accordance with
this chapter. Any user subject to an order to pretreat shall prepare a plan to
pretreat its discharge so that the discharge complies with the requirements of
the order and this chapter. The plan shall be submitted to the POTW
Superintendent within a reasonable period as specified in the order. The plan
shall be prepared in accordance with good engineering practice and shall state
whether construction is necessary, as well as identify measures that can be
completed without construction. The plan shall contain a schedule of compliance
for completion of each of the various phases necessary to implement full
pretreatment. The schedule of compliance must be approved by the POTW
Superintendent. The schedule of compliance shall consist of one or more
remedial measures, including enforceable timetables for a sequence of actions
or operations leading to compliance with an effluent standard, or other
prohibition or standard. The following steps or phases shall be included in the
schedule of compliance as determined necessary by the POTW Superintendent:
         a.   Retain a qualified engineer and/or consultant.
         b.   Obtain any engineering or scientific investigation or surveys
deemed necessary.
         c.   Prepare and submit a preliminary plan to achieve pretreatment.
         d.   Prepare plans and specifications, working drawings, or other
engineering or architectural documents that may be necessary to effect
pretreatment.
         e.   Establish a time to let any contract necessary for any
construction.
         f.   Establish completion times for any construction necessary.
         g.   Establish a time limit to complete full pretreatment pursuant to
the final order.
         h.   If a phase or unit of construction or implementation may be
effected independently of another phase or unit, establish separate timetables
for the phases or unit.
      4.   Order to affirmatively respond. The POTW Superintendent may issue an
order requiring a person to perform any action required under this chapter,
including, without limitation, requiring a person to submit samples; to install
sampling, metering and monitoring equipment; to submit reports; to permit
access for inspection, sampling, testing, monitoring and investigations; to
reduce or eliminate a discharge or pollutants in a discharge; or to pay permit
fees or other applicable charges.
      5.   Order to terminate sewer services. The POTW Superintendent may issue
an order to terminate the sewer services of a user, including, but not limited
to, immediate physical blockage of the user’s sewer connection, for reasons
including, without limitation, the following:
         a.   A discharge that violates any general or specific discharge
prohibition, including any pretreatment standard or requirement, and that
reasonably appears to present an imminent endangerment to human health, the
environment or the POTW.
         b.   Failure of a user to notify the POTW of any discharge as
described in § 
35-111B.5.a. of which the user was aware or reasonably should have been aware.
         c.   Failure of a user to sample, monitor, pretreat or report, or
failure to install monitoring or pretreatment facilities, as required by an
order of the POTW Superintendent.
         d.   A knowing, willful violation of any term, condition or
requirement of an order or user permit, or any provision of this chapter.
         e.   A negligent violation of any major term, condition or requirement
of an order or user permit. For purposes of this section, a MAJOR TERM,
CONDITION or REQUIREMENT is one the violation of which is reasonably likely to
endanger human health, the environment, the POTW, or cause the POTW to violate
its NPDES permit.
      6.   Physical blockage. If the POTW Superintendent determines that
physical blockage is necessary, the POTW shall make a reasonable attempt to
deliver to the person who appears to be in control of the user’s facility a
written notice describing the reason for the physical blockage order. After
delivery of the notice (or after a reasonable attempt to deliver the notice,
even if delivery was unsuccessful), the POTW may immediately install the
physical blockage. No person shall remove or tamper with a physical blockage
installed by the POTW without prior written permission from the city.
      7.   Order to show cause. The POTW Superintendent may issue an order
requiring a person to appear and explain any noncompliance with the
requirements of this chapter or any permit, order, decision or determination
promulgated, issued or made under this chapter, and to show cause why more
severe enforcement actions against the person should not go forward. A show
cause hearing shall be held within ten days after the order to show cause is
issued, as follows:
         a.   The Wastewater Board of Appeals shall conduct the hearing and
take evidence. Notice of the hearing shall be provided to require the
attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant
to any matter involved in the hearing.
         b.   Any testimony taken at the hearing shall be under oath and
recorded. A copy of the transcript of the hearing shall be made available at
cost to any person upon payment of applicable charges for the transcript.
         c.   After reviewing the evidence taken at the hearing, the Wastewater
Board of Appeals shall decide whether further enforcement action is required
and, if so, the nature and extent of that further action, including, without
limitation, the issuance of any order or imposition of any fines, fees,
surcharges or penalties, as authorized by this chapter.
   C.   Immediate response to order by user may be required. Any user issued an
order as provided by this section to immediately suspend its discharge to the
POTW shall immediately stop or eliminate the discharge using whatever means are
necessary to do so, or take any other action as required by the order. If the
user fails to comply voluntarily with the order to immediately suspend its
discharge, the POTW shall take any action determined necessary as authorized by
this chapter, including, without limitation, immediate suspension of water
service and/or severance of the sewer connection or commencement of judicial
proceedings, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW or endangerment to
public health, safety or the environment. The POTW may reinstate the wastewater
treatment service and terminate any judicial proceedings, as applicable, upon
satisfactory proof or other demonstration by the user that the noncomplying
discharge has been eliminated or will not reoccur. A detailed written statement
submitted by the User describing the causes of the noncomplying discharge and
the measures taken to prevent any further occurrence shall be submitted to the
POTW Superintendent within 15 days of the occurrence.
   D.   Noncompliance due to factors beyond user’s control. If noncompliance
with an order is unintentional and temporary and due to factors beyond the
reasonable control of a user, and the user can demonstrate the conditions
necessary for demonstration of an upset as provided by § 
35-90A., the POTW Superintendent may modify the order or take other actions as
determined appropriate. However, a user shall not be relieved of liability for
noncompliance with an order to the extent caused by operational error,
improperly designed or inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventative
maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
   E.   Amendment, suspension and revocation of orders. An order shall be
subject to amendment, suspension or revocation as determined appropriate by the
POTW Superintendent. Notice of the amendment, suspension or revocation shall be
served upon the person in the same manner as notice was provided for the
original order. An amendment, suspension or revocation of an order shall be
subject to the same procedures for review and appeal as the original issuance
of the order, as provided by this chapter.
   F.   Consent orders and agreements. The POTW Superintendent may enter into a
consent order or agreement with a person to resolve disputed claims and address
identified and potential deficiencies in the person’s compliance status. The
order or agreement shall be in the form of a written agreement with the person
and may contain appropriate provisions, including, without limitation,
compliance schedules and stipulated fines and remedial actions.
   G.   POTW authority to require financial assurances. The POTW may require
any user to post a performance bond (or other form of surety acceptable to the
POTW Superintendent) sufficient to cover expenses (direct and/or indirect) that
might reasonably be incurred by the POTW as a result of the user’s discharges
to the POTW (including, but not limited to, the costs to restore or repair any
damage to the POTW) or sufficient to achieve consistent compliance with
applicable laws and regulations, as determined necessary by the POTW
Superintendent. Further, any person that has in the prior two years been
responsible for causing interference or pass through at the POTW may be
required to obtain liability insurance sufficient to cover the reasonable costs
of responding or restoring the POTW in the event of a second such incident.
These financial assurance requirements may also be made conditions of a user
permit. 
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
SEC. 35-112. SERVICE OF NOTICES OF VIOLATIONS, ORDERS AND NOTICES OF
ASSESSMENTS.
   Except as otherwise expressly provided by this chapter, all orders, notices
of violations and notices of assessments shall be served upon persons and shall
contain the information as provided by this section.
   A.   Service. Service shall be by personal delivery or certified mail
(return receipt requested), addressed to the user, alleged violator or other
person, as applicable, at the person’s last know address as shown by POTW’s
records. The person served shall sign and date the order or notice and shall
return the signed original copy to the POTW; provided, that the failure to do
so shall not affect in any way the person’s obligation to comply with the order
or notice. Further, a notice or order served by mail may not actually be
received by the person, but this shall not nullify in any way any enforcement
action subsequently taken by the POTW against the person under authority of
this chapter. Receipt, or non-receipt, of a notice or order shall not in any
way relieve the affected person of any liability associated with the violation.
Further, the issuance of a notice or order will not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, any other enforcement actions by the city against the
affected person.
   B.   Contents. All orders and notices shall contain at least the following
information, to the extent known by the POTW and as determined by the POTW to
be applicable to the situation:
      1.   The name and address of the violator;
      2.   The location and time that the violation occurred or was observed,
and the duration of the violation;
      3.   The nature of the violation, including the provisions of this
chapter or of any permit, order, decision, determination or agreement violated;
      4.   The basis for determining that a violation has occurred (personal
observation, pollutant analysis, etc.);
      5.   The amount of the fine, penalty or charge assessed or due, if any;
      6.   The manner in which, and time and date by which, any fine, penalty
or charge must be paid, including any penalty or charge for late payment;
      7.   The remedial action ordered, the time within which required actions
must be taken, and any consequences for failure to do so;
      8.   The right to appeal the issuance of the order or notice and a
summary of the procedures for appeal, or other applicable administrative
procedures;
      9.   The date and time the order or notice was issued.
   C.   Request for additional information. A person served may request
additional information from the POTW Superintendent regarding the contents or
requirements of any order or notice. However, a request for additional
information shall not extend the time for compliance with an order or notice.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-113. PUBLICATION OF USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE.
   The POTW shall publish once per year in the largest newspaper circulated in
the city, a list of nondomestic users that, at any time during the previous 12
months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment
standards or requirements. For the purposes of this section, a user shall be
considered to be in significant noncompliance if its violations meet one or
more of the following criteria:
   A.   Chronic violation of discharge limits, defined as results of analyses
in which 66% or more of all of the measurements taken during a six-month period
exceed (by any magnitude) the numeric daily maximum limit, instantaneous limit,
or the average limit for the same pollutant parameter;
   B.   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined as results of
analyses in which 33% or more of all of the measurements taken for the same
pollutant parameter during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of
the daily maximum limit, instantaneous limit, or the average limit times the
applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all
other pollutants, except pH);
   C.   Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (instantaneous
minimum, instantaneous maximum, daily maximum, or long-term average, or
narrative standard) that the POTW determines has caused, alone or in
combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including
endangering the health of department personnel or the general public);
   D.   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to
human health, welfare, or to the environment, or has resulted in the POTW’s
exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent the discharge;
   E.   Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in a permit or enforcement order, for starting
construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance;
   Sewer Use   281
   F.   Failure to provide any required reports within 30 days after the due
date;
   G.   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
   H.   Any other violation or group of violations, which may include a
violation of best management practices, that the POTW Superintendent determines
will adversely affect the POTW or the operation or implementation of the POTW’s
pretreatment program.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-114. MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTIONS.
   A.   Violation; municipal civil infraction. Except as provided by § 35-115,
and notwithstanding any other provision of the city’s laws, ordinances and
regulations to the contrary, a person who violates or fails to comply with any
provision of this chapter (including, without limitation, any notice, order,
permit, decision or determination promulgated, issued or made by the POTW under
this chapter) is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to
payment of a civil fine of not less than $1,000 per day for each infraction and
not more than $10,000 per day for each infraction, plus costs and other
sanctions.
   B.   Repeat offenses; increased fines. Increased fines may be imposed for
repeat offenses. As used in this section, REPEAT OFFENSE means a second (or any
subsequent) municipal civil infraction violation of the same requirement or
provision of this chapter (i) committed by a person within any 90-day period
and (ii) for which the person admits responsibility or is determined to be
responsible. The increased fine for a repeat offense under this chapter shall
be as follows:
      1.   The fine for any offense that is a first repeat offense shall be not
less than $2,500, plus costs.
      2.   The fine for any offense that is a second repeat offense or any
subsequent repeat offense shall be not less than $5,000, plus costs.
   C.   Amount of fines. Subject to the minimum fine amounts specified in
§§ 35-114A. and B., the following factors shall be considered by the court in
determining the amount of a municipal civil infraction fine following the
issuance of a municipal civil infraction citation for a violation of this
chapter: the type, nature, severity, frequency, duration, preventability,
potential and actual effect, and economic benefit to the violator (such as
delayed or avoided costs or competitive advantage) of a violation; the
violator’s recalcitrance or efforts to comply; the economic impacts of the fine
on the violator; and such other matters as justice may require. A violator
shall bear the burden of demonstrating the presence and degree of any
mitigating factors to be considered in determining the amount of a fine.
However, mitigating factors shall not be considered unless it is determined
that the violator has made all good faith efforts to correct and terminate all
violations.
282   Plainwell - Code of Ordinances
   D.   Authorized local official. Notwithstanding any other provision of the
city’s laws, ordinances and regulations to the contrary, the following persons
are designated as the authorized local officials to issue municipal civil
infraction citations directing alleged violators to appear in district court
for violations of this chapter (or, if applicable, to issue municipal civil
infraction notices directing alleged violators to appear at a municipal
ordinance violations bureau): the POTW Superintendent, any sworn law
enforcement officer, and any other persons so designated by the city.
   E.   Other requirements and procedures. Except as otherwise provided by this
section, or by other provisions of the city code, the requirements and
procedures for commencing municipal civil infraction actions; issuance and
service of municipal civil infraction citations; determination and collection
of court-ordered fines, costs and expenses; appearances and payment of fines
and costs; failure to answer, appear or pay fines; disposition of fines, costs
and expenses paid; and other matters regarding municipal civil infractions
shall be as set forth in Public Act 236 of 1961, as amended.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-115. CRIMINAL PENALTIES; IMPRISONMENT.
   A.   Any person who:
      1.   At the time of a violation knew or should have known that a
pollutant or substance was discharged contrary to any provision of this
chapter, or contrary to any notice, order, permit, decision or determination
promulgated, issued or made by the POTW under this chapter; or
      2.   Intentionally makes a false statement, representation, or
certification in an application for, or form pertaining to a permit, or in a
notice, report, or record required by this chapter, or in any other
correspondence or communication, written or oral, with the POTW regarding
matters regulated by this chapter; or
      3.   Intentionally falsifies, tampers with, or renders inaccurate any
sampling or monitoring device or record required to be maintained by this
chapter; or
      4.   Commits any other act that is punishable under state law by
imprisonment for more than 93 days;
   B.   Shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine
of $500 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for up to 93 days, or both in
the discretion of the court.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
   Sewer Use   283
Sec. 35-116. CONTINUING VIOLATION.
   Each act of violation, and each day or portion of a day that a violation of
this chapter (or of any permit, order, notice or agreement issued or entered
into under this chapter) exists or occurs, constitutes a separate violation
subject to the fines, penalties and other sanctions and remedies as provided by
this chapter.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-117. NUMBER OF VIOLATIONS.
   The number of violations resulting from a user’s noncompliance with
applicable discharge prohibitions or effluent limitations shall be determined
as follows:
   A.   Applicable concentration limitations and mass (or loading) limitations
shall be treated as separate limitations, and a user may be liable and
penalized separately for exceeding any of those limitations for a single
pollutant or sampling parameter.
   B.   Each violation of a daily maximum limit for a single pollutant or
sampling parameter shall constitute a separate violation for each day on which
the violation occurs or continues.
   C.   Each violation of an instantaneous minimum or instantaneous maximum
limit for a single pollutant or sampling parameter shall constitute a separate
violation for each such occurrence, and there may be multiple violations for
each day on which such a violation occurs or continues.
   D.   Each violation of a monthly average limit (or of some other average
limit period) for a single pollutant or sampling parameter shall constitute a
separate violation for each day of the month (or other stated period) during
which the violation occurred, regardless of the number of days on which samples
were actually taken. (For example, in a month with 31 days, a violation of the
monthly average limit for that month constitutes 31 violations for each
pollutant parameter for which the monthly average limit was exceeded during the
month.)
   E.   Except with regard to violations of average limits as provided by § 35-
117D., a violation will be deemed to have continued to occur each day beginning
with the first day the violation occurred to the day the user is able to
demonstrate through appropriate sampling results that the violation is no
longer occurring.
   F.   If for any period a user has violated both a daily maximum limit and an
average limit for a particular pollutant parameter, then the total number of
violations is the sum of the days on which the daily maximum limit was violated
plus the number of days in the averaging period.
   G.   If a user permit regulates more than one outfall, each outfall shall be
considered separately in computing the number of violations as provided by this
section.
284   Plainwell - Code of Ordinances
   H.   If a user is discharging a wastestream that is required to be monitored
and analyzed under continuous monitoring procedures (such as for pH or any
other parameter that is required to be monitored and analyzed under continuous
monitoring) then all of the following shall apply:
      1.   If at any time during a daily 24-hour period the continuous
monitoring shows that the monitored parameter exceeded the instantaneous
minimum, instantaneous maximum, or daily maximum limit for that parameter, then
a violation has occurred.
      2.   If during a daily 24-hour period under continuous monitoring the
monitored parameter exceeds the instantaneous minimum, instantaneous maximum,
or daily maximum limit more than once after returning to compliance during that
period, then each such exceedence shall be considered a separate violation.
      3.   If during a daily 24-hour period under continuous monitoring the
monitored parameter exceeds the instantaneous minimum, instantaneous maximum,
or daily limit into the next daily 24-hour period (i.e., the exceedence occurs
both before and after midnight), then the exceedence will be considered a
separate violation on both days.
      4.   If during a daily 24-hour period under continuous monitoring the
monitored parameter exceeds instantaneous minimum, instantaneous maximum, or
the daily limit for more than 66% of the 24-hour, as determined in minutes of
the day, then the user will be considered to be in significant non-compliance.
   I.   One violation occurs on: each day that a report is late; and each day
after an action required to be completed is not completed.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-118. NUISANCE.
   A violation of this chapter, or of any permit, order, notice or agreement
issued or entered into under this chapter, is deemed to be a public nuisance
and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the city. In addition to any
other legal or equitable remedies available under the law, any person creating
a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of state law, this
chapter, or other ordinance of the city governing such nuisances, including
reimbursing the city for any costs incurred in removing, abating, or remedying
said nuisance, as applicable.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-119. REIMBURSEMENT OF CITY.
   A.   1.   Any person who discharges to the POTW (including, but not limited
to, any person who causes or creates a discharge that violates any provision of
this chapter, produces a deposit or obstruction, or otherwise damages, injures,
or impairs the POTW, or causes or contributes to a violation
   Sewer Use   285
of any federal, state or local law governing the POTW, whether any such act is
intentional or unintentional) shall be liable to and shall fully reimburse the
POTW for all expenses, costs, losses or damages (direct or indirect) payable or
incurred by the POTW as a result of, or associated with, any discharge,
deposit, obstruction, damage, injury, impairment, violation, exceedence,
noncompliance, or act. The costs that must be reimbursed to the POTW shall
include, but shall not be limited to, all of the following:
         a.   All costs incurred by the POTW in responding to the violation or
discharge, including, expenses for any cleaning, repair or replacement work,
and the costs of sampling, monitoring, and treatment, as a result of the
discharge, violation, or noncompliance.
         b.   All costs to the POTW of monitoring, surveillance, and
enforcement in connection with investigating, verifying, and prosecuting any
discharge, violation, or noncompliance.
         c.   The full amount of any fines, assessments, penalties, and claims,
including natural resource damages, levied against the POTW, or any POTW
representative, by any governmental agency or third party as a result of a
violation of the POTW’s NPDES permit (or other applicable law or regulation)
that is caused by or contributed to by any discharge, violation, or
noncompliance.
         d.   All costs incurred by the city in connection with a local unit of
government’s failure or refusal to fully comply with the terms and requirements
of the local unit’s wastewater treatment service agreement with the city.
         e.   The full value of any city staff time (including any
administrative and overhead costs and any required overtime), consultant and
engineering fees, and actual attorney fees and defense costs (including the
POTW’s legal counsel and any special legal counsel), associated with reviewing,
responding to, investigating, verifying, and/or prosecuting any discharge,
violation, or noncompliance or otherwise incurred by the POTW in administering
and enforcing the requirements of this chapter.
      2.   Further, the POTW is authorized to correct any violation of this
chapter or damage or impairment to the POTW caused by a discharge and to bill
the person causing the violation or discharge for the amounts to be reimbursed.
The costs reimbursable under this section shall be in addition to fees, amounts
or other costs and expenses required to be paid by users under other sections
of this chapter.
   B.   In determining the amounts to be reimbursed, the POTW may consider
factors such as, but not limited to, the following:
      1.   The volume of the discharge.
      2.   The length of time the discharge occurred.
      3.   The composition of the discharge.
286   Plainwell - Code of Ordinances
      4.   The nature, extent, and degree of success the POTW may achieve in
minimizing or mitigating the effect of the discharge.
      5.   The toxicity, degradability, treatability and dispersal
characteristics of the discharges.
      6.   The direct and indirect costs incurred by the POTW, or imposed upon
the POTW to treat the discharges, including sludge handling and disposal costs.
      7.   Fines, assessments, levies, charges, expenses and penalties imposed
upon and/or incurred by the POTW, including the POTW’s costs of defense of
actions, or suits brought or threatened against the POTW by governmental
agencies or third parties.
      8.   Such other factors, including the amount of any attorney’s fees;
engineering, consultant, and expert fees; expenses, costs, sampling and
analytical fees; repairs; as the POTW deems appropriate under the
circumstances.
   C.   Costs to be reimbursed to the POTW as provided by this section may be
assessed to the user as provided by § 35-112 of this chapter, or as otherwise
determined appropriate by the POTW Superintendent in conjunction with an
enforcement action.
   D.   The failure by any person to pay any amounts required to be reimbursed
to the POTW as provided by this section shall constitute an additional
violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-120. REVIEW OR APPROVAL BY CITY.
   In no case shall the review and/or approval by the city of a user’s plans,
specifications or operating procedures entitle a user to relief from
enforcement actions for failure to achieve compliance with the applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-121. SEVERANCE OR SUSPENSION OF SEWER AND/OR WATER SERVICE.
   If a user violates or continues to violate any provision of this chapter
(including, without limitation, any notice, order, permit, decision or
determination promulgated, issued or made by the POTW under this chapter), or
if the city determines that the user’s actual or proposed discharge may present
an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or
the environment, the city may immediately, and without notice, sever or suspend
sewer and/or water service provided to the user by the city. If severed or
suspended, the sewer and/or water service shall recommence only after the user
has satisfactorily demonstrated to the city the user’s ability to comply with
all applicable provisions of this chapter, and only at the user’s sole expense.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
   Sewer Use   287
Sec. 35-122. JUDICIAL RELIEF.
   With the approval of the city, in conjunction with the city’s legal counsel,
the POTW Superintendent may institute legal proceedings in a court of competent
jurisdiction to seek all appropriate relief for violations of this chapter or
of any permit, order, notice or agreement issued or entered into under this
chapter. The action may seek temporary or permanent injunctive relief, damages,
penalties, costs, and any other relief, at law or equity, that a court may
order. The POTW Superintendent may also seek collection of surcharges, fines,
penalties and any other amounts due to the POTW that a person has not paid.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-123. CUMULATIVE REMEDIES.
   The imposition of a single penalty, fine, notice, order, damage, or
surcharge upon any person for a violation of this chapter, or of any permit,
order, notice or agreement issued or entered into under this chapter, shall not
preclude (or be a prerequisite for) the imposition by the POTW or a court of
competent jurisdiction of a combination of any or all of those sanctions and
remedies or additional sanctions and remedies with respect to the same
violation, consistent with applicable limitations on penalty amounts under
state or federal laws or regulations. A criminal citation and prosecution of a
criminal action against a person shall not be dependent upon and need not be
held in abeyance during any civil, judicial, or administrative proceeding,
conference, or hearing regarding the person.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
   ARTICLE XVIII. ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW AND APPEALS
Sec. 35-124. PROCEDURES AVAILABLE.
   Any person aggrieved by a notice of violation, order, or other action taken
by the POTW Superintendent under this chapter may request review and
reconsideration by the POTW Superintendent and/or may appeal to the Wastewater
Board of Appeals as provided by this article. If review and reconsideration or
appeal is not properly and timely requested in connection with an action as
provided by this article, the action shall be deemed final. The person
requesting the appeal shall pay an appeal fee in the amount determined from
time to time by the city. The appeal fee shall be paid at the time that the
appeal is requested.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
288   Plainwell - Code of Ordinances
Sec. 35-125. REVIEW AND RECONSIDERATION BY THE POTW SUPERINTENDENT.
   A request for a review and reconsideration by the POTW Superintendent must
be made in writing within seven days from the date of the POTW Superintendent’s
action in question. The request must state the reasons for the review and shall
include all supporting documents and dates. A hearing on the request shall be
scheduled at the earliest practicable date as determined by the POTW
Superintendent. The hearing shall be conducted on an informal basis at the
wastewater treatment plant or at another location designated by the
Superintendent. The POTW Superintendent shall conduct the hearing. Following
the informal hearing, the POTW Superintendent may affirm or reverse, in whole
or in part, the action appealed from, or may make any order, requirement,
decision or determination as, in the Superintendent’s opinion, ought to be made
in the case under consideration. The POTW Superintendent shall notify the
aggrieved person of the decision on the request within 14 days of the hearing.
The POTW Superintendent may request additional information and extend the time
for his/her decision by an additional seven days following the submission of
the additional information. The decision of the Superintendent may be appealed
to the Wastewater Board of Appeals as provided by § 35-126. All supporting
documentation and information shall be provided solely by the person requesting
the appeal.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-126. APPEAL TO WASTEWATER BOARD OF APPEALS.
   A.   The City Council of the city shall serve as a Wastewater Board of
Appeals (WBA). The WBA shall consider appeals from final decisions of the POTW
Superintendent (and other appeals as expressly provided by this chapter). The
WBA shall adopt its own rules of procedure, and keep a record of its
proceedings, showing findings of fact, the action of the board, and the vote of
each member upon each question considered. The presence of five members of the
WBA shall be necessary to constitute a quorum.
   B.   The following provisions shall govern appeals of final decisions of the
POTW Superintendent made to the WBA under this chapter:
      1.   An appeal from any final action of the POTW Superintendent must be
made to the WBA within seven days from the date of the action appealed. The
appeal may be taken by any person aggrieved by the action. The appellant shall
file a written notice of appeal with the POTW Superintendent and with the WBA.
The notice of appeal shall specify the grounds for the appeal and shall be
accompanied by a non-refundable appeal fee of $500. Failure to file a timely
notice of appeal shall be deemed to be a waiver of the right to appeal.
      2.   Prior to a hearing before the WBA regarding an appeal, the POTW
Superintendent shall transmit to the WBA a written summary of all previous
action taken in connection with the action being appealed. The WBA may, at the
WBA’s discretion, request the POTW Superintendent to provide further
information regarding the action that is the subject of the appeal.
   Sewer Use   289
      3.   The WBA shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal.
Notice of the hearing shall be provided at least ten days in advance of the
hearing to require the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production
of evidence relevant to any matter involved in the hearing. The appellant must
submit an exhibit and witness list to the WBA at least five days before the
hearing or as directed by the WBA.
      4.   The WBA shall conduct the hearing. At the hearing, attorneys may
represent the parties and they may file briefs, present evidence, and call,
examine and cross-examine witnesses. Any testimony taken at the hearing shall
be under oath and recorded. A copy of the transcript of the hearing shall be
made available at cost to any person upon payment of applicable charges for the
transcript.
      5.   The WBA shall admit all testimony having reasonable probative value
and shall exclude irrelevant or unduly repetitious testimony, as determined by
the WBA. The WBA shall not be bound by common law or statutory rules of
evidence. The appellant shall have the burden of proof and persuasion for
showing that the POTW Superintendent’s decision was clearly erroneous.
      6.   Within 30 days after the completion of the hearing, the WBA shall
mail or otherwise deliver to all of the parties a written decision granting,
denying or modifying the decision appealed and/or relief being sought. The
decision of the WBA on the matter shall be final, and shall be a final
determination for purposes of judicial review.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-127. PAYMENT OF CHARGES, PENALTIES, FINES, AND OTHER COSTS OR FEES
PENDING OUTCOME OF APPEAL.
   All service charges, penalties, fines, fees, surcharges, costs or expenses
outstanding during any appeal process shall be due and payable to the POTW and
the city, as applicable. Upon resolution of any appeal, the amounts due and
payable shall be adjusted accordingly, provided that any refunds shall be
retroactive to the previous four monthly billings only. The POTW may terminate
wastewater treatment services if a corrective course of action is not taken or
if service charges, penalties, fines, fees, surcharges, costs, or expenses are
not paid by a user.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-128. FINALITY OF ACTION.
   If an appeal is not demanded as provided by this article within the periods
specified by this article, the POTW Superintendent’s action shall be deemed
final. If an appeal is properly demanded, the action appealed shall be
suspended until a final determination has been made by the WBA, except for
orders
290   Plainwell - Code of Ordinances
to immediately cease and desist discharge; orders to terminate sewer services;
other emergency orders or actions where a suspension or delay might endanger
human health, the environment, or the POTW; and as otherwise expressly provided
by this chapter (such as for permit appeals, § 35-44).
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-129. APPEALS FROM DETERMINATION OF WBA.
   Appeals from a final determination of the WBA may be made to circuit court
as provided by law. All findings of fact made by the WBA, if supported by the
evidence, shall be deemed conclusive.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
   ARTICLE XIX. PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE
Sec. 35-130. PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE.
   It is a misdemeanor for any person to maliciously or willfully break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or
equipment that is part of the POTW. Any person violating this provision shall
be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct, and shall be
subject to other sanctions and remedies as provided by this chapter, including,
but not limited to, reimbursement of the POTW as provided by § 17.11 of this
chapter.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
   ARTICLE XX. MUNICIPAL LIABILITY
Sec. 35-131. MUNICIPAL LIABILITY.
   Neither the POTW nor the city (including, but not limited to, city staff,
employees, and officials) shall be responsible for interruptions of service due
to natural calamities, equipment failures, or the actions of users. It shall be
the responsibility of the users that all connected equipment remain in good
working order so as not to cause disruption of service of any sewer or
treatment plant equipment.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
   Sewer Use   291
   ARTICLE XXI. INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT PROGRAM FEES
Sec. 35-132. PURPOSE.
   It is a purpose of this chapter to provide for the recovery from users of
the POTW of all costs incurred by the POTW for the administration and
implementation by the POTW of the industrial pretreatment program (IPP)
established by this chapter. The IPP fees provided for by this article are
separate from, and in addition to, amounts chargeable to users for sewage
disposal services by the city and/or the POTW and costs required to be
reimbursed to the city and/or the POTW under any other provisions of this
chapter or other laws and regulations.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-133. FEES.
   IPP fees payable by users may include, but are not limited to, any of the
following:
   A.   Fees to reimburse the POTW for the costs of development and operation
of an industrial pretreatment program, and fees to reimburse the POTW for
monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures, including expenses
incurred for analysis of samples.
   B.   Fees for reviewing discharge reports, and for related enforcement
procedures.
   C.   Fees associated with permit applications, permit renewals, and permit
transfers.
   D.   Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction.
   E.   Fees for filing appeals.
   F.   Fees for removal by the POTW of pollutants subject to federal or state
pretreatment standards.
   G.   User fees based on volume of waste and concentration or quantity of
specific pollutants in the discharge.
   H.   Other charges or fees for services or procedures performed by the POTW
as are required by law.
   I.   Such other charges or fees as the POTW may deem necessary to perform
fully the provisions of applicable federal and state laws, this chapter, rules
and regulations issued or adopted pursuant to law or ordinance, and terms and
conditions of service.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
292   Plainwell - Code of Ordinances
Sec. 35-134. IPP FEE AMOUNTS.
   A.   IPP fees shall be paid by users to the POTW in amounts determined
necessary by the POTW from time to time to reimburse the POTW for all costs and
expenses incurred by the POTW in administering the IPP. To the extent
practical, the fees shall be set in an amount to include at least the POTW’s
average total costs for that purpose. With regard to IPP activities undertaken
by the POTW with regard to particular users, the fees shall be charged to the
users on a time and materials basis, including, but not limited to, the full
value of any city staff time (including any administrative and overhead costs
and any required overtime), consultant and engineering fees, and actual
attorney fees and defense costs, plus general administrative expenses, based on
the nature and requirements of the IPP activities undertaken for each user.
   B.   Prior to accepting a user’s proposed discharge, the POTW may be
required to evaluate the ability or capacity of the POTW to accept the
discharge by means, including, but not limited to, a headworks analysis or
treatability study, as determined necessary by the POTW Superintendent. All
such evaluation and analysis or other required means shall be at the sole cost
of the user proposing the discharge and shall be paid in full by the user
according to the timetable and subject to any terms or conditions established
by the POTW Superintendent, and whether or not the discharge (or any part
thereof) is ultimately approved. The POTW Superintendent may require the user
to post a deposit or other form of surety, as determined sufficient and
appropriate by the Superintendent, to ensure payment by the user of all such
costs.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-135. BILLING AND COLLECTION OF IPP FEES; DISTRIBUTION.
   A.   User permit application fees shall be due upon submission of permit
applications. For each year thereafter, annual fees shall be due on the first
day of the month following the anniversary date of the user permit. Except as
otherwise required by the POTW, all other IPP fees shall be due within 30 days
of the date of the activity or service for which the fee is required. For fees
not paid at the time of service, the amount of the fee shall be added to the
user’s sewage disposal service charges or billed separately. IPP fees provided
for by this article shall be billed, collected and enforced pursuant to the
procedures as provided by POTW for user charges as provided by § 35-140 and/or
as otherwise established by the POTW.
   B.   Fees collected as provided by this article shall be credited to the
sewer fund and shall be used to fund the industrial pretreatment program.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
   Sewer Use   293
   ARTICLE XXII. USER CHARGE SYSTEM
Sec. 35-136. GENERALLY.
   This article provides for the establishment and collection of user charges
from users of the POTW. (See also, IPP fees which are addressed under Article
XXI, and connection and inspection fees which are addressed under Article IV.)
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-137. USER CHARGE SYSTEM.
   A.   The City Council shall adopt from time-to-time by resolution a user
charge system to establish the user charges as determined necessary and
appropriate by the City Council to pay the operation and maintenance costs
(including replacement costs), and such other costs and expenses that are or
may be incurred by the city in connection with the city’s ownership and
operation of the POTW, and to pay any other POTW-related costs and expenses
that may otherwise be required by applicable local, state, and federal laws and
regulations, or POTW-related financial obligations such as debt service.
   B.   The user charge system may include commodity charges, readiness-to-
serve charges, and such other charge components and other provisions as
determined necessary and appropriate by the City Council to meet the purposes
and intent of this article and this chapter, consistent with applicable laws
and regulations.
   C.   The specific rates, rate methodologies, and rate policies and
procedures for user charges as applicable to users (or user classes) shall be
established from time-to-time by resolution of the City Council.
   D.   User charges established by the City Council and levied on users may be
based on a user’s actual or estimated flow (volume and/or rate), actual or
estimated wastewater strength, and such other factors determined necessary and
appropriate by the City Council. The City Council may also establish user
classes to which user charges are applied, including, but not limited to, user
classes that distinguish between domestic and nondomestic users and/or
subclasses thereof (such as residential, commercial, institutional, industrial,
and other subclasses).
   E.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, in
situations where user charges are to be based on estimated wastewater flow and/
or wastewater strength for a particular user (or user class), the following
methodologies may apply (singly or in combination) as determined appropriate by
the city and consistent with the city’s then current rate methodologies,
policies and procedures:
      1.   The flow may be estimated by the city based on a user’s most recent
water meter reading (or most recent water meter reading for winter water use).
      2.   If no city water is available to a user or in other circumstances
determined appropriate by the City Council, the user’s flow may be estimated
based on a specified number of gallons per month per facility (or residential
equivalent) unit as determined by the city.
      3.   If a discharge meter has been installed for a user’s discharge, for
any period that the meter is not in operation or the user’s daily effluent flow
is not measured for any reason, the daily effluent flow for that period may be
deemed to be an amount equal to the average of the daily flow meter readings
for the prior 90 days on which reliable, accurate, and representative flow
meter readings were obtained, as determined by the POTW Superintendent.
      4.   Such other methodologies to estimate wastewater flow and/or strength
as determined appropriate and consistent with good utility practices by the
POTW Superintendent.
   F.   In lieu of estimated flows, and subject to approval (with or without
conditions) by the POTW Superintendent, a user may install a water meter to
measure the actual water consumption to calculate the applicable user charge.
All costs and expenses for and related to the installation, maintenance, and
calibration of water meter shall be paid for solely by the user.
   G.   As determined necessary and appropriate by the POTW Superintendent or
as otherwise required by a user permit, order, notice or agreement issued or
entered into under this chapter, a user may be required to install a water
meter and/or sampling and monitoring equipment or facilities to measure the
user’s actual wastewater flow and/or strength upon which the user charge shall
be based. All costs and expenses for and related to the installation,
maintenance, and calibration of the water meter and/or sampling and monitoring
equipment or facilities shall be paid for solely by the user.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-138. COMMODITY CHARGES.
   As part of the city’s user charge system, the city council shall establish
commodity charges to be levied on users of the POTW. The commodity charges may
include charges for wastewater treatment services, surcharges, and other
charges determined appropriate by the City Council.
   A.   Wastewater treatment service charges. For discharges treated at the
POTW treatment plant, a wastewater treatment service charge shall be
established and levied based on the wastewater flow and/or strength and/or
other factors as determined appropriate by the City Council.
   B.   Surcharges. Surcharges shall be established and levied to reimburse the
POTW for all costs incurred by the POTW in handling or treating a discharge
that contains pollutants in excess of specified surcharge concentrations,
loadings or other applicable limits.
      1.   Any user exceeding applicable surcharge threshold limitations shall
be subject to the imposition of one or more surcharges as provided by this
section to reimburse the POTW for any costs or expenses, direct or indirect,
the POTW may incur in handling or treating the discharge, or which may be
imposed upon the city, where the exceedence of applicable limits causes or
contributes to those costs or expenses. These costs may include, but are not
limited to, the actual extra costs of treatment including chemical, equipment,
and personnel costs.
      2.   The amount of a surcharge shall be based on the surcharge rate
schedule prepared by the POTW Superintendent and approved from time-to-time by
resolution of the City Council, plus other costs and expenses as provided by
this section.
      3.   The applicable surcharge for a User shall be assessed for all
discharges during the entire period beginning with the first sample results
that exceed the surcharge threshold limit and continuing until statistically
significant sample results are obtained which do not exceed the surcharge
threshold limit, as determined by the POTW. To be considered statistically
significant, the user shall take a minimum of four samples over the three
consecutive months following any sample result that exceeds the surcharge
threshold limit, and shall continue such sampling until the expected value of
the mean of the sampling results is less than the applicable surcharge
threshold limit. The cost and responsibility to demonstrate that a discharge no
longer exceeds the surcharge threshold shall be borne solely by the user.
      4.   All exceedences of applicable discharge prohibitions and limitations
and all instances of noncompliance with applicable discharge requirements shall
constitute a violation of this chapter, subject to applicable fines, penalties
and other enforcement actions provided by this chapter. In no event shall the
imposition of a surcharge for a discharge which does not meet the applicable
prohibitions, limitations or requirements be construed as authorizing the
illegal discharge or otherwise excuse a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-139. READINESS-TO-SERVE CHARGE.
   A readiness-to-serve charge shall be established and levied by the city on
users of the POTW. The effective rate for RTS charges shall be calculated each
year by the city on the basis of the estimated need for the current year,
considering capital improvement plans and actual expenses incurred by the city
during the prior 12-month audit period, using the methodology as established
from time-to-time by resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-140. APPLICATION OF USER CHARGES.
   A.   Bulk metered discharges. For discharges from a user that are bulk
metered and treated at the city’s wastewater treatment plant, monthly user
charges shall be determined by applying the applicable commodity charge rates
to the monthly wastewater flow and strength characteristics from each bulk
metering station.
      1.   The confirmation of wastewater flow and the determination of
wastewater strength characteristics shall be performed by the user at least
twice each year under dry weather conditions during the months of May or June,
and October or November (or such other months as specified by the POTW
Superintendent) using representative samples and testing for sample parameters
as determined necessary by the POTW Superintendent, at the user’s sole cost.
      2.   The wastewater characteristics for each bulk metering station shall
be updated each year. Updated wastewater characteristics from May and June
sampling shall be used for monthly billings of July through December. Updated
wastewater characteristics from October and November shall be used for monthly
billings of January through June. If the POTW Superintendent requires (or the
User performs) additional wastewater sampling and analysis, then the cost of
such work shall be paid for by the user.
      3.   The city and the user may mutually agree to an alternate system of
determining wastewater characteristics if the alternate system is more accurate
and cost effective than the system described in this paragraph.
      4.   The specific methodology used for computing monthly user charges for
bulk metered flow shall be as established from time-to-time by resolution of
the City Council.
      5.   If an analysis of wastewater discharged by the user identifies any
strength characteristic in excess of normal strength domestic waste, then a
surcharge may be levied against the user by the city on any such excess
characteristic.
   B.   Individually metered discharges. If any discharge from a user is not
bulk metered, but is individually metered (such as at a user’s premises) and
passes through the city’s wastewater facilities, monthly user charges shall be
determined by applying the applicable commodity charge rates to the monthly
wastewater flow and strength characteristics of the individually metered
discharge.
      1.   The specific methodology used to compute user charges for
individually metered discharges shall be as established from time-to-time by
resolution of the City Council.
      2.   Except as otherwise specified by this chapter (or by any permit,
order, decision or determination issued or made under this chapter), users
shall follow the sampling, analysis, and monitoring requirements and procedures
as provided by Article IX of this chapter.
      3.   If an analysis of wastewater discharged from any user identifies any
strength characteristic in excess of normal strength domestic waste, then a
surcharge may be levied by the city against the user on any such excess
characteristic.
   C.   If any required meter fails, the meter shall be fixed or replaced at no
expense to the city by no more than 90 days from the date of the failure.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-141. RATES, CHARGES AND BILLING PROCEDURE.
   The amounts to be charged to users by the POTW under this chapter shall be
established from time-to-time by resolution of the City Council. All sums due
shall be billed according to a schedule established by resolution of the City
Council. If not paid within 15 days of due date, an additional charge equal to
10% of the total unpaid balance shall be added. Any delinquent bills with
penalties due the city (including any delinquent amounts determined to be
payable to the city under Sec. 4 of Article XI) shall be a lien against the
premises served and shall be spread on the next regular city tax roll. The lien
arising under this section shall be of the same effect as a lien created by
state and county taxes and collection shall be enforced in a like manner.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-142. USER CHARGE REVISIONS.
   A.   City to review. The City Council will review user wastewater
contributions, the total costs of operation and maintenance of the POTW, and
its user charge system, as provided by this section.
   B.   Purpose of review. The City Council will review and revise user charges
as determined necessary by the City Council to accomplish the following: (1)
maintain the proportionate distribution of operation and maintenance costs
among users and/or user classes; (2) generate sufficient revenue to pay the
total operation and maintenance costs necessary to the proper operation and
maintenance (including replacement) of the POTW; and (3) generate sufficient
revenue to pay for capital improvements and/or requirements of the POTW five-
year plan. The review process shall be conducted at least once every five
years.
   C.   User charge rates to be reviewed and amended. User charge rates shall
be reviewed and amended for the projected 12-month service period as determined
necessary by the City Council. Amendments to user charge rates shall be
determined following the applicable methodologies as established from time-to-
time by resolution of the City Council. If a User or the city identify a
substantive error in calculation or measurement of wastewater that has affected
the user charges, the party identifying the error shall present documentation
that confirms the error, and the city will either refund the amount of the
error or charge the correct amount to the user, as applicable. Either the
refund paid by the city to the user or the balance due from the user to the
city shall be paid prior to the first day of March in the year in which the
biennial review process is completed, unless other payment arrangements are
mutually agreed to by the city and the user. In no case shall the city issue a
refund to a user for any period in excess of the 12-month period that occurs
immediately prior to identification of an error confirmed by the city as
provided by this division.
   D.   Interim cost adjustments. User charges shall be adjusted by the city
based on revised budgets, as determined necessary by the city.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
Sec. 35-143. NO FREE SERVICE.
   No free service, or service at less than cost, shall be furnished by the
POTW to any person, firm or corporation, public or private, or to any public
agency or instrumentality.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
ARTICLE XXIII. DISCHARGES FROM OTHER LOCAL
UNITS OF GOVERNMENT
Sec. 35-144. WASTEWATER TREATMENT SERVICE AGREEMENTS; LOCAL UNIT SEWER USE
ORDINANCES.
   A.   Any local unit of government, other than the city, that discharges into
the POTW (or that has users or premises located within the local unit that
discharge into the POTW) shall, as a condition to commencing and/or continuing
such discharges, meet all of the following requirements:
      1.   The local unit shall enter into a wastewater treatment service
agreement (WTSA) With the city that sets forth the terms, conditions, and
requirements applicable to current and future discharges from the local unit
(and from any user or premises located within the local unit) to the POTW, and
to the city’s acceptance and treatment of such discharges. The WTSA shall
specify the boundaries of the service district within the local unit that is
eligible to discharge to the POTW. No portion of a local unit’s service
district shall extend outside the political and/or geographical limits of the
local unit; provided that the city may agree to extend a local unit’s service
district to include specified areas located outside the local unit’s boundaries
if the local unit has jurisdiction and regulatory control over sewer service
related matters outside its boundaries (such as through a valid, enforceable
agreement under Public Act 425 of 1984) as determined sufficient by the city,
subject to any terms and conditions as determined necessary by the city to
enable the city to fully meet it’s obligations under applicable laws and
regulations regarding the city’s POTW and the city’s NPDES permit. If a local
unit’s service district is allowed to extend outside the local unit’s
boundaries as provided by this section, the local unit’s WTSA shall, as a
condition to commencing or continuing discharges from the extended service
district to the POTW, be amended accordingly to specify and delineate the
extended service district.
      2.   The local unit shall adopt, and keep continually in force and up-to-
date, an ordinance that, except as specifically provided by this subdivision,
shall be identical to the sewer use regulations as provided by this chapter
(and as this chapter is amended from time to time by the city). (If the local
unit does not have authority to adopt an ordinance, the local unit shall
instead adopt regulations or other provisions with the force of law that meet
the requirements of this subdivision otherwise applicable to a local unit’s
ordinance, as determined sufficient by the city.)
         a.   The ordinance adopted by the local unit (the “local unit’s sewer
use ordinance”) shall expressly designate, empower and authorize the city to
act as the agent and representative of the local unit for purposes of
administering and enforcing the local unit’s sewer use ordinance within the
local unit’s service district. This shall include, but shall not be limited to,
the power and authority of the city, as deemed necessary by the city, to
immediately and independently investigate, enforce, and prosecute
(administratively or judicially, and civilly or criminally) any violation of
this chapter, of the local unit’s sewer use ordinance, or of any notice, order,
permit, decision or determination promulgated, issued or made by the POTW
Superintendent under this chapter or the local unit’s sewer use ordinance, and
to otherwise implement the requirements of this chapter and the local unit’s
sewer use ordinance.
         b.   The local unit’s sewer use ordinance shall expressly require and
provide: that all costs and expenses incidental to the installation, connection
and maintenance, including inspections, of sewer stubs and building leads shall
be at no cost to the city; and that the owner of any premises connected to a
collection system which discharges to the wastewater treatment system must
agree to, and shall be liable to, indemnify the city and hold the city harmless
from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the
installation, connection and maintenance of a sewer stub and building lead,
including, but not limited to, loss or damage from sewer backups not caused by
the city, or any other loss or damage not caused by the city resulting from the
premise’s discharges to the wastewater treatment system, consistent with
applicable laws and regulations.
         c.   The only other deviations and differences permitted between this
chapter and the local unit’s sewer use ordinance shall be those that reflect
the fact that the local unit’s sewer use ordinance is being adopted as an
ordinance by the local unit, and any other deviations or differences that are
approved in advance by the city.
         d.   At the city’s request, the local unit shall terminate service to
any user or premises that fails to comply with the local unit’s sewer use
ordinance.
         e.   If a local unit’s service district is extended as provided by § 
35-144A.1., both the local unit and any other local unit being served pursuant
to the extended service district shall adopt a local sewer use ordinance as
provided by this subdivision; or there shall be a valid, enforceable agreement
under Public Act 425 of 1984 between all of the local units being served as
determined adequate by the city to enable the city to fully meet it’s
obligations under applicable laws and regulations regarding the city’s POTW and
the city’s NPDES permit.
         f.   The local unit shall adopt an ordinance as required by this
section (or make any amendments to revise the ordinance consistent with
revisions to this division as made by the city from time to time) no later than
90 days after written notice from the city.
   B.   It shall be a violation of this chapter for a local unit that
discharges to the POTW (or a user located within the local unit) to fail or
refuse to comply with any provision of this chapter, any provision of the local
unit’s sewer use ordinance, any notice, order, permit, decision or
determination promulgated, issued or made by the POTW Superintendent under this
chapter or the local unit’s sewer use ordinance. Further, it shall be a
violation of this chapter for a local unit to discharge to the POTW except in
full compliance with the terms and requirements of the local unit’s WTSA.
   C.   Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter or other city ordinance
to the contrary, it shall be a violation of this chapter for a local unit, or
any user located within the local unit, to discharge (or continue to discharge)
to the POTW if:
      1.   The discharge is not solely from within the local unit’s service
district as authorized by the local unit’s WTSA; or
      2.   The discharge is from any portion of a collection system owned and/
or operated by or on behalf of a local unit that does not meet the standards
and specifications as required by the local unit’s WTSA or by other applicable
city laws and regulations; or
      3.   The local unit has failed or refused to adopt a local sewer use
ordinance (or subsequently amend such ordinance to conform with subsequent
amendments made by the city to this division), as provided by § 
35-144A.2.; or
      4.   The local unit or user has failed or refused to pay all or any
portion of charges, costs, expenses, penalties, fees, reimbursement, or other
amounts due and payable to the city under this chapter, under the local unit’s
sewer use ordinance, under any notice, order, permit, decision or determination
promulgated, issued or made by the POTW Superintendent under this chapter or
the local unit’s sewer use ordinance, or under the local unit’s WTSA.    
   D.   In addition to any other legal or equitable remedies available to the
city under this chapter or other applicable laws or regulations, the city may
refuse to accept and/or may terminate any discharge from a local unit’s service
district (or from any portion thereof or any user or premises located within
the local unit) to the POTW that does not comply with all of the terms,
conditions, and requirements of this chapter and/or the local unit’s WTSA, as
determined by the POTW.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
ARTICLE XXIV. SEVERABILITY
Sec. 35-145. SEVERABILITY.
   Sections of this chapter shall be deemed severable and should any section,
clause or provision of this chapter be declared to be invalid, the same shall
not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole or any part thereof other
than the part so declared to be invalid.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
ARTICLE XXV. SAVINGS CLAUSE
Sec. 35-146. SAVINGS CLAUSE.
   The amendment or repeal by this chapter of any ordinance or ordinance
provision shall have no effect upon prosecutions commenced prior to the
effective date of this chapter or prosecutions based upon actions taken by any
person prior to the effective date of this chapter. Those prosecutions shall be
conducted under the ordinance provisions in effect prior to the effective date
of this chapter.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
ARTICLE XXVI. CONFLICT
Sec. 35-147. CONFLICT.
   Except as otherwise expressly provided, the provisions of this Ordinance
shall control in the event of any inconsistency or conflict between this
Ordinance and any other provision of any other ordinance of the City.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
ARTICLE XXVII. PUBLICATION
Sec. 35-148. PUBLICATION.
   This section shall be published by publishing a summary of the section in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City of Plainwell, including the
designation in the publication of the location in the city where a true copy of
the chapter Can be inspected or obtained, as authorized by state law.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
ARTICLE XXVIII. EFFECTIVE DATE
Sec. 35-149. EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall become effective ten days after the date of publication
of the notice of its adoption as provided in § 
35-148, above, and as certified by the Clerk, in the ordinance codified herein.
(Ord. 355, passed - -2010)
CHAPTER 36: WATER USE
Section
   
36-1   Definitions
   
36-2   Ownership
   
36-3   Right of access and/or entry to premises where water is used
   
36-4   Liability
   
36-5   Charges for installation of distribution mains
   
36-6   Installation and maintenance of service connections
   
36-7   Connection charges
   
36-8   Cross connections
   
36-9   Location and size of meters
   
36-10   Service of more than one premises by the same meter
   
36-11   Prohibition against bypassing meter
   
36-12   Meters for water used during construction/unmetered water
   
36-13   Unlawful tapping, removing, installing and the like of mains, pipes,
meters and the like
   
36-14   Fire hydrants
   
36-15   Water pipes as electrical grounds
   
36-16   Connection charges and user rates
   
36-17   Water billing
   
36-18   Violations and penalties
Sec. 36-1. DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY BILLING CLERK. The person appointed by the City Manager responsible for
the billing and collection of fees for services as further described herein.
   CITY MANAGER. The City of Plainwell Manager.
   CUSTOMER. The person, persons or entity owning the property in or on which
water is consumed.
   METER. Any measuring device by which the quantity of water used by a
customer is measured.
   PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT. The Public Works Department of the City of
Plainwell.
   SERVICE CONNECTION or SERVICE PIPE. The pipe which delivers water from the
distribution main to the property line of the customer served.
   SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS. The Department of Public Works
Superintendent.
   WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM. The City of Plainwell’s complete potable water
distribution system including all well supplies, mains, service connections,
meters, storage facilities, hydrants, valves, apparatus or appurtenances
connected thereto.
(Ord. 217, eff. 6-1-1984)
Sec. 36-2. OWNERSHIP.
   Management of the water distribution system shall be and remain under the
management, supervision and control of the City Manager who may employ or
designate the person or persons in the capacity or capacities as he or she
deems advisable to carry out the efficient management and operation of the
system. The Administrator shall also make rules, orders or regulations as
deemed advisable and necessary to assure the efficient management and operation
of the system and to provide equitable charges for the service thereof. The
rules, regulations and charges shall be effective upon approval by the City
Council.
(Ord. 217, eff. 6-1-1984)
Sec. 36-3. RIGHT OF ACCESS AND/OR ENTRY TO PREMISES WHERE WATER IS USED.
   Department of Public Works employees of the city shall have the right to
enter any premises in which or on which city water is used, to inspect, adjust,
repair or remove water meters or appurtenances in connection with water
services, at any and all reasonable times. The Department shall have the right
to shut off the supply of water to any premises where the Department is not
able to obtain access to the meter.
(Ord. 217, eff. 6-1-1984)
Sec. 36-4. LIABILITY.
   A.   The city will endeavor to furnish continuous water service to the
customers, but does not guarantee uninterrupted service and will not be liable
for any damage which the customer may sustain by reason of failure of the water
supply or for damages to persons or property arising, occurring or resulting
from the supply of water or from any appurtenance or apparatus in connection
therewith. Whenever possible, a notice of intent to temporarily discontinue
service shall be given affected customers by public notice and/or mailed
notice.
   B.   The city shall not assume liability for intermittent water
discoloration during times of hydrant flushing and/or variations in flow. A
notice of hydrant flushing will be published a minimum of one week prior to
flushing.
(Ord. 217, eff. 6-1-1984)
Sec. 36-5. CHARGES FOR INSTALLATION OF DISTRIBUTION MAINS.
   A.   In all cases where the City Council is petitioned to install
distribution mains in easements or public rights-of-way, for any district or
development not presently served by city water, a charge, based upon cost
estimates for the completed project, providing acceptable service to the
district or development shall be paid for by the party or parties petitioning.
The extent and scope of service necessary for a district or development shall
be prescribed by the City Council in cooperation with the City Engineer, based
on sound engineering and operating practices and the legal requirements of any
other public agency.
   B.   The City Council shall provide water distribution system cost estimates
based upon previous construction costs and the projected changes in costs of
labor and materials prior to authorizing construction. For mains required
larger than ten inches in diameter, that portion of cost for the oversizing
shall be deemed to be “transmission facilities” and the cost differential
therefore shall be absorbed by the city.
   C.   Charges and/or collections for installations of water mains shall be as
follows.
      1.   Where the party or parties require a complete system to service a
plat, multi-family and/or developed complex, these costs shall be borne by the
party or parties. In addition, the actual costs of inspecting the connection
and/or chlorination, pressure testing and other required inspections by the
city shall be borne by the parties.
      2.   Charges for the various distribution construction projects installed
and/or contracted by the city must be paid in full prior to construction,
except where a separate contract is negotiated.
      3.   In case the City Council shall determine, by resolution, that the
expense for distribution mains shall be paid for by special assessment, the
normal assessment policies of the city shall apply.
      4.   In cases where arterial or distribution mains have been installed at
cost to the city, charges for these distribution facilities shall be made when
any abutting property is rendered service from the mains. These charges, for
each front foot of the connecting property, shall be based on costs per lineal
foot for distribution mains in effect at the time of the connection.
(Ord. 217, eff. 6-1-1984)
Sec. 36-6. INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF SERVICE CONNECTIONS.
   A.   The City of Plainwell Department of Public Works is responsible for the
maintenance of water mains and water services from the main to the water
service shut-off located on the city right-of-way. The property owner is
responsible for the maintenance of the water service from the shut-off to the
building.
   B.   At the request of the owner of the property or his or her duly
authorized representative, water service connections shall be installed and
maintained under the direction and control of the Superintendent of Public
Works. Any change to the site, subsequent to the installation of the
connection, which may affect the operation and maintenance of the service shall
relieve the city from all responsibility for maintenance and liability for any
resultant damages.
(Ord. 217, eff. 6-1-1984)
Sec. 36-7. CONNECTION CHARGES.
   A.   The City Manager is authorized, with the consent of the City Council,
to review the schedule of construction charges for the various sizes and types
of water service connections for each fiscal year. The schedule of rates may
become effective when adopted by resolution of the City Council.
   B.   The total costs for service connection construction shall be paid to
the city before authorization to proceed. All repair costs relating to the
water service connection for any structure shall be the responsibility of the
owner. All costs and any additional costs relating to construction, shall be
due within 30 days after billing.
(Ord. 217, eff. 6-1-1984; Ord. 331, adopted 6-14-2004)
Sec. 36-8. CROSS CONNECTIONS.
   A.   The city adopts by reference the Water Supply Cross Connections Rules
of the State Department of Public Health, being R 32.5.431 to R 32.5.440 of the
Michigan Administrative Code.
   B.   It shall be the duty of the City Manager or agent, to cause inspections
to be made of all properties served by the public water supply where cross
connections with the public water supply is deemed possible. The frequency of
inspections and reinspections based on potential health hazards involved shall
be as established by the City Manager or as required by the State Department of
Public Health.
   C.   The Superintendent of Public Works shall have the right to enter at any
reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply
system of the city for the purpose of inspecting the piping system or systems
thereof for cross connections. On request the owner, lessees or occupants of
any property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent
information regarding the piping system or systems on the property. The refusal
of the information or refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed
evidence of the presence of cross connections.
   D.   The City Manager is authorized and directed to discontinue water
service after reasonable notice to any property wherein any connection in
violation of this section exists and to take other precautionary measures
deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water
supply system. Water service to the property shall not be restored until the
cross connection(s) has been eliminated in compliance with the provisions of
this section.
   E.   The potable water supply made available on the properties served by the
public water system shall be protected from possible contamination as specified
by this section and by the State Plumbing Code.
(Ord. 217, eff. 6-1-1984)
Sec. 36-9. LOCATION AND SIZE OF METERS.
   A.   Meters shall be located in an accessible space, provided by the
property owner at the point where the service connection enters the structure
and shall not be in a crawl space or a locked storage room. When it is
impractical to place the meter elsewhere, the owner shall provide a meter pit
on private property adjacent to the public right-of-way.
   B.   Meter sizes shall be prescribed by the Superintendent of Public Works.
Meter sizes shall be changed when it appears a meter of the wrong size is in
use, except changes shall not be made for seasonal variations.
   C.   The remote meter shall be placed at the direction of the Superintendent
of Public Works.
   D.   Customers are required to have a working ball type shut-off valve both
before and after the water meter.
(Ord. 217, eff. 6-1-1984)
Sec. 36-10. SERVICE OF MORE THAN ONE PREMISES BY THE SAME METER.
   A.   Not more than one residence, factory or industrial institution shall be
serviced by one meter, except under special conditions as approved by the
Superintendent of Public Works.
   B.   When a main is installed on the street past any premises previously
served by a meter also measuring water to another premises, the connection
previously installed shall be removed and the premises connected to the main in
the regular way.
(Ord. 217, eff. 6-1-1984)
Sec. 36-11. PROHIBITION AGAINST BYPASSING METER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to open any valve or make any connection
which will make possible the use of water which has not passed through a meter
properly installed. In special cases where it is impractical to meter the water
and where the amount used can be accurately estimated, the City Manager may
grant temporary permission in writing for the use of water without a meter.
(Ord. 217, eff. 6-1-1984)
Sec. 36-12. METERS FOR WATER USED DURING CONSTRUCTION/UNMETERED WATER.
   A.   In case of ordinary building construction, a meter shall be set in a
place approved by the city, at the expense of the customer to measure the water
used during construction. Water so used shall be charged at the usual rates.
   B.   In case of an emergency and/or for special temporary purposes, the
Superintendent of Public Works may authorize the use of unmetered water. The
conditions will result in submission of a report to the City Billing Clerk and/
or Administrator.
(Ord. 217, eff. 6-1-1984)
Sec. 36-13. UNLAWFUL TAPPING, REMOVING, INSTALLING AND THE LIKE OF MAINS,
PIPES, METERS AND THE LIKE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, except employees of the city or other
person(s) acting in their official capacity, to tap, change, remove,
disconnect, repair, install, break a seal, turn on or, in any way, disturb any
water mains, branch pipes, services, meters, valves, fittings or other
appurtenances of the water distribution system.
(Ord. 217, eff. 6-1-1984)
Sec. 36-14. FIRE HYDRANTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, except employees of the city or other
person(s) acting in their official capacity, to operate any fire hydrant, curb
cock or valve which controls water which is unmetered, except as described
below.
   A.   Persons who request to use water from fire hydrants may do so providing
they have written permission from the City Billing Clerk and providing the
users operate the equipment and hydrant according to specific directions of the
Department of Public Works. Water will be charged at established rates.
   B.   Customers may turn water on and off by the valve immediately ahead of
the meter in the basement or meter pit in which the meter is located, at their
pleasure.
(Ord. 217, eff. 6-1-1984)
Sec. 36-15. WATER PIPES AS ELECTRICAL GROUNDS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to ground or electrically connect any
radio, telephone or other electrical system to any pipes or appurtenances
connected to the discharge side of any water meter unless:
   A.   A shunt is placed around the water so as to shunt or bypass any
electrical current that might otherwise flow through the water meter. A shunt
shall be placed so that any meter may be removed without disturbing the
connection. No electrical connection shall be made to the meter or
appurtenances in any way; or
   B.   Ten feet or more of water pipe connected to the discharge side of water
meter is buried in moist earth.
(Ord. 217, eff. 6-1-1984)
Sec. 36-16. CONNECTION CHARGES AND USER RATES.
   A.   Connection charges. All connections to city water mains or repairs to
existing connections shall be made only by the City Department of Public Works
staff after issuance of a written permit by the City Clerk.
      1.   The application for a permit shall include payment of a connection
charge to be established from time to time by resolution of the City Council.
      2.   Application for service shall be made at the City Hall during normal
working hours. For a tap larger than two inches, the difference in cost shall
be paid by the applicant. This includes corporation cock, tail piece and cost
of installation from the main to the curb stop. An additional charge will also
be made for any meter installation greater than two inches.
   B.   User rates. The charge for water service furnished by the city shall be
the sum of the readiness-to-serve charge, dependent upon meter size, plus the
commodity charge, dependent upon the amount of water used applicable to the
rate schedules as established and included.
      1.   Readiness-to-serve charge. The readiness-to-serve charge covers the
fixed costs of maintaining the water system. The readiness-to-serve charge
shall be determined on a frequency and basis that shall be established from
time to time by resolution of the City Council.
      2.   Commodity charge. The commodity charge is based upon the metered
water used and is to be billed in an amount determined from time to time by
resolution of the City Council.
      3.   Hydrant rental. A hydrant rental charge of $8 per month or $96 per
year will be made for each fire hydrant maintained in service.
      4.   Rates and charges. Rates and charges shall be established and
adjusted from time to time by resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. 217, eff. 6-1-1984; Ord. 239, eff. 5-17-1987)
Sec. 36-17. WATER BILLING.
   A.   It is made the duty of the City Billing Clerk to render billing
statements for user fees and all other charges as provided for herein in
connection with the provision of water service and to collect all monies due
therefrom. Said billing statements will be sent monthly on or about the first
day of the month following the month of the provision of the water service and
shall be due and payable at the offices of the City Billing Clerk on or before
the fifteenth day (if a weekend or holiday, then the next business day) of the
month in which the billing statement was rendered. If the full balance of the
billing statement is not paid by the fifteenth day (if a weekend or holiday,
then the next business day) of the month in which it became due and payable: a
late payment service charge of 10% of the balance due shall be added to the
amount owed, with said late payment service charge due immediately and the City
Billing Clerk shall issue a notice of delinquency and intent to discontinue
service. Failure by a customer to receive the notice of delinquency and intent
to discontinue service shall not waive payment of any disconnect charges,
reconnect charges, or other fees or charges.
   B.   If the full balance due and payable including any late payment charges
or other fees or charges for the provision of water service remain unpaid as of
the first Tuesday of the month following when said balance becomes due and
payable, the water service for the lot, parcel of land, or the premises
affected is eligible to be disconnected, and if disconnected, shall not be
turned on again until all sums then due and owing, including penalties and
reconnection fees or charges, are paid. Any disconnection or reconnection fees
shall be in amounts as determined by resolution of the City Council. If water
services are disconnected or reconnected at times other than the regular
business hours of the Public Works Department, there will be imposed an
additional charge for time and materials in an amount to be determined by
resolution of the City Council.
   C.   When the water service to any premises is shut off at the request of
the customer there shall be a water turn-off charge in an amount to be
determined by resolution of the City Council. Where the water service to any
premises is turned on at the request of the customer there shall be a water
turn-on charge in an amount to be determined by resolution of the City Council.
When the city is requested to provide turn-on or shut-off services at times
other than the regular business hours of the City Department of Public Works,
there will be imposed an additional charge for time and materials in an amount
to be determined by resolution of the City Council.
   D.   The user fees and charges for water service which are, under the
provisions of Public Act No. 94 of 1933 (MCL 141.101 et seq.), made a lien on
all premises served thereby, are hereby recognized to constitute such lien and
whenever any such charge against any piece of property shall be delinquent for
a period of six months, the City Council shall certify on or before April 1 of
each year to the city tax assessing officer the fact of such delinquency,
whereupon such delinquent charge shall be entered upon the next tax roll as a
charge against such premises and the lien thereof enforced in the same manner
as general city taxes against such premises are collected and the lien thereof
enforced.
   E.   In the event of a declaration of a state of emergency as authorized by
law, or in the event of a public health or safety emergency as authorized by
the Michigan Department of Health and Human Services or the Allegan County
Health Department, the City Administrator may temporarily suspend water shut
offs to maintain the health and safety of the utility and its customers.
(Ord. 217, eff. 6-1-1984; Ord. 272, eff. 1-1-1992; Ord. 388, passed 11-23-2020;
Ord. 396, passed 8-14-2023)
Sec. 36-18. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   A.   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is responsible
for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not
less than $500, plus costs and other sanctions, for each violation. Repeat
offenses shall be subject to increased fines as provided by code.
   B.   A violation of this chapter is also declared to be a public nuisance
and the city may enforce the same by injunction or other remedy, including the
right to correct the violation and bill the owner or person in charge of the
premises.
(Ord. 217, eff. 6-1-1984; Ord. 318, adopted 11-12-2001)
CHAPTER 37: WATER SUPPLY WELLS; CONTAMINATION
Section
   
37-1   Construction or maintenance of source of contamination
   
37-2   Installation or construction of a private water well
   
37-3   Repair, modification or replacement of existing private well
   
37-4   Acts which contribute to contamination
   
37-5   Violations and penalties
   
37-6   Groundwater Protection Board of Appeals
   
37-7   Appeals
Sec. 37-1. CONSTRUCTION OR MAINTENANCE OF SOURCE OF CONTAMINATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to construct or
maintain or permit to be constructed or maintained, within a radius of 200 feet
from any of the municipal water wells within the city from which the city draws
its water supplies, any source of possible contamination or pollution to the
wells.
(Ord. 117, adopted 8-11-1952; Am. Ord. 370, adopted 10-27-2014)
Sec. 37-2. INSTALLATION OR CONSTRUCTION OF A PRIVATE WATER WELL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to install or
construct or permit to be installed or constructed a private water well for the
purpose of drinking water or irrigation, if a public water service connection
is within 200 feet of the property border.
(Ord. 370, adopted 10-27-2014)
Sec. 37-3. REPAIR, MODIFICATION OR REPLACEMENT OF EXISTING PRIVATE WATER WELL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to repair, modify
or replace 50% or more of the value of an existing private water well for the
purpose of drinking water or irrigation, if a public water service connection
is within 200 feet of the property border.
(Ord. 370, adopted 10-27-2014)
Sec. 37-4. ACTS WHICH CONTRIBUTE TO CONTAMINATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to do any act or to
allow to be done any act, that may contaminate or pollute or contribute to the
contamination or pollution of the water supply wells or water system of the
city.
(Ord. 117, adopted 8-11-1952; Am. Ord. 370, adopted 10-27-2014)
Sec. 37-5. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is responsible for a
municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than
$500, plus costs and other sanctions, for each violation. Repeat offenses shall
be subject to increased fines as provided by code.
(Ord. 117, adopted 8-11-1952)
Sec. 37-6. GROUNDWATER PROTECTION BOARD OF APPEALS.
   A.   In order that the provisions of this article may be reasonably applied
and substantial justice done in instances where unnecessary hardship would
result from carrying out the strict letter of these sections, the City Council
shall appoint a Groundwater Protection Board of Appeals. The duty of the
Groundwater Protection Board of Appeals shall be to consider appeals to
determine, in particular cases, whether any deviation from strict enforcement
will violate the intent of this article or jeopardize the public health or
safety or environment.
   B.   The Groundwater Protection Board of Appeals shall meet at times as the
board may determine. There shall be a fixed place of meeting and all meetings
shall be open to the public in accordance with applicable laws. The Groundwater
Protection Board of Appeals shall adopt its own rules of procedure and keep a
record of its proceedings, showing findings of fact, the action of the Board,
and the vote of each member upon each question considered. The presence of five
members of the Groundwater Protection Board of Appeals shall be necessary to
constitute a quorum.
   C.   The Groundwater Protection Board of Appeals may prescribe the sending
of notice to persons as it deems to be interested in any hearing by the Board.
   D.   The Groundwater Protection Board of Appeals will be appointed by City
Council, may be revised from time to time, and shall include:
      1.   Mayor;
      2.   Chair of the Planning Commission;
      3.   Most senior Planning Commission member other than the Chair;
      4.   Superintendent of Public Works;
      5.   Chair of the Downtown Development Authority Board;
      6.   Chair of the Tax Increment Financing Authority Board; and
      7.   Chair of the Brownfield Redevelopment Authority.
(Ord. 370, adopted 10-27-2014)
Sec. 37-7. APPEALS.
   A.   Formal hearing.
      1.   Appeals from orders of the City Manager may be made at the
groundwater protection board of appeals within 30 days from the date of any
citation, order, charge, fee, surcharge, penalty or other action. The appeal
may be taken by any person aggrieved. The appellant shall file a notice of
appeal with the City Manager and with the groundwater protection board of
appeals, specifying the grounds therefor. Prior to a hearing, the City Manager
shall transmit to the groundwater protection board of appeals a summary report
of all previous action taken. The board of appeals may, at its discretion, call
upon the City Manager to explain the action. The final disposition of the
appeal shall be in the form of a resolution, either reversing, modifying, or
affirming, in whole or in part, the appealed decision or determination. In
order to find for the appellant, a majority of the groundwater protection board
of appeals must concur.
      2.   The groundwater protection board of appeals shall fix a reasonable
time for the hearing of the appeal, give due notice thereof the interested
parties, and decide the appeal within a reasonable time. Within the limits of
its jurisdiction, the groundwater protection board of appeals may reverse or
affirm, in whole or in part, or may make such order, requirements, decisions,
or determination as, in its opinion, ought to be made in the case under
consideration, and to that end shall have all the powers of the official from
whom the appeal is taken.
      3.   The decision of the groundwater protection board of appeals shall be
final, except that the board or the members thereof may be required, under
proper mandamus proceedings, to show cause why certain actions were taken or
decisions rendered.
   B.   Charges outstanding during appeal process. All charges for service,
penalties, fees, or surcharges outstanding during any appeal process shall be
due and payable to the City. Upon resolution of any appeal, the City shall
adjust such amounts accordingly.
   C.   Administrative action. If an informal or formal hearing is not demanded
within the periods specified in this section, the administrative action shall
be deemed final. In the event either or both hearings are demanded, the action
shall be suspended until a final determination has been made, except for
immediate cease and desist orders or any emergency or judicial action.
   D.   Appeals from determinations of groundwater protection board of appeals.
Appeals from the determinations of the groundwater protection board of appeals
may be made to the circuit court for the county as provided by law. The appeals
shall be governed procedurally by the Administrative Procedures Act of 1969
(M.C.L. 24.201 et seq.). All findings of fact, if supported by the evidence,
made by the board shall be conclusive upon the court.
(Ord. 370, adopted 10-27-2014)
CHAPTER 38: GROUNDWATER PROTECTION
Section
   
38-1   Purpose
   
38-2   Definitions
   
38-3   Applicability
   
38-4   Prohibitions within ten year time-of-travel wellhead protection area
   
38-5   Site plan review
   
38-6   Criteria for review
   
38-7   Professional review of proposed development
   
38-8   Exemptions and waivers
   
38-9   Inactive operations
   
38-10   Enforcement
   
38-11   Abatement/remedial activities by the city
   
38-12   Injunctive relief
   
38-13   Violations and penalties
   
38-14   Groundwater Protection Board of Appeals
   
38-15   Appeals
   
38-16   Remedies not exclusive
   
38-17   Conflicting regulations
Sec. 38-1. STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   A.   The city has determined that certain groundwater underlying areas
including the City of Plainwell currently are, or may be in the future, the
sole source of the city’s drinking water supply. Groundwater aquifers are
integrally connected with the surface water, lakes and streams that constitute
significant public health, recreational and economic resources of the city and
surrounding area. Spills and discharges of hazardous substances threaten the
quality of the groundwater supplies and other water related resources, posing
potential public health and safety hazards and threatening economic losses.
   B.   This chapter protects existing and potential groundwater supplies,
aquifers, and groundwater recharge areas of the city.
(Ord. 369, adopted 10-27-2014)
Sec. 38-2. SUPPLEMENTARY DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED OPERATIONS. Any property that is unoccupied for at least 30 days
and to which one or more of the following applies:
      1.   Is open to casual entry;
      2.   Has one or more windows boarded;
      3.   Has utilities disconnected;
      4.   Is unsafe for occupancy or the general public, or is a visual blight
adversely affecting the general welfare of the area;
      5.   Is given notice under the City of Plainwell Zoning Ordinances
Dangerous Buildings Chapter;
      6.   Is the subject of indebtedness to the city for more than one year.
   ABANDONED OPERATIONS do not include a property that is actively listed by a
licensed real estate broker.
   AQUIFER. A geological formation, group of formations, or part of a formation
capable of storing and yielding a significant amount of groundwater to wells
and springs.
   CHEMICAL ABSTRACT SERVICE (CAS) NUMBER. A unique number for every chemical
established by a Columbus, Ohio organization which indexes information
published in Chemical Abstracts by the American Chemical Society.
   HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE. A chemical or other material that is or may become
injurious to the public health, safety, or welfare, or to the environment. The
term HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE includes, but is not limited to, any of the following
which are stored or generated in quantities greater than 100 kilograms
(approximately 220 pounds or 25 gallons) per month, and which require site plan
review under provisions of this chapter.
      1.   Hazardous substances as defined in the Comprehensive Environmental
Response, Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA) of 1980, Public Law 96.510,
94 State. 2767;
      2.   Hazardous waste as defined in Part 111 of the State of Michigan
Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, 1994 Public Act 451, as
amended;
      3.   Regulated substance as defined in Part 213 of the State of Michigan
Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, 1994 Public Act 451, as
amended;
      4.   Hazardous substance as defined in Part 201 of the State of Michigan
Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, 1994 Public Act 451, as
amended;
      5.   Used oil;
      6.   Radiological materials.
   POLLUTION INCIDENT PREVENTION PLAN (PIPP). A PIPP includes a polluting
material inventory, a site diagram depicting the locations of the polluting
materials, emergency response procedures, and secondary-containment details.
Sites are subject to Michigan’s Part 5 Rules if they store oils and other
polluting materials above established threshold management quantities (TMQs),
which are:
      1.   Salt in solid form at quantities of five tons (10,000 pounds) or
more.
      2.   Salt in liquid form at 1,000 gallons or more.
      3.   Petroleum products in an AST or container with a capacity of 660
gallons or greater or an aggregate aboveground storage capacity of 1,320
gallons.
      4.   All other polluting materials specified in Part 5 that are used,
stored, or otherwise managed in a discrete outdoor location, with a total
storage quantity of 200 kilograms (kg) (440 pounds) or more.
      5.   All other polluting materials specified in Part 5 that are used,
stored, or otherwise maintained at a discrete indoor location, with a total
storage quantity of 1,000 kg (2,200 pounds) or more.
   PROPERLY PLUGGED ABANDONED WELL. A well that has been closed in accordance
with regulations and procedures of the Michigan Department of Environmental
Quality and the local Health Department. A PROPERLY PLUGGED ABANDONED WELL
requires a permit to be brought back into service.
   SECONDARY CONTAINMENT. A second tank, catchment pit, pipe, or vessel that
limits and contains liquid or chemical leaking or leaching from a primary
containment area; monitoring and recovery are required.
   SPILL PREVENTION CONTROL AND COUNTERMEASURE (SPCC) PLAN. As detailed in 40
CFR Part 112, sites are subject to the SPCC rules if (1) they store either more
than 1,320 gallons of petroleum products aboveground and (2) they present a
reasonable risk to a navigable water of the United States property (including
via storm water and groundwater). A SPCC PLAN details site oil storage, spill
potential, and emergency response and notification procedures. The SPCC PLAN is
required to be certified by a registered professional engineer.
   STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP). As detailed in 40 CFR Part
122, sites that are required to have a storm water permit are also required to
have SWPPPs that detail hazardous substance exposed to storm water and controls
to prevent releases.
   UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANK. A tank or combination of tanks, including
underground pipes connected to the tank or tanks, which is, was, or may have
been used to contain an accumulation of hazardous substances, as defined in
Part 211 of the State of Michigan Natural Resources and Environmental
Protection Act, 1994 Public Act 451, as amended.
   UNPLUGGED ABANDONED WELL. A well which has not been used for one year or
more.
   WELL. As defined in the Michigan Water Well Construction and Pump
Installation Code, Part 127, Act 368 of the Public Acts of 1978, as amended,
and rules; or a permanent or temporary opening in the surface of the earth for
the purpose of removing water, or testing water quality, or measuring water
characteristics, or measuring liquid recharge, or measuring liquid levels, or
oil and gas exploration or production, or waste disposal, or dewatering
purposes; or geothermal heat exchange purposes, or a cistern of a depth of four
feet or more and with a top width of 12 inches or more.
   WELLHEAD PROTECTION AREA. The area which has been approved by the MDEQ in
accordance with the State of Michigan Wellhead Protection Program, which
represents the surface and subsurface area surrounding a water well or well
field, which supplies a public water system, and through which contaminants are
reasonably likely to move toward and reach the water well or well field within
a ten-year time of travel.
(Ord. 369, adopted 10-27-2014)
Sec. 38-3. APPLICABILITY.
   USES SUBJECT TO SITE PLAN REVIEW: Except as provided in Section
38-8, “EXEMPTIONS AND WAIVERS”, this chapter applies to all building permit
requests made under
Chapter 53: Zoning.
(Ord. 369, adopted 10-27-2014)
Sec. 38-4. PROHIBITIONS WITHIN TEN YEAR TIME-OF-TRAVEL (TOT) WELLHEAD
PROTECTION AREA.
   For any parcel of land that has a portion within a ten-year wellhead
protection area, the following are prohibited at any location on the parcel:
   A.   Operations of a scrap and recycling yard.
   B.   Operations of a State of Michigan Type II or Type III solid waste
landfill.
   C.   Use of oil, waste oil, or similar liquid petroleum-type products for
dust suppression.
   D.   Excavation, extraction, or mining of sand, gravel, bedrock, or any
other type of earth if a permit or site plan review is required.
   E.   Unplugged abandoned wells.
   F.   Drilling for natural gas or petroleum, whether for exploration or
production.
   G.   Drilling, direct-push and other earth penetration beyond 15 feet depth
shall be sealed to within two feet of surface grade with grout, or with soil
material exhibiting lower hydraulic permeability than the native soil.
(Ord. 369, adopted 10-27-2014)
Sec. 38-5. SITE PLAN REVIEW.
   Site plan review procedures. Applicable projects under this chapter that
also require site plan review under Chapter 53 shall include:
   A.   Existing and proposed land use deed restrictions, if any.
   B.   Location and outline of all existing septic tanks and drain fields.
   C.   Location of any floor drains in proposed structures on the site. The
point of discharge for all drains and pipes shall be specified on the site
plan.
   D.   Location of existing and proposed public and private drinking water
wells, monitoring wells, irrigation wells, test wells, wells used for
industrial processes or wells that have no identified use.
   E.   Inventory of hazardous substances to be stored, used or generated on-
site, presented in a format acceptable to the City Planning Commission and
Department of Public Safety (include CAS numbers).
   F.   Description and drawings showing size and location for any existing or
proposed aboveground and underground storage tanks, piping lines and
dispensers.
   G.   Descriptions of type of operations proposed for the project and
drawings showing size, location, and description of any proposed interior or
exterior areas of structures for storing, using, loading or unloading of
hazardous substances.
   H.   Reported delineation of areas on the site which are known or suspected
to be contaminated, together with a report on the status of cleanup or closure.
   I.   Completion of the City of Plainwell Environmental Permits Checklist.
(Ord. 369, adopted 10-27-2014)
Sec. 38-6. CRITERIA FOR REVIEW.
   Criteria for review will include:
   A.   The project and related improvements shall be designed to protect land
and water resources from pollution, including pollution of soils, groundwater,
rivers, streams, lakes, ponds, and wetlands.
   B.   If required by state or federal law, properties using hazardous
substances are required to have a Spill Prevention Control and Countermeasure
(SPCC) Plan, a Pollution Incident Prevention Plan (PIPP), and/or a Storm Water
Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP).
   C.   Sites that at any time use, store or generate hazardous substances
shall be designed to prevent spills and unpermitted discharges to air, surface
of the ground, groundwater, lakes, streams, rivers or wetlands.
   D.   Hazardous substances stored on the site before, during, or after site
construction, shall be stored in a location and manner designed to prevent
spills and unpermitted discharges to air, surface of the ground, groundwater,
lakes, streams, rivers, or wetlands.
   E.   Secondary containment facilities shall be provided for aboveground
storage of hazardous substances in accordance with state and federal
requirements. Aboveground secondary containment facilities shall be designed
and constructed so that the potentially polluting material cannot escape from
the unit by gravity through sewers, drains, or other means, directly or
indirectly into a sewer system, or to the waters of the State (including
groundwater).
   F.   Unplugged abandoned wells and cisterns shall be plugged in accordance
with regulations and procedures of the Michigan Department of Environmental
Quality and the County Health Department.
   G.   Completion of the City of Plainwell Environmental Permits Checklist.
(Ord. 369, adopted 10-27-2014)
Sec. 38-7. PROFESSIONAL REVIEW OF PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT.
   Fees in escrow for professional reviews. Any application for site plan
approval under this chapter may require the deposit of fees to be held in
escrow in the name of the applicant. An escrow fee shall be required by the
Building Official unless waived by the Building Official or City Council.
Waiver shall be based on a written conclusion that there is no substantial
information or analysis benefit to accrue as a result of the application of
this section. An escrow fee may be requested to obtain a professional review of
any other project which may, at the discretion of the Building Official create
an identifiable and potentially negative impact on public infrastructure or
services, or on adjacent properties and because of which, professional input is
desired before a decision to approve, deny or approve with conditions is made.
   A.   The escrow shall be used to pay professional review expenses of
engineers, community planners, and any other professionals whose expertise the
city values to review the proposed application and/or site plan of an
applicant. Professional review will result in a report to the City indicating
the extent of conformance or nonconformance with this chapter and to identify
any problems that may create a threat to public health, safety or the general
welfare. Mitigation measures or alterations to a proposed design may be
identified where they would serve to lessen or eliminate identified impacts.
The applicant will receive a copy of any professional review hired by the city
and a copy of the statement of expenses for the professional services rendered.
   B.   No application for approval for which an escrow fee is requested will
be processed until the escrow fee is deposited with the City Clerk. The amount
of the escrow fee shall be established based on an estimate of the cost of the
services to be rendered by the professionals contacted by the Building
Official. The applicant is entitled to a refund of any unused escrow fees at
the time a permit is either issued or denied in response to the applicant’s
request.
   C.   If actual professional review costs exceed the amount of an escrow, the
applicant shall pay the balance due prior to receipt of any land use or other
permit issued by the city in response to the applicant’s request.
   D.   Disputes on the costs of professional reviews may be resolved by an
arbitrator mutually satisfactory to both parties.
(Ord. 369, adopted 10-27-2014)
Sec. 38-8. EXEMPTIONS AND WAIVERS.
   A.   A limited exclusion from this chapter is hereby authorized as follows:
      1.   The site plan review criteria of Section
38-5 and
38-6 do not apply to hazardous substances packaged for personal or household
use or present in the same form and concentration as a product packaged for use
by the general public.
      2.   The site plan review requirements of Section
38-5 and
38-6 do not apply to products held in containers with a volume of less than 40
gallons and packaged for retail use.
      3.   The total excluded substances containing hazardous substances may
not exceed the lesser of 200 gallons or 1,000 pounds at any time.
   B.   Residential family dwellings (R-1, R-2 and RMH) and PUD districts
proposed for development outside of the city’s wellhead protection areas are
exempt from the site plan review requirements of Sec.
38-5.
(Ord. 369, adopted 10-27-2014)
Sec. 38-9. ABANDONED OPERATIONS.
   This section applies to residences, businesses or other operations. Those
who own or control abandoned operations shall do the following:
   A.   Within seven days of becoming an abandoned operation, take such steps
as necessary to secure the site such that natural elements such as water, wind
and ice or vandals and all other persons cannot gain access to the hazardous
substances.
   B.   Within 30 days of becoming inactive, provide to the code official and
the Department of Public Safety a document that identifies the site, the date
of inactivity, the hazardous substances that exist on site, and the name,
address, and telephone number of both the owner and the person in control of
the site.
   C.   Within 60 days of becoming inactive, remove all hazardous substances
from the site. This does not include those substances used for heating,
cooling, and/or electrical lighting.
(Ord. 369, adopted 10-27-2014)
Sec. 38-10. ENFORCEMENT.
   A.   Whenever the city determines that a person has violated a provision of
Section 38-9, the City Building Inspector shall issue a written notice of
violation.
   B.   The notice shall be directed to the owner or party in interest of the
building in whose name the property appears on the last local tax assessment
records of the city.
   C.   If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property are
required, the notice shall set forth a deadline by which such remediation or
restoration must be completed. The notice shall further advise that, should the
responsible party fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline,
the work may be done by the city, with the expense thereof charged to the
property owner and possibly assessed as a lien against the property.
   D.   All notices required by Sec.
38-10 shall be in writing and shall be served upon the person to whom they are
directed personally or in lieu of personal service, may be mailed by certified
mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the owner or party in interest at
the address shown on the tax records, at least ten days before the date of the
hearing described in the notice. If any person to whom a notice is directed is
not personally served, in addition to mailing the notice, a copy thereof shall
be posted upon a conspicuous part of the building or structure at least ten
days prior to the hearing date.
(Ord. 369, adopted 10-27-2014)
Sec. 38-11. ABATEMENT/REMEDIAL ACTIVITIES BY THE CITY.
   A.   The city is authorized to take or contract with others to take
reasonable and necessary abatement or remedial activities whenever the city
determines a violation of this chapter has occurred and that the responsible
party cannot or will not correct the violation in a timely manner, or when no
known responsible party exists. The responsible party shall reimburse the city
for all reasonable expenses thus incurred by the city. A lien may be placed on
the property for the reimbursement of all reasonable expenses.
   B.   If the city desires the responsible party to reimburse it for
reasonable abatement activity expenses, the city shall, within 90 days of the
completion of the activities, mail to that person a notice of claim outlining
the expenses incurred, including reasonable administrative costs, and the
amounts thereof. The person billed shall pay said sum in full within 30 days of
receipt of the claim. If the person billed desires to object to all or some of
the amount sought by the city, said person may file, within the same 30 day
period, a written objection so stating. The city shall, within 30 days of its
receipt of the objection, provide an opportunity for the objecting party to
present facts or arguments supporting the objection. If the city determines
that some or the entire amount originally billed is appropriate, the person
shall pay the sum within 30 days of receipt of that determination. If the
amount due is not paid, the city may cause the charges to become a special
assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property.
(Ord. 369, adopted 10-27-2014)
Sec. 38-12. INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
   If a person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this
chapter, the city may petition the appropriate court for injunctive relief
restraining the person from activities that would create further violations, or
compelling the person to perform necessary abatement or remediation.
(Ord. 369, adopted 10-27-2014)
Sec. 38-13. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   Violation of this chapter shall be subject to the Municipal Civil Infraction
Chapter of the city’s code of ordinances.
(Ord. 369, adopted 10-27-2014)
Sec. 38-14. GROUNDWATER PROTECTION BOARD OF APPEALS.
   A.   In order that the provisions of this chapter may be reasonably applied
and substantial justice done in instances where unnecessary hardship would
result from carrying out the strict letter of these sections, the City Council
shall appoint a Groundwater Protection Board of Appeals. The duty of the
Groundwater Protection Board of Appeals shall be to consider appeals from the
decision of the City Manager and to determine, in particular cases, whether any
deviation from strict enforcement will violate the intent of this chapter or
jeopardize the public health or safety or environment.
   B.   The Groundwater Protection Board of Appeals shall meet at times as the
board may determine. There shall be a fixed place of meeting and all meetings
shall be open to the public in accordance with applicable laws. The Groundwater
Protection Board of Appeals shall adopt its own rules of procedure and keep a
record of its proceedings, showing findings of fact, the action of the Board,
and the vote of each member upon each question considered. The presence of five
members of the Groundwater Protection Board of Appeals shall be necessary to
constitute a quorum.
   C.   The Groundwater Protection Board of Appeals may prescribe the sending
of notice to persons as it deems to be interested in any hearing by the Board.
   D.   The Groundwater Protection Board of Appeals will be appointed by City
Council, may be revised from time to time, and shall include:
      1.   Mayor;
      2.   Chair of the Planning Commission;
      3.   Most senior Planning Commission member other than the Chair;
      4.   Superintendent of Public Works;
      5.   Chair of the Downtown Development Authority Board;
      6.   Chair of the Tax Increment Financing Authority Board; and
      7.   Chair of the Brownfield Redevelopment Authority.
(Ord. 369, adopted 10-27-2014)
Sec. 38-15. APPEALS.
   A.   Right of appeal. Any person has the right to appeal the basis for any
charges, permits, orders, or other action developed in accordance with this
chapter. Appeals shall be directed to the City Manager along with any
supporting documentation for amendment of the charges in question. Any
additional information that may be required to resolve the appeal, as directed
by the City Manager, shall be obtained by the user at his expense. Resolution
of appeals shall be made within 30 days in accordance with the best available
data and the formulations presented in this chapter.
   B.   Informal hearing.
      1.   An informal hearing before the City Manager may be requested in
writing by any person deeming itself aggrieved by any citation, order, charge,
fee, surcharge, penalty, or action within ten days after the date thereof,
stating the reasons therefor with supporting documents and data.
      2.   The informal hearing shall be scheduled at the earliest practicable
date, but not later than five days after receipt of the request, unless
extended by mutual written agreement.
      3.   The hearing shall be conducted on an informal basis at the City Hall
or such place as designated by the City Manager.
   C.   Formal hearing. 
      1.   Appeals from orders of the City Manager may be made at the
Groundwater Protection Board of Appeals within 30 days from the date of any
citation, order, charge, fee, surcharge, penalty or other action. The appeal
may be taken by any person aggrieved. The appellant shall file a notice of
appeal with the City Manager and with the Groundwater Protection Board of
Appeals, specifying the grounds therefor. Prior to a hearing, the City Manager
shall transmit to the Groundwater Protection Board of Appeals a summary report
of all previous action taken. The Board of Appeals may, at its discretion, call
upon the City Manager to explain the action. The final disposition of the
appeal shall be in the form of a resolution, either reversing, modifying, or
affirming, in whole or in part, the appealed decision or determination. In
order to find for the appellant, a majority of the Groundwater Protection Board
of Appeals must concur.
      2.   The Groundwater Protection Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable
time for the hearing of the appeal, give due notice thereof the interested
parties, and decide the appeal within a reasonable time. Within the limits of
its jurisdiction, the Groundwater Protection Board of Appeals may reverse or
affirm, in whole or in part, or may make such order, requirements, decisions,
or determination as, in its opinion, ought to be made in the case under
consideration, and to that end shall have all the powers of the official from
whom the appeal is taken.
      3.   The decision of the Groundwater Protection Board of Appeals shall be
final, except that the Board or the members thereof may be required, under
proper mandamus proceedings, to show cause why certain actions were taken or
decisions rendered.
   D.   Charges outstanding during appeal process. All charges for service,
penalties, fees, or surcharges outstanding during any appeal process shall be
due and payable to the city. Upon resolution of any appeal, the city shall
adjust such amounts accordingly.
   E.   Administrative action. If an informal or formal hearing is not demanded
within the periods specified in this section, the administrative action shall
be deemed final. In the event either or both hearings are demanded, the action
shall be suspended until a final determination has been made, except for
immediate cease and desist orders or any emergency or judicial action.
   F.   Appeals from determinations of Groundwater Protection Board of Appeals.
Appeals from the determinations of the Groundwater Protection Board of Appeals
may be made to the circuit court for the county as provided by law. The appeals
shall be governed procedurally by the Administrative Procedures Act of 1969
(MCL 24.201 et seq.). All findings of fact, if supported by the evidence, made
by the Board shall be conclusive upon the court.
(Ord. 369, adopted 10-27-2014)
Sec. 38-16. REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state, or local law, and it is within
the discretion of the city to seek cumulative remedies.
(Ord. 369, adopted 10-27-2014)
Sec. 38-17. CONFLICTING RESOLUTIONS.
   Whenever any provision of this chapter imposes more stringent requirements,
regulations, restrictions or limitations than are imposed or required by the
provisions of any other law or chapter, then the provisions of this chapter
shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other law or chapter impose more
stringent requirements than are imposed or required by this title, then the
provision of such chapter shall govern.
(Ord. 369, adopted 10-27-2014)
CHAPTER 39: GEOTHERMAL HEAT PUMP SYSTEMS PERMITS
Section
   
39-1   Purpose
   
39-2   Definitions
   
39-3   Geothermal heat pump system permit required
   
39-4   Application procedure
   
39-5   Permit requirements
   
39-6   Permit fee
   
39-7   Permit revocation
   
39-8   Open loop systems prohibited
   
39-9   Periodic system testing
   
39-10   Backflow prevention
   
39-11   System abandonment
   
39-12   Violations and penalties
   
39-13   Remedies not exclusive
   
39-14   Conflicting regulations
Sec. 39-1. STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   A.   The city has determined that an open loop geothermal system that
penetrates and/or draws water from an aquifer can deplete or pollute
groundwater. Additionally, an improperly constructed or maintained closed loop
geothermal system can pollute groundwater.
   B.   This chapter protects the public health, safety, and general welfare
including existing and potential groundwater supplies, aquifers, and
groundwater recharge areas of the city from pollution or depletion resulting
from construction, reconstruction, repair, or abandonment of geothermal heat
pump systems.
(Ord. 368, adopted 10-27-2014)
Sec. 39-2. SUPPLEMENTARY DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANNULAR SPACE. The space between the casing or well screen and the wall of
the borehole, or between drilling pipe and casing, or between two separate
strings of casing.
   AQUIFER. A geological formation, group of formations, or part of a formation
capable of storing and yielding a significant amount of groundwater to wells
and springs.
   AS-BUILT PLAN. A legible hand-sketch or computer generated illustration.
   BENTONITE GROUT. A slurry that consists of sodium montmorillonite bentonite
and water and that has a solids concentration of not less than 20%. A slurry of
drilling fluid bentonite and water or drilled cuttings, either singularly or in
combination, is not BENTONITE GROUT.
   BOREHOLE. A hole drilled or bored into the earth, usually into which casing,
screen, piping and other materials may be installed to construct a well or
geothermal heat pump system.
   CASING. An impervious, durable pipe placed in a borehole to prevent the
walls of the borehole from caving, and to seal off surface drainage or
undesirable water, gas, or other fluids and prevent entrance into a well.
   CLOSED LOOP SYSTEM. A geothermal heat pump system that generally consists of
underground loops of piping; heat transfer fluid; a heat pump, and an air
distribution system. An opening is made in the earth. One or more pipes are
installed into the opening and connected to a heat exchange system in the
building. The pipes form a “closed loop” and are filled with a heat transfer
fluid. The fluid is circulated through the piping from the opening into the
heat exchanger and back. The system functions in the same manner as the open
loop system except there is no pumping of groundwater.
   DEPARTMENT. The Michigan Department of Environmental Quality or its
predecessor.
   DRINKING WATER. Water which is intended for human consumption and other
domestic uses, and is considered to be free of harmful chemicals and disease-
causing microorganisms.
   GEOTHERMAL HEAT PUMP SYSTEM. A mechanical system for space heating or
cooling that relies on the transfer of thermal energy between the earth and a
heat transfer fluid and consists of heat pump, a well to exchange heat and a
heat distribution network.
   GROUNDWATER. Water beneath the earth’s surface that is located between
saturated soil and rock that supplies wells and springs.
   GROUT. A low permeability material that is emplaced in the space between the
wall of the borehole and the casing of a well end, or placed in the annular
space of the borehole. The emplacement of GROUT is to prevent the migration of
water or fluid contaminants into and through the borehole. GROUT shall consist
of neat cement or high solids bentonite slurry.
   HEAT TRANSFER FLUID. Any liquid used especially for the purpose of
transferring thermal energy from the heat source to another location.
   ISOLATION DISTANCES. The distance of a source of contamination from a
surface drinking water source, a groundwater source supply well, or any type of
borehole.
   NEAT CEMENT GROUT. A mixture of one bag of Portland cement (94 pounds) and
not more than six gallons of fresh water. Drilling fluid bentonite that is not
more than 5% by weight of cement and additional water that is not more than 0.6
gallons for each 1% of bentonite may be added to neat cement grout.
   OPEN LOOP SYSTEM. A geothermal heat pump system in which groundwater is
drawn from a well into a heat exchanger that is often located in a surface
building. The water drawn from the earth is then pumped back into the aquifer
through a different well or in some cases the same well. Alternatively, the
groundwater could be discharged to a surface water body. In the heating mode,
cooler water is returned to the earth, while in the cooling mode, warmer water
is returned to the surface water body.
   PERMEABILITY. The propensity of a material to allow fluid to move through
its pores or interstices. PERMEABILITY is an important soil parameter when flow
of water through soil or rock is a matter of concern.
   PERMIT. For the purpose of
Chapter 39, PERMIT means a city permit issued to construct, install, modify,
replace or repair a geothermal heat pump system; or dig, bore, drill, replace,
modify, repair, or destroy a well that is intended to be or was part of a
geothermal heat pump system.
   PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY WELL. Water supply well used or made available to two or
more consumers.
      1.   TYPE I. Community water supply providing year-round service to not
less than 25 residents or not less than 15 living units.
      2.   TYPE IIb. Non-community water supply providing year-round service to
not less than 25 residents or not less than 15 living units.
      3.   TYPE III. Anything not considered Type I or Type II water supply;
serves less than 25 people and less than 15 connections, or operates for less
than 60 days per year.
   WASTE WATER SYSTEM. Any system for the collection, storage, treatment,
neutralization or stabilization of sewage that occurs on a property.
      1.   SEPTIC SYSTEM. Type of waste water system consisting of a septic
tank that collects all of the sewage. The sewage separates into solid (sludge)
that settles to the bottom and liquid effluent that then flows into a leach
field for final treatment by the soil.
      2.   MUNICIPAL SYSTEM. Type of waste water system whereby sewage flows
into a sanitary sewer system and is carried to a waste water treatment plant
for chemical and/or biological treatment.
   WATER SUPPLY WELL. A well used to provide potable water for drinking or
domestic purposes.
   WELL. As defined in the Michigan Water Well Construction and Pump
Installation Code, Part 127, Act 368 of the Public Acts of 1978, as amended,
and rules; or a permanent or temporary opening in the surface of the earth for
the purpose of removing water, testing water quality, measuring water
characteristics, measuring liquid levels, oil and gas exploration or
production, waste disposal, dewatering, or for geothermal heat exchange
purposes, or for a cistern of a depth four feet or more and with a top width of
12 inches or more.
(Ord. 368, adopted 10-27-2014)
Sec. 39-3. GEOTHERMAL HEAT PUMP SYSTEM PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall construct or install a geothermal heat pump system without
first obtaining a permit from the city. No permit shall be issued for any open
loop geothermal heat pump system per Section
39-8 below.
   A.   An application for a geothermal permit shall be made to the city on
city approved forms.
   B.   Permits shall be issued to the owner or an agent thereof for the
particular parcel of property on which the geothermal heat pump system is to be
constructed and/or installs.
   C.   Open-loop systems existing prior to the date of the adoption of this
chapter shall be allowed.
(Ord. 368, adopted 10-27-2014)
Sec. 39-4. APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   A.   Applications for city permits shall be made to the City Clerk on City
approved forms.
   B.   Application may be made by the property owner or an agent thereof.
(Ord. 368, adopted 10-27-2014)
Sec. 39-5. PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   A.   Permits may be issued only for closed loop geothermal heat pump systems
that are entirely located within the boundaries of the property.
   B.   Boreholes shall be drilled by Michigan registered/licensed water well
drillers.
   C.   The property owner shall maintain and also submit to the city a well
log of the borehole and as built plans showing the location and specifications
of closed loop geothermal heat pump system components.
   D.   Abandoned wells are to be plugged.
   E.   Wells shall be constructed in accordance with the procedures in Part
127, Water Supply and Sewer Systems, of the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368.
   F.   Abandoned wells shall be plugged in accordance with the procedures in
Part 127, Water Supply and Sewer Systems, of the Public Health Code, 1978 PA
368.
   G.   Borehole piping shall be high density polyethylene as specified in
International Ground Source Heat Pump Association standards for closed loop
heat pumps.
   H.   The annular space of the boreholes shall be sealed for the full depth
of the borehole using high solid bentonite grout.
   I.   Meet the following minimum isolation distances during construction:
      1.    Twenty-five feet from an on-site wastewater system;
      2.    Ten feet from property line; and
      3.    Ten feet from road right of ways and utilities.
   J.   For geothermal heat pump systems with components extending over 15 feet
below grade surface, meet the following minimum isolation distances during
construction:
      1.    Fifty feet from a household drinking water well;
      2.    Seventy-five feet from a Type IIb or Type III public water supply
well, as defined in R 325.10502of the Michigan Administrative Code; and
      3.    Two hundred feet from a Type I or Type IIa public water supply
well, as defined in R325.10502 of the Michigan Administrative Code.
   K.   For geothermal heat pump systems with components extending over 15 feet
below grade surface, documentation that the components will be located where
they are not subject to contamination and/or will not penetrate into a zone of
contamination. Websites such as the Environmental Mapper website at http://
mcgi.state.mi.us/environmentalmapping/ may be used for determining if
contaminated sites are in the vicinity of the proposed installation.
(Ord. 368, adopted 10-27-2014)
Sec. 39-6. PERMIT FEE.
   The geothermal heat pump system permit fee shall be in the amount
established from time-to-time by resolution of the City Council and shall be
paid when the application is filed.
(Ord. 368, adopted 10-27-2014)
Sec. 39-7. PERMIT REVOCATION.
   A.   The city may revoke a permit if:
      1.    Any action or any geothermal heat pump system violates a provision
of this chapter; or
      2.    There are factual inaccuracies in a permit application or the
documents supporting it.
   B.   The city shall notify the property owner and occupant in writing of a
permit revocation.
      1.   The property owner or agent may appeal a revocation to the City
Manager who shall hold a hearing on that revocation to allow the appellant to
prove the geothermal heat pump system complies with this chapter or that the
statements in the application and supporting documents are true. Further
appeals shall be to the Allegan County Circuit Court.
      2.   When a permit is revoked, the property owner or agent shall
immediately abandon the geothermal heat pump system as required by this
chapter. Except in cases where the city reasonably determines that groundwater
contamination is an imminent risk, the obligation to abandon the geothermal
heat pump system after revocation shall be stayed while any appeal is pending.
(Ord. 368, adopted 10-27-2014)
Sec. 39-8. OPEN LOOP SYSTEMS PROHIBITED.
   Open loop geothermal heat pump systems are prohibited.
(Ord. 368, adopted 10-27-2014)
Sec. 39-9. PERIODIC SYSTEM TESTING.
   A.   All closed-loop systems pipes for geothermal heat pump system permitted
under this chapter shall be tested hydrostatically at one and one-half times
the maximum system design pressure, but not less than 100 psi (689 kPa), for a
duration of not less than 15 minutes with no leaks.
   B.   All geothermal heat pump systems shall be pressure checked by a
licensed contractor every five years from the date of its initial successful
test.
   C.   For applicable geothermal heat pump systems constructed over five years
from the date of this chapter shall be pressure checked by a licensed
contractor within six months of the date of the adoption of this chapter.
   D.   Results shall be filed with the city.
(Ord. 368, adopted 10-27-2014)
Sec. 39-10. BACKFLOW PREVENTION.
   A temporary water line connected to a flush and fill port of a geothermal
heat pump system shall be protected with a backflow prevention device as
specified in Section P2902 of the Michigan Residential Code, R408.30401 of the
MAC or Section 608.1 of the Michigan Plumbing Code, R408.30701 of the Michigan
Administrative Code.
(Ord. 368, adopted 10-27-2014)
Sec. 39-11. SYSTEM ABANDONMENT.
   A.   Abandonment of a geothermal heat pump system shall comply with the
laws, rules and regulations applicable to abandonment of water supply wells.
   B.   Heat transfer fluid must be removed by displacement with grout. This
work shall be done by a Michigan licensed water well driller experienced with
geothermal heat pump systems. Proper disposal of the heat exchange fluid in
accordance with applicable state waste disposal regulations is expected.
Documentation of the system abandonment shall be filed with the city within 30
days of closure.
(Ord. 368, adopted 10-27-2014)
Sec. 39-12. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   Any person who violates any provision of the chapter is responsible for a
municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than
$500, plus costs and other sanctions, for each violation. Repeat offenses shall
be subject to increased fines as provided by code.
(Ord. 368, adopted 10-27-2014)
Sec. 39-13. REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state, or local law, and it is within
the discretion of the city to seek cumulative remedies.
(Ord. 368, adopted 10-27-2014)
Sec. 39-14. CONFLICTING RESOLUTIONS.
   Whenever any provision of this chapter imposes more stringent requirements,
regulations, restrictions or limitations than are imposed or required by the
provisions of any other law or chapter, then the provisions of this chapter
shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other law or chapter impose more
stringent requirements than are imposed or required by this title, then the
provision of such chapter shall govern.
(Ord. 368, adopted 10-27-2014)
CHAPTER 40: STREET VACATIONS
Section
   
40-1   Vacations
   
40-2   Violations and penalties
Sec. 40-1. VACATIONS.
   Public rights in the following streets, alleys and ways, except utility
installations to be negotiated by parties in interest, are vacated:
   A.   River Street. River Street in Riverview Addition;
   B.   Michigan Avenue. Michigan Avenue from S. side of River Street to S.
side of Lot 25, Bk. 1 and Lot 21, Bk. 2, Riverview Addition;
   C.   Prospect Avenue. Prospect Avenue from S. side of River Street and
Southerly extension of S. line of Lot 40, Bk. 1, Riverview Addition;
   D.   Mill Street. Mill Street between Lots 1 and 11, Whitney’s Addition;
   E.   Beebe Street. 560 feet of Beebe Street beginning at the intersection of
the west line of Mina’s Addition and the east line of the school property and
measured 560 feet westerly along the centerline of Beebe Street in Section 30
T1N R11W. The vacating date of Beebe Street shall be 10-15-1966 at midnight;
   F.   Vacating alley. North of 3rd Street between Broad and Prairie;
   G.   Scott Street;
   H.   Naomi Street at Melrose in favor of two owners abutting;
   I.   Benhoy Stub Street to Johnson and McBride;
   J.   Cedar Street;
   K.   First Division Street right-of-way; and
   L.   Jerry Thurman (125 Prairie).
(Ord. 133 and 149, readopt. eff. 12-31-1965; Ords. 158-160; Ord. 158, adopted
3-28-1966; Ord. 159, adopted 4-25-1966; Ord. 160, adopted 9-12-1966; Res. 79-2,
adopted 2-12-1979; Res. 79-4, adopted 2-12-1979; Ord. adopted 5- -1980; Res.
83-5, adopted 2-14-1983; Res. 83-31, adopted 11-14-1983)
Sec. 40-2. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is responsible for a
municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than
$500, plus costs and other sanctions, for each violation. Repeat offenses shall
be subject to increased fines as provided by code.
(Ord. 318, adopted 11-12-2001)
CHAPTER 41: STREETS AND ALLEY; DRIVEWAYS
Section
   
41-1   Ashes and debris
   
41-2   Driveway construction
   
41-3   Application for driveway
   
41-4   Permit for work
   
41-5   Excavations
   
41-6   Notice before cutting pavement
   
41-7   Removal of pavement
   
41-8   Utility poles
Sec. 41-1. ASHES AND DEBRIS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or direct or in person place,
deposit, scatter or throw any ashes or other debris in or upon any of the
streets or alleys within the limits of the city or upon any part of the streets
or alleys used or occupied as sidewalks or that may be hereafter used or
occupied as sidewalks.
(Ords. 30, 54, 56 and 58, readopted 12-31-1965)
Sec. 41-2. DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION.
   A.   At the time of the construction of any curbing as provided for in this
chapter, any and all driveways measuring from the inside of curbing to the
premises along which the curbing shall be constructed, shall, at the request of
the owner of the premises be constructed upon his or her written application
therefor and under the regulations as the Council of the city shall prescribe
relative thereto.
   B.   The entire expense of the construction of the driveways together with
the side or retaining walls thereto shall be paid by the person or person so
making the application within 60 days after the amount of the expense shall
have been ascertained and the person shall have been notified thereof by bill
rendered.
   C.   The amount shall be fixed by the Council before the bill is rendered
and shall not be in excess of the actual cost of the construction and the
person to whom it is rendered shall have the right to be heard relative thereto
by Council at any regular meeting thereof, during the 60 days.
(Ords. 30, 54, 56 and 58, readopted 12-31-1965)
Sec. 41-3. APPLICATION FOR DRIVEWAY.
   In making application for the driveways, the person or persons applying
therefor shall execute in the application an undertaking and promise to pay the
entire cost thereof and of the walls thereto within the time prescribed for
payment thereof and that in case of failure or neglect to pay the same that the
amount of the expense may be assessed against the premises described in the
application and be reported to the proper officers and be collected as are
other taxes.
(Ords. 30, 54, 56 and 58, readopted 12-31-1965)
Sec. 41-4. PERMIT FOR WORK.
   A.   No person, firm or corporation shall construct, lay, repair or connect
any water, sewer or gas pipe or conduit or make any opening, hole or trench in
the streets, alleys or public places in the city without first having made
application and received a permit from the City Clerk therefor.
   B.   The application shall be made on a form to be provided by the Clerk,
shall fully identify the applicant, the contractor if any, the location and
nature of the work, the length of time anticipated and a commitment that the
applicant or contractor shall comply with all directions of the Superintendent
regarding the opening, barricading and resurfacing of the area, will save
harmless the city and its employees and agents against any liability whatever
which may arise as a result of the project and evidence that the applicant or
contractor carries liability insurance covering the risks to the limits and in
a company approved by the City Council.
(Ords. 30, 54, 56 and 58, readopted 12-31-1965)
Sec. 41-5. EXCAVATIONS.
   No excavation in any alley or street in the city shall be left open
overnight except where the necessities of the case absolutely requires; in all
and every case, the public safety must be protected by the use of proper
barriers and the placing of red lights or flares in a manner as to prevent
accidents.
(Ords. 30, 54, 56 and 58, readopted 12-31-1965)
Sec. 41-6. NOTICE BEFORE CUTTING PAVEMENT.
   A.   If, in the doing of the work, it becomes necessary to remove or cut
through any pavements, hard surfaced or graveled streets, notice shall be given
to the effect at least 24 hours before the work shall be started to the City
Superintendent.
   B.   The pavement, hard surfaced or gravel streets shall be removed and
replaced in a manner satisfactory to the City Council.
(Ords. 30, 54, 56 and 58, readopted 12-31-1965)
Sec. 41-7. REMOVAL OF PAVEMENT.
   Where it is found necessary to remove the pavement, hard surface or graveled
streets, the city reserves the right to replace or repair the openings and to
make a charge to cover the costs of the repairs against the property
responsible for the openings.
(Ords. 30, 54, 56 and 58, readopted 12-31-1965)
Sec. 41-8. UTILITY POLES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to hereafter set up in any of
the streets, alleys or other public places in the city any telegraph poles,
telephone poles, electric light poles or other poles without a city permit
therefor and without immediately after setting up the same, leveling off the
ground around and about the poles in a condition similar to what it was
immediately before excavating therefor.
(Ords. 30, 54, 56 and 58, readopted 12-31-1965)
CHAPTER 42: SNOW REMOVAL; PLACES OF
BUSINESS OR SERVICE
Section
   
42-1   “Person” defined
   
42-2   Prohibition; nuisance
   
42-3   Violations; notification
   
42-4   Removal by city
   
42-5   Violations and penalties
   
42-6   Additional duty; city
Sec. 42-1. “PERSON” DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PERSON. Any person, persons, firm, corporation, partnership, business or
other association. PERSON shall also mean the owner(s) of a vacant building the
use of which was or would be to conduct a business or provide a service.
(Ord. 227, adopted 11-11-1985)
Sec. 42-2. PROHIBITION; NUISANCE.
   It shall be unlawful and shall constitute a public nuisance for any person
that does business within or performs services for the public within the
corporate limits of the city, to permit or suffer to remain on the public
sidewalk adjacent to that person’s place of business or service, any snow and/
or ice which is hazardous to pedestrians.
(Ord. 227, adopted 11-11-1985)
Sec. 42-3. VIOLATIONS; NOTIFICATION.
   Whenever the Director of Public Safety or other individual authorized by the
City Manager to enforce this chapter determines there is a violation under
§ 42-2 of this chapter, the enforcing official shall be required to notify the
specific business or service in writing of the violation. Repeated violations
of this chapter by a business or service which has received previous written
notification will not require additional written notification before the city
is authorized to cause the snow and/or ice to be removed.
(Ord. 227, adopted 11-11-1985)
Sec. 42-4. REMOVAL BY CITY.
   In case any person shall neglect or refuse to remove snow and/or ice from
the public sidewalk adjacent to his or her place of business or service after
having been notified to do so in accordance with this chapter, the City Manager
may, if the presence of snow and/or ice shall be a hazard to pedestrians, cause
the same to be removed. The expense of the removal may be recovered by
appropriate civil remedies from the person who neglected or refused to remove
the snow and/or ice.
(Ord. 227, adopted 11-11-1985)
Sec. 42-5. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or otherwise fails to
remove the snow or ice as required within 48 hours is responsible for a
municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than
$250, plus costs and other sanctions, for each violation. Repeat offenses shall
be subject to increased fines as provided by code. The property owner shall
also reimburse the city for any expense incurred by the city in removing the
snow and ice if the property owner fails to do so, except that the increased
fine for a repeat offense shall be as follows.
   A.   The fine for any offense which is a first repeat offense shall be not
less than $500, plus costs and other sanctions.
   B.   The fine for any offense which is a second repeat offense or any
subsequent repeat offense shall be not less than $1,000, plus costs and other
sanctions.
(Ord. 318, adopted 11-12-2001)
Sec. 42-6. ADDITIONAL DUTY; CITY.
   Nothing in this chapter shall create any additional duty on the city, its
Police Department, its police officers or other individuals authorized to
enforce this chapter to remove snow and/or ice or to inspect public sidewalks
for snow and/or ice.
(Ord. 227, adopted 11-11-1985)
CHAPTER 43: ACCESS TO AND USE OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY BY TELECOMMUNICATIONS
PROVIDERS
Section
   
43-1   Purpose
   
43-2   Conflict
   
43-3   Terms defined
   
43-4   Permit required
   
43-5   Issuance of permit
   
43-6   Construction/engineering permit
   
43-7   Conduit or utility poles
   
43-8   Route maps
   
43-9   Repair of damage
   
43-10   Establishment and payment of maintenance fee
   
43-11   Modification of existing fees
   
43-12   Savings clause
   
43-13   Use of funds
   
43-14   Annual report
   
43-15   Cable television operators
   
43-16   Existing rights
   
43-17   Compliance
   
43-18   Reservation of police powers
   
43-19   Severability
   
43-20   Authorized city officials
   
43-21   Municipal civil infraction
Editor’s note:
   A copy of the act can be obtained on the internet at
     http://www.cis.state.mlus/mpsrlcomm/rightofway/rightofway.htm
   A copy of the application form as approved by the MPSC can be obtained on
the internet at
     http://www.cis.state.michmpsr/comm/rightofway/rightofway.htm
   Copies of the permit forms currently approved by the MPSC can be obtained on
the internet at
     http://www.cis.state.mlus/mpsr/comm/rightofway/rightofway.htm
Sec. 43-1. PURPOSE.
   The purposes of this chapter are to regulate access to and ongoing use of
public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers for their
telecommunications facilities while protecting the public health, safety and
welfare and exercising reasonable control of the public rights-of-way in
compliance with the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way
Oversight Act (Public Act 48 of 2002) (“Act”) and other applicable law and to
ensure that the city qualifies for distributions under the Act by modifying the
fees charged to providers and complying with the Act.
(Ord. 322, adopted 11-11-2002)
Sec. 43-2. CONFLICT.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed in a manner as to conflict with
the Act or other applicable law.
(Ord. 322, adopted 11-11-2002)
Sec. 43-3. TERMS DEFINED.
   A.   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ACT. The Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way
Oversight Act (Public Act 48 of 2002), as amended from time to time.
      CITY. The City of Plainwell.
      CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Plainwell or its designee.
This section does not authorize delegation of any decision or function that is
required by law to be made by the City Council.
      CITY MANAGER. The City Manager or his or her designee.
      PERMIT. A non-exclusive permit issued pursuant to the Act and this
chapter to a telecommunications provider to use the public rights-of-way in the
city for its telecommunications facilities.
   B.   All other terms used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as
defined or as provided in the Act, including, without limitation, the
following.
      AUTHORITY. The Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way
Oversight Authority created pursuant to § 3 of the Act.
      MPSC. The Michigan Public Service Commission in the Department of
Consumer and Industry Services and shall have the same meaning as the term
“Commission” in the Act.
      PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership, association,
governmental entity or any other legal entity.
      PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area on, below or above a public roadway,
highway, street, alley, easement or waterway. PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY does not
include a federal, state or private right-of-way.
      TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES or FACILITIES. The equipment or personal
property, such as copper and fiber cables, lines, wires, switches, conduits,
pipes and sheaths, which are used to or can generate, receive, transmit, carry,
amplify or provide telecommunication services or signals. TELECOMMUNICATION
FACILITIES or FACILITIES do not include antennas, supporting structures for
antennas, equipment shelters or houses and any ancillary equipment and
miscellaneous hardware used to provide federally licensed commercial mobile
service as defined in § 332(d) of part I of title III of the Communications Act
of 1934, chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. § 332 and further defined as
commercial mobile radio service in 47 C.F.R. § 20.3 and service provided by any
wireless, two-way communication device.
      TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER, PROVIDER and TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES.
Those terms as defined in § 102 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, Public
Act 179 of 1991, M.C.L.A. § 484.2102. TELECOMMUNICATION PROVIDER does not
include a person or an affiliate of that person when providing a federally
licensed commercial mobile radio service as defined in § 332(d) of part I of
the Communications Act of 1934, chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. § 332 and
further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 C.F.R. § 20.3 or
service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. For the purpose
of the Act and this chapter only, a PROVIDER also includes all of the
following:
         a.   A cable television operator that provides a telecommunications
service;
         b.   Except as otherwise provided by the Act, a person who owns
telecommunication facilities located within a public right-of-way; and
         c.   A person providing broadband internet transport access service.
(Ord. 322, adopted 11-11-2002)
Sec. 43-4. PERMIT REQUIRED.
   A.   Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in the Act, a
telecommunications provider using or seeking to use public rights-of-way in the
city for its telecommunications facilities shall apply for and obtain a permit
pursuant to this chapter.
   B.   Application. Telecommunications providers shall apply for a permit on
an application form approved by the MPSC in accordance with § 6(1) of the Act.
A telecommunications provider shall file one copy of the application with the
City Clerk, one copy with the City Manager and one copy with the City Attorney.
Applications shall be complete and include all information required by the Act,
including without limitation a route map showing the location of the provider’s
existing and proposed facilities in accordance with § 6(5) of the Act.
   C.   Confidential information. If a telecommunications provider claims that
any portion of the route maps submitted by it as part of its application
contain trade secret, proprietary or confidential information, which is exempt
from the Freedom of Information Act, Public Act 442 of 1976, M.C.L.A. §§ 15.231
to 15.246, pursuant to § 6(5) of the Act, the telecommunications provider shall
prominently so indicate on the face of each map.
   D.   Application fee. Except as otherwise provided by the Act, the
application shall be accompanied by a one-time non-refundable application fee
in the amount of $500.
   E.   Additional information. The City Manager may request an applicant to
submit additional information which the City Manager deems reasonably necessary
or relevant. The applicant shall comply with all requests in compliance with
reasonable deadlines for additional information established by the City
Manager. If the city and the applicant cannot agree on the requirement of
additional information requested by the city, the city or the applicant shall
notify the MPSC as provided in § 6(2) of the Act.
   F.   Previously issued permits. Pursuant to § 5(1) of the Act,
authorizations or permits previously issued by the city under § 251 of the
State Telecommunications Act, Public Act 179 of 1991, M.C.L.A. § 484.2251 and
authorizations or permits issued by the city to telecommunications providers
prior to the 1995 enactment of § 251 of the State Telecommunications Act, but
after 1985 shall satisfy the permit requirements of this chapter.
   G.   Existing providers. Pursuant to § 5(3) of the Act, within 180 days from
11-1-2002, the effective date of the Act, a telecommunications provider with
facilities located in a public right-of-way in the city as of that date, that
has not previously obtained authorization or a permit under § 251 of the State
Telecommunications Act, Public Act 179 of 1991, M.C.L.A. § 484.2251, shall
submit to the city an application for a permit in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter. Pursuant to § 5(3) of the Act, a
telecommunications provider submitting an application under this division is
not required to pay the $500 application fee required under division D. above.
A provider under this division shall be given up to an additional 180 days to
submit the permit application if allowed by the Authority, as provided in § 5
(4) of the Act.
(Ord. 322, adopted 11-11-2002)
Sec. 43-5. ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   A.   Approval or denial. The authority to approve or deny an application for
a permit is delegated to the City Manager. Pursuant to § 15(3) of the Act, the
City Manager shall approve or deny an application for a permit within 45 days
from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit
under § 
43-4B. of this chapter for access to a public right-of-way within the city.
Pursuant to § 6(6) of the Act, the City Manager shall notify the MPSC when the
City Manager has granted or denied a permit, including information regarding
the date on which the application was filed and the date on which permit was
granted or denied. The City Manager shall not unreasonably deny an application
for a permit.
   B.   Form of permit. If an application for permit is approved, the City
Manager shall issue the permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or
without additional or different permit terms, in accordance with §§ 6(1), 6(2)
and 15 of the Act.
   C.   Conditions. Pursuant to § 15(4) of the Act, the City Manager may impose
conditions on the issuance of a permit, which conditions shall be limited to
the telecommunications provider’s access and usage of the public right-of-way.
   D.   Bond requirement. Pursuant to § 15(3) of the Act and without limitation
on division C. above, the City Manager may require that a bond be posted by the
telecommunications provider as a condition of the permit. If a bond is
required, it shall not exceed the reasonable cost to ensure that the public
right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the
telecommunications provider’s access and use.
(Ord. 322, adopted 11-11-2002)
Sec. 43-6. CONSTRUCTION/ENGINEERING PERMIT.
   A telecommunications provider shall not commence construction upon, over,
across or under the public rights-of-way in the city without first obtaining
the construction or engineering permit as may be required under this code, as
amended, for construction within the public rights-of-way. No fee shall be
charged for a construction or engineering permit. To the extent the fee
requirements of any city ordinance or resolution are in conflict with this
section, those fee requirements are repealed.
(Ord. 322, adopted 11-11-2002)
Sec. 43-7. CONDUIT OR UTILITY POLES.
   Pursuant to § 4(3) of the Act, obtaining a permit or paying the fees
required under the Act or under this chapter does not give a telecommunications
provider a right to use conduit or utility poles.
(Ord. 322, adopted 11-11-2002)
Sec. 43-8. ROUTE MAPS.
   Pursuant to § 6(7) of the Act, a telecommunications provider shall, within
90 days after the substantial completion of construction of new
telecommunications facilities in the city, submit route maps showing the
location of the telecommunications facilities to both the MPSC and to the city.
The route maps should be in paper format unless and until the MPSC determines
otherwise, in accordance with § 6(8) of the Act.
(Ord. 322, adopted 11-11-2002)
Sec. 43-9. REPAIR OF DAMAGE.
   Pursuant to § 15(5) of the Act, a telecommunications provider undertaking an
excavation or construction or installing telecommunications facilities within a
public right-of-way or temporarily obstructing a public right-of-way in the
city, as authorized by a permit, shall promptly repair all damage done to the
street surface and all installations under, over, below or within the public
right-of-way and shall promptly restore the public right-of-way to its
preexisting condition.
(Ord. 322, adopted 11-11-2002)
Sec. 43-10. ESTABLISHMENT AND PAYMENT OF MAINTENANCE FEE.
   In addition to the non-refundable application fee paid to the city set forth
in § 43-4D. above, a telecommunications provider with telecommunications
facilities in the city’s public rights-of-way shall pay an annual maintenance
fee to the Authority pursuant to § 8 of the Act.
(Ord. 322, adopted 11-11-2002)
Sec. 43-11. MODIFICATION OF EXISTING FEES.
   In compliance with the requirements of § 13(1) of the Act, the city
modifies, to the extent necessary, any fees charged to telecommunications
providers after 11-1-2002, the effective date of the Act, relating to access
and usage of the public rights-of-way, to an amount not exceeding the amounts
of fees and charges required under the Act, which shall be paid to the
Authority. In compliance with the requirements of § 13(4) of the Act, the city
also approves modification of the fees of providers with telecommunication
facilities in public rights-of-way within the city’s boundaries, so that those
providers pay only those fees required under § 8 of the Act. The city shall
provide each telecommunications provider affected by the fee with a copy of
this chapter, in compliance with the requirement of § 13(4) of the Act. To the
extent any fees are charged telecommunications providers in excess of the
amounts permitted under the Act or which are otherwise inconsistent with the
Act, the imposition is declared to be contrary to the city’s policy and intent
and upon application by a provider or discovery by the city, shall be promptly
refunded as having been charged in error.
(Ord. 322, adopted 11-11-2002)
Sec. 43-12. SAVINGS CLAUSE.
   Pursuant to § 13(5) of the Act, if § 8 of the Act is found to be invalid or
unconstitutional, the modification of fees under § 
43-11 above shall be void from the date the modification was made.
(Ord. 322, adopted 11-11-2002)
Sec. 43-13. USE OF FUNDS.
   Pursuant to § 10(4) of the Act, all amounts received by the city from the
Authority shall be used by the city solely for rights-of-way related purposes.
In conformance with that requirement, all funds received by the city from the
Authority shall be deposited into the Major Street Fund and/or the Local Street
Fund maintained by the city under Public Act 51 of 1951.
(Ord. 322, adopted 11-11-2002)
Sec. 43-14. ANNUAL REPORT.
   Pursuant to § 10(5) of the Act, the City Manager shall file an annual report
with the Authority on the use and disposition of funds annually distributed by
the Authority.
(Ord. 322, adopted 11-11-2002)
Sec. 43-15. CABLE TELEVISION OPERATORS.
   Pursuant to § 13(6) of the Act, the city shall not hold a cable television
operator in default or seek any remedy for its failure to satisfy an
obligation, if any, to pay after 11-1-2002, the effective date of this Act, a
franchise fee or similar fee on that portion of gross revenues from charges the
cable operator received for cable modem services provided through broadband
internet transport access services.
(Ord. 322, adopted 11-11-2002)
Sec. 43-16. EXISTING RIGHTS.
   Pursuant to § 4(2) of the Act, except as expressly provided herein with
respect to fees, this chapter shall not affect any existing rights that a
telecommunications provider or the city may have under a permit issued by the
city or under a contract between the city and a telecommunications provider
related to the use of the public rights-of-way.
(Ord. 322, adopted 11-11-2002)
Sec. 43-17. COMPLIANCE.
   The city declares that its policy and intent in adopting this chapter is to
fully comply with the requirements of the Act and the provisions hereof should
be construed in a manner as to achieve that purpose. The city shall comply in
all respects with the requirements of the Act, including, but not limited to,
the following:
   A.   Exempting certain route maps from the Freedom of Information Act,
Public Act 442 of 1976, M.C.L.A. §§ 15.231 to 15.246, as provided in § 43-4C.
of this chapter, to the extent permitted by law;
   B.   Allowing certain previously issued permits to satisfy the permit
requirements hereof, in accordance with § 
43-4F. of this chapter;
   C.   Allowing existing providers additional time in which to submit an
application for a permit and excusing the providers from the $500 application
fee, in accordance with § 
43-4G. of this chapter;
   D.   Approving or denying an application for a permit within 45 days from
the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit for
access to and usage of a public right-of-way within the city, in accordance
with § 
43-5A. of this chapter;
   E.   Notifying the MPSC when the city has granted or denied a permit, in
accordance with § 
43-55A. of this chapter;
   F.   Not unreasonably denying an application for a permit, in accordance
with § 
43-5A. of this chapter;
   G.   Issuing a permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without
additional or different permit terms, as provided in § 
43-5B. of this chapter;
   H.   Limiting the conditions imposed on the issuance of a permit to the
telecommunications provider’s access and usage of the public right-of-way, in
accordance with § 
43-5C. of this chapter;
   I.   Not requiring a bond of a telecommunications provider which exceeds the
reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its
original condition during and after the telecommunication provider’s access and
use, in accordance with § 
43-5D. of this chapter;
   J.   Not charging any telecommunications providers any additional fees for
construction or engineering permits, in accordance with § 
43-6 of this chapter;
   K.   Providing each telecommunications provider affected by the city’s
right-of-way fees with a copy of this chapter, in accordance with § 
43-11 of this chapter;
   L.   Submitting an annual report to the Authority, in accordance with § 
43-14 of this chapter; and
   M.   Not holding a cable television operator in default for a failure to pay
certain franchise fees, in accordance with § 
43-15 of this chapter.
(Ord. 322, adopted 11-11-2002)
Sec. 43-18.    RESERVATION OF POLICE POWERS.
   Pursuant to § 15(2) of the Act, this chapter shall not limit the city’s
right to review and approve a telecommunication provider’s access to and
ongoing use of a public right-of-way or limit the city’s authority to ensure
and protect the health, safety and welfare of the public.
(Ord. 322, adopted 11-11-2002)
Sec. 43-19. SEVERABILITY.
   The various parts, sentences, paragraphs, sections and clauses of this
chapter are declared to be severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph, section
or clause of this chapter is adJudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court or
administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, the unconstitutionality or
invalidity shall not affect the constitutionality or validity of any remaining
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 322, adopted 11-11-2002)
Sec. 43-20. AUTHORIZED CITY OFFICIALS.
   The City Manager or his or her designee is designated as the authorized city
official to issue municipal civil infraction citations (directing alleged
violators to appear in court) or municipal civil infraction violation notices
(directing alleged violators to appear at the Municipal Chapter Violations
Bureau) for violations under this chapter as provided by the city code.
(Ord. 322, adopted 11-11-2002)
Sec. 43-21. MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION.
   A.   A person who violates any provision of this chapter or the terms or
conditions of a permit is responsible for a municipal civil infraction and
shall be subject to the city’s municipal civil infraction ordinance, as amended
and fines in accordance with the following schedule:
 
First offense                             $250
First repeat offense                      $500
Second (or any subsequent) repeat offense $1,000
 
   B.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the remedies
available to the city in the event of a violation by a person of this chapter
or a permit.
(Ord. 322, adopted 11-11-2002)
CHAPTER 44: GAS UTILITIES
Section
Article I. Michigan Gas Utilities Franchise
   
44-1.   Granting of franchise to use highways, streets, alleys and public
places
   
44-2   Use of public ways
   
44-3   Indemnification
   
44-4   Rates established by Michigan Public Service Commission
   
44-5   Term; effective date
   
44-6   Franchise revocable
Article II. Aquila Gas Franchise
   
44-7   Granting of franchise to use highways, streets, alleys and public places
   
44-8   Use of public ways
   
44-9   Indemnification
   
44-10   Rates established by Michigan Public Service Commission
   
44-11   Term; effective date; renewal; supersede previous franchise
   
44-12   Franchise revocable
ARTICLE I. MICHIGAN GAS UTILITIES FRANCHISE
Sec. 44-1. GRANTING OF FRANCHISE TO USE HIGHWAYS, STREETS, ALLEYS AND PUBLIC
PLACES.
   The City of Plainwell, County of Allegan, State of Michigan (hereinafter
called “grantor”), grants to UtiliCorp United, Inc., a Delaware corporation
doing business in the state under the assumed name Michigan Gas Utilities,
(hereinafter called “grantee”), its successors and assigns, a nonexclusive
franchise to use the highways, streets, alleys and other public places of the
city, for the purpose of constructing, maintaining and operating a gas
distribution system in the city with full right, power and authority to
establish, construct, maintain, extend and operate a plant, stations, mains,
pipes, conduits, valves, drips and all other appurtenances, apparatus and
appliances within the corporate limits of the city, for the purpose of
supplying and distributing to the city and its inhabitants gas for heating and
other purposes and, for such purposes, to enter upon and use the highways,
streets, alleys and public lands of the city and lay, maintain, operate, repair
and extend therein, through and thereunder the mains, pipes, conduits, valves,
drips, apparatus, appliances and other appurtenances as may be necessary and
proper for the distribution of gas throughout and beyond the city and for the
purpose of conducting and operating a gas business in the city subject to the
terms and conditions hereinafter provided.
(Ord. 285, adopted 9-26-1994)
Sec. 44-2. USE OF PUBLIC WAYS.
   A.   The company and its contractors and subcontractors shall not unduly
burden or interfere with the present or future use of any of the public ways
within the city. The company and its contractors and subcontractors shall at
the company’s sole cost and expense repair the same and leave it in as good
condition as before the opening or excavation was made. The company and its
contractors and subcontractors shall complete the repair within the time
specified on the permit issued by the city. In the event that the company and
its contractors and subcontractors fail to make the repair within the time
specified on the permit, the city shall be entitled to complete the repair and
the company shall pay the costs of the city for the repair. The company and its
contractors and subcontractors shall maintain the company’s facilities in
reasonable and safe condition.
   B.   Except in emergencies, no public way shall be opened for the laying or
repair of any facilities unless an application is made to the city stating the
nature of the proposed work and the route and upon obtaining a right-of-way
permit pursuant to applicable city ordinances. No permit shall be issued unless
the location and depth of the facilities within the public way are identified
at the time of application.
   C.   The company and its contractors and subcontractors shall, at the
company’s own cost and expense, protect, support, disconnect, relocate in or
remove from the public ways any facilities when required to do so by the city
due to street or other public excavation, construction, repair, grading,
regrading, traffic conditions; the installation of sewers, drains, water pipes
or municipally-owned facilities of any kind; the vacation, construction or
relocation of streets; or other public improvements by a unit of government.
   D.   A company representative shall attend when requested by the city pre-
construction meetings conducted by the city in connection with any public
improvement projects in the public ways in the city which may affect the
company’s facilities. The company representative shall notify the city and its
contractors of any conditions of the company facilities which may affect the
project and the company shall make provisions as necessary to prevent the
company’s facilities (or their condition) from delaying or otherwise
interfering with the project.
   E.   Any easements over or under private property necessary for the
construction or preparation of the facilities shall be arranged and paid for by
the company. Any easements over or under property owned by the city other than
the public ways shall be separately negotiated with the city. The city shall be
under no obligation to grant the easements.
   F.   The company and its contractors and subcontractors shall be subject to
all applicable laws, ordinances or regulations in the course of constructing,
installing, operating and maintaining the facilities in the city. Without
limitation, the company shall comply with the latest edition of the following
if applicable.
      1.   The Michigan Gas Safety Code;
      2.   The American National Standards Institute ANSI B-109.1, Standard for
Gas Displacement Meters;
      3.   The American National Standards Institute Z223.1, National Fuel Gas
Code;
      4.   The National Fire Protection Association Standard No. 59, LP Gases
at Utility Plants;
      5.   The National Fire Protection Association Standard No. 58, Storage
and Handling Liquefied Petroleum Gases;
      6.   The National Fire Protection Association Standard No. 59A,
Production, Storage and Handling, Liquefied Natural Gas; and
      7.   General rules of the Construction Code Commission. The company and
its contractors and subcontractors shall comply with all zoning and land use
restrictions as may exist or may hereafter be amended.
   G.   The city may remove or damage the company’s facilities in the case of
fire, disaster or other emergencies as determined by the Mayor, City Manager,
Public Safety Director, Police Chief or Fire Chief. In that event, neither the
city nor any agent, contractor or employee thereof shall be liable to the
company for any damages caused to the company or the facilities.
   H.   The company shall keep accurate, complete and current maps and records
of its facilities. If the city or its contractors are working within the public
ways in the vicinity of the company’s facilities, the company agrees, if
requested by the city, to furnish maps and/or records of the specific area
requested.
   I.   In the event that the city or its contractors and subcontractors are
working within the public ways in the vicinity of a gas line having pressure of
250 pounds per square inch or more, upon notice by the city the company shall,
at its sole expense, furnish at least one company representative who shall
identify the location of the high pressure gas line and indicate to the city,
its employees or contractors how to avoid damage to or interference with the
high pressure gas line.
(Ord. 285, adopted 9-26-1994)
Sec. 44-3. INDEMNIFICATION.
   The grantee and its contractors and subcontractors shall use due care at all
times in exercising the privileges herein contained. The grantee shall hold
harmless, defend and indemnify the city and its officers, agents and employees,
from and against all costs, claims, damages, liabilities, expenses and
judgments of proceedings of whatever nature, including without limitation,
attorneys fees, arising from the grantee’s exercise of its right pursuant to
this chapter (whether by the grantee or the grantee’s contractors or
subcontractors).
(Ord. 285, adopted 9-26-1994)
Sec. 44-4. RATES ESTABLISHED BY MICHIGAN PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION.
   The rates to be charged by grantee and all rules of service shall be those
which are established from time to time by the State Public Service Commission
or another body which shall succeed to the jurisdiction, rights, powers and
authority of the Commission.
(Ord. 285, adopted 9-26-1994)
Sec. 44-5. TERM; EFFECTIVE DATE.
   The rights granted in this franchise shall continue in full force and effect
for a period of ten years from the effective date thereof. The effective date
of this franchise shall be the date of the acceptance of the franchise by
grantee, which acceptance shall be filed by the grantee, in writing, within 60
days after the enactment of this chapter.
(Ord. 285, adopted 9-26-1994)
Sec. 44-6. FRANCHISE REVOCABLE.
   The franchise herein granted shall be revocable at the will of the governing
body of the city.
(Ord. 285, adopted 9-26-1994)
ARTICLE. II. AQUILA GAS FRANCHISE
Sec. 44-7. GRANTING OF FRANCHISE TO USE HIGHWAYS, STREETS, ALLEYS AND PUBLIC
PLACES.
   The city (hereinafter called “grantor”) grants to Aquila, a Delaware
corporation doing business in the state (hereinafter called “grantee”), its
successors and assigns, a non-exclusive franchise to use the highways. streets,
alleys and other public places of the city, for the purpose of constructing,
maintaining and operating a natural gas distribution system in the city with
full right, power and authority to establish, construct, maintain, extend and
operate a plant, stations, mains, pipes, conduits, valves, drips and all other
appurtenances, apparatus and appliances within the corporate limits of the
city, for the purpose of supplying and distributing to the grantor and its
inhabitants natural gas for heating and other purposes and, for such purposes,
to enter upon and use the highways, streets, alleys and public lands of the
grantor and lay, maintain, operate, repair and extend therein, through and
thereunder the mains, pipes, conduits, valves, drips, apparatus, appliances and
other appurtenances as may be necessary and proper for the distribution of
natural gas throughout and beyond the city, for the purpose of conducting and
operating a natural gas business subject to the terms and conditions
hereinafter provided.
(Ord. 333, adopted 9-27-2004)
Sec. 44-8. USE OF PUBLIC WAYS.
   A.   The grantee and its contractors and subcontractors shall not unduly
burden or interfere with the present or future use of any of the public ways
within the city and shall interfere as little as possible with public travel.
The grantee and its contractors and subcontractors shall, at the grantee’s sole
cost and expense, repair the public ways and leave it in as good condition as
before the opening or excavation was made. The grantee and its contractors and
subcontractors shall complete the repair within the time specified on the
permit issued by the grantor. In the event that the grantee and its contractors
and subcontractors fail to make the repair within the time specified on the
permit, the grantor shall be entitled to complete the repair and the grantee
shall pay the costs of the grantor for the repair. The grantee and its
contractors and subcontractors shall maintain the grantee’s facilities in
reasonable and safe condition.
   B.   Except in emergencies, no public way shall be opened for the laying or
repair of any facilities unless an application is made to the grantor stating
the nature of the proposed work and the route and upon obtaining a right-of-way
permit pursuant to applicable grantor ordinances. No permit shall be issued
unless the location and depth of the facilities within the public way are
identified at the time application.
   C.   The grantee and its contractors and subcontractors shall, at the
grantee’s own cost and expense, protect, support disconnect, relocate in or
remove from the public ways any facilities when required to do so by the
grantor due to street or other public excavation, construction, repair,
grading, regrading, traffic conditions, the installation of sewers, drains,
water pipes or municipally owned facilities of any kind; the vacation,
construction or relocation of streets; or other public improvements by a unit
of government.
   D.   A grantee representative shall attend when requested by the grantor
pre-construction meetings conducted by the grantor in connection with any
public improvement projects in the public ways in the city which may affect the
grantee’s facilities. The grantee representative shall notify the grantor and
its contractors of any conditions of the grantee’s facilities which may affect
the project and the grantee shall make provisions as necessary to prevent the
grantee’s facilities (or their condition) from delaying or otherwise
interfering with the project.
   E.   Any easements over or under private property necessary for the
construction or preparation of the facilities shall be arranged and paid for by
the grantee. Any easements over or under property owned by the city other than
the public ways shall be separately negotiated with the city. The city shall be
under no obligation to grant the easements.
   F.   The grantee and its contractors and subcontractors shall be subject to
all applicable laws, ordinances or regulations, including the requirements of
the State Public Service Commission in the course of constructing, installing,
operating and maintaining the facilities in the city. Without limitation, the
company shall comply with the latest edition of the following if applicable:
      1.   The Michigan Gas Safety Code;
      2.   The American National Standards Institute ANSI B-109.1, Standard for
Gas Displacement Meters;
      3.   The American National Standards Institute Z223.1, National Fuel Gas
Code; and
      4.   General rules of the Construction Code Commission. The grantor and
its contractors and subcontractors shall comply with all zoning and land use
restrictions as may exist or may hereafter be amended.
   G.   The grantor may turn-off the grantee’s facilities in the case of fire,
disaster or other emergencies at private or public structures as determined by
the fire chief in conjunction with grantee’s public official training.
   H.   The grantee shall keep accurate, complete and current maps and records
of its facilities. Subject to the Homeland Security Act and upon reasonable
request (and annually), the grantee shall furnish a copy of the maps and/or
records of its facilities to the city.
   I.   In the event that the grantor or its contractors and subcontractors are
working within the public ways in the vicinity of a gas line having pressure of
250 pounds per squire inch or more, upon notice by the grantor the grantee
shall, at its sole expense, furnish at least one grantee representative who
shall identify the location of the high pressure gas line and indicate to the
grantor, its employees or contractors how to avoid damage to or interference
with the high pressure gas line.
(Ord. 333, adopted 9-27-2004)
Sec. 44-9. INDEMNIFICATION.
   The grantee and its contractors and subcontractors shall use due care at all
times in exercising the privileges herein. The grantee shall hold harmless,
defend and indemnify the city and its officers, agents and employees, from and
against all costs, claims, damages, liabilities, expenses and judgments of
proceedings of whatever nature, including without limitation, attorneys fees,
arising from the grantee’s exercise of its rights pursuant to this franchise
ordinance (whether by the grantee or the grantee’s contractors or
subcontractors); provided, however, that, the grantee need not save harmless
the city from claims, demands, losses and expenses arising out of the sole
negligence of the city, its employees or agents.
(Ord. 333, adopted 9-27-2004)
Sec. 44-10. RATES ESTABLISHED BY MICHIGAN PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION.
   The rates to be charged by grantee and all rules of service shall be those
which are established from time to time by the State Public Service Commission
or another body which shall succeed to the jurisdiction, rights, powers and
authority of the Commission.
(Ord. 333, adopted 9-27-2004)
Sec. 44-11. TERM; EFFECTIVE DATE; RENEWAL, SUPERSEDE PREVIOUS FRANCHISE.
   The rights granted in this franchise shall continue in full force and effect
for a period of ten years from the effective date of this chapter. The
franchise rights, power and authority granted herein shall automatically be
renewed for a ten-year term thereafter unless, within six months prior to the
expiration of the first ten-year term, one party provides the other written
notice of its intent not to renew the franchise for the upcoming ten-year term.
The effective date of this franchise shall be the date of the acceptance of the
franchise by the grantee, which acceptance shall be filed by the grantee, in
writing, with the City Clerk within 60 days after the enactment of this
chapter.
(Ord. 333, adopted 9-27-2004)
Sec. 44-12. FRANCHISE REVOCABLE.
   The franchise herein granted shall be revocable at the will of the governing
body of the city as provided in the State Constitution.
(Ord. 333, adopted 9-27-2004)
CHAPTER 45: ENERGY MARKETING FRANCHISE
Section
Article I. DTE
   
45-1   Grant of franchise
   
45-2   Conditions
   
45-3   Rates
   
45-4   Insurance
   
45-5   Interpretation
   
45-6   Limitations
   
45-7   Assignment
   
45-8   Consideration
   
45-9   Revocation
   
45-10   Public emergency
   
45-11   Acceptance and effective date
Article II. Quest
   
45-12   Grant of franchise
   
45-13   Conditions
   
45-14   Rates
   
45-15   Insurance
   
45-16   Interpretation
   
45-17   Limitations
   
45-18   Assignment
   
45-19   Consideration
   
45-20   Revocation
   
45-21   Public emergency
   
45-22   Acceptance and effective date
ARTICLE I. DTE
Sec. 45-1. GRANT OF FRANCHISE.
   The city, with offices located at 141 N. Main Street, Plainwell, Michigan
49080 (“city”), grants to DTE Energy Marketing, Inc., a Michigan corporation,
with offices at 101 N. Main Street, Suite 300, Arbor, Michigan 48104
(“grantee”), a limited, non-exclusive, revocable franchise to market
electricity through and over existing and future electrical lines owned and
operated by another authorized public utility and to conduct a local electric
business as an electric power marketer and third-party supplier of electricity
in the city for a period of ten years after this chapter takes effect; provided
that, this grant of franchise excludes a franchise to construct, lay, maintain
or operate electric utility facilities, including, but not limited to, electric
lines, towers, masts, poles, crossarms, guys, braces, feeders, transmission and
distribution wires, transformers and other electrical appliances in, along,
over or under the highways, streets, alleys and other public places in the
city; and further provided that, the grantee shall transmit, supply, deliver
and distribute electricity and electrical services solely through the electric
utility facilities presently or hereafter owned and maintained by another
authorized public utility, by agreement with the public utility or as otherwise
provided by law. This grant of franchise includes a franchise for the grantee
to own, operate and maintain metering and telemetry equipment for the purpose
of serving its customers; provided that, the equipment will not be used to bill
services provided by another public utility.
(Ord. 311, adopted 7-24-2000)
Sec. 45-2. CONDITIONS.
   A.   As an electric power marketer and third-party supplier of electricity,
the grantee will not directly transmit or generate electricity, nor impair,
obstruct or attempt to control or occupy any highway, street, alley or any
other public place, nor engage in any construction or installation in any
highway, street, alley or any other public place or right-of-way.
   B.   The grantee shall hold harmless, defend and indemnify the city and its
officers, boards, commissions, consultants, agents and employees from and
against all costs, claims, damages, liabilities, expenses, judgments and
proceedings of whatever nature including, without limitation, attorneys’ fees
and the fees of expert witnesses and consultants, arising from the grantee’s
exercise of its rights and obligations pursuant to this chapter (whether by the
grantee or the grantee’s contractors or subcontractors).
   C.   The city may establish reasonable standards of service, prevent unjust
discrimination in service and impose any other regulations as may be determined
by the city to be conductive to the safety, welfare and accommodation of the
public. The grantee shall be and remain subject to all charter provisions,
ordinances, rules and regulations of the city now in effect or which are
adopted hereafter including, without limitation, charter provisions,
ordinances, rules and regulations which regulate the use of public rights-of-
way in the city.
   D.   The grantee shall reimburse the city for the city’s costs associated
with issuance of this franchise, including reasonable and documented attorney
fees.
   E.   The rights, power and authority granted by this chapter are not
exclusive.
(Ord. 311, adopted 7-24-2000)
Sec. 45-3. RATES.
   The grantee may charge its customers within the city for electricity and
electrical services at rates as agreed upon by the grantee and its customers
subject to compliance with all applicable federal and state laws and State
Public Service Commission orders, rules and regulations.
(Ord. 311, adopted 7-24-2000)
Sec. 45-4. INSURANCE.
   A.   The grantee shall obtain and maintain in full force and effect the
following insurance covering all insurable risks associated with its exercise
of the rights granted by this chapter: comprehensive general liability,
including completed operations liability, independent contractors liability,
contractual liability coverage and coverage for hazards in an amount no less
than $2,000,000 and workers’ compensation insurance with state statutory
limits, including employers’ liability coverage. In addition, grantee shall
maintain motor vehicle liability insurance covering all owned, hired and non-
owned vehicles in use by grantee, its employees and agents, with personal
protection insurance and property protection insurance to comply with the
provisions of the state’s no fault insurance law, including residual liability
insurance with minimum limits of $2,000,000 as the combined single limit for
each occurrence of bodily injury and property damage.
   B.   The city shall be named as an additional insured in all applicable
policies. All insurance policies shall provide that they shall not be canceled
or modified unless 30 days prior written notice is given to the city. If so
requested by the city, grantee shall provide the city with a certificate of
insurance evidencing the coverage and maintain a current certificate on file
with the city. All insurance shall be issued by insurance carriers licensed to
do business by the state or by surplus line carriers on the State Insurance
Commission approved list of companies qualified to do business in the state.
All insurance and surplus line carriers shall be rated A+ or better by A.M.
Best Company. The grantee shall require that each and every one of its
contractors and their subcontractors carry the insurance in the same type and
amounts as the grantee is required to obtain under this section.
(Ord. 311, adopted 7-24-2000)
Sec. 45-5. INTERPRETATION.
   Nothing in this franchise shall be construed to alienate the title of the
public in and to any highway, street, alley or public place. Nothing in this
franchise shall be construed in any manner as a surrender by the city of its
legislative power with respect to the subject matter of this franchise or with
respect to any other matter or in any manner limiting the right of the city to
lawfully regulate the use of any highway, street, alley or public place in the
city.
(Ord. 311, adopted 7-24-2000)
Sec. 45-6. LIMITATIONS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a waiver by the grantee of any
rights under state or federal law. The grantee shall, as to all other
conditions and elements of electrical service, not herein addressed or fixed,
be and remain subject to the orders, rules and regulations applicable to
electric service in the city as prescribed by the State Public Service
Commission or its successors and by any federal agency with authority and
jurisdiction to issue the orders, rules and regulations. If so requested by the
city, grantee shall provide the city with copies of all documents which grantee
sends to the State Public Service Commission and copies of all orders,
decisions or correspondence the grantee receives from the State Public Service
Commission that relate to this franchise. The grantee shall permit city
inspection and examination of all records that relate to this franchise that
grantee is required to maintain or file under State Public Service Commission
rules and regulations.
(Ord. 311, adopted 7-24-2000)
Sec. 45-7. ASSIGNMENT.
   This franchise may not be sold, leased, assigned, transferred or used by any
party other than the grantee without the consent of the city.
(Ord. 311, adopted 7-24-2000)
Sec. 45-8. CONSIDERATION.
   In consideration of the rights, power and authority granted, the grantee
shall faithfully perform all things required by the terms hereof.
(Ord. 311, adopted 7-24-2000)
Sec. 45-9. REVOCATION.
   The franchise granted by this chapter is subject to revocation at will and
without cause upon 60 days written notice by the party desiring the revocation.
(Ord. 311, adopted 7-24-2000)
Sec. 45-10. PUBLIC EMERGENCY.
   The city shall have the right to sever, disrupt, dig up or otherwise destroy
electrical facilities owned or used by the grantee, without any prior notice,
if the action is deemed necessary by the City Manager or the Mayor because of a
public emergency. PUBLIC EMERGENCY shall be any condition which, in the opinion
of either of the officials named, possesses an immediate threat to the lives or
property of the residents of the city, caused by any natural or human-made
disaster, including but not limited to storms, floods, fire, accidents,
explosions, major sewer or water main breaks, hazardous material spills and
similar events. The grantee or the owner of the electric facilities shall be
responsible for repair, at its sole expense, of the electric facilities damaged
pursuant to any action taken by the city.
(Ord. 311, adopted 7-24-2000)
Sec. 45-11. ACCEPTANCE AND EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall take effect ten days after adoption and upon the
publication thereof; provided, however, it shall cease and be of no effect
after 30 days from its adoption unless within the period the grantee shall
accept the same in writing filed with the City Clerk. Upon acceptance and
publication hereof, this chapter shall constitute a contract between the city
and the grantee.
(Ord. 311, adopted 7-24-2000)
ARTICLE II. QUEST
Sec. 45-12. GRANT OF FRANCHISE.
   The city, with offices located at 141 N. Main Street, Plainwell, Michigan
49080 (“city”), grants to Quest Energy, a Michigan limited liability company,
with offices at 173 Parkland Plaza, Suite B, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48103
(“grantee”), a limited, non-exclusive, revocable franchise to market
electricity through and over existing and future electrical lines owned and
operated by another authorized public utility and to conduct a local electric
business as an electric power marketer and third-party supplier of electricity
in the city for a period of ten years after this chapter takes effect; provided
that, this grant of franchise excludes a franchise to construct, lay, maintain
or operate electric utility facilities, including, but not limited to, electric
lines, towers, masts, poles, crossarms, guys, braces, feeders, transmission and
distribution wires, transformers and other electrical appliances in, along,
over or under the highways, streets, alleys and other public places in the
city; and further provided that, the grantee shall transmit, supply, deliver
and distribute electricity and electrical services solely through electric
utility facilities presently or hereafter owned and maintained by another
authorized public utility, by agreement with the public utility or as otherwise
provided by law. This grant of franchise includes a franchise for the grantee
to own, operate and maintain metering and telemetry equipment for the purpose
of serving its customers; provided that, the equipment will not be used to bill
services provided by another public utility.
(Ord. 312, adopted 7-24-2000)
Sec. 45-13. CONDITIONS.
   A.   As an electric power marketer and third-party supplier of electricity,
the grantee will not directly transmit or generate electricity, nor impair,
obstruct or attempt to control or occupy any highway, street, alley or any
other public place, nor engage in any construction or installation in any
highway, street, alley or any other public place or right-of-way.
   B.   The grantee shall hold harmless, defend and indemnify the city and its
officers, boards, commissions, consultants, agents and employees from and
against all costs, claims, damages, liabilities, expenses, judgments and
proceedings of whatever nature including, without limitation, attorneys’ fees
and the fees of expert witnesses and consultants, arising from the grantee’s
exercise of its rights and obligations pursuant to this chapter (whether by the
grantee or the grantee’s contractors or subcontractors).
   C.   The city may establish reasonable standards of service, prevent unjust
discrimination in service and impose any other regulations as may be determined
by the city to be conductive to the safety, welfare and accommodation of the
public. The grantee shall be and remain subject to all charter provisions,
ordinances, rules and regulations of the city now in effect or which are
adopted hereafter including, without limitation, charter provisions,
ordinances, rules and regulations which regulate the use of public rights-of-
way in the city.
   D.   The grantee shall reimburse the city for the city’s costs associated
with issuance of this franchise, including reasonable and documented attorney
fees.
   E.   The rights, power and authority granted by this chapter are not
exclusive.
(Ord. 312, adopted 7-24-2000)
Sec. 45-14. RATES.
   The grantee may charge its customers within the city for electricity and
electrical services at rates as agreed upon by the grantee and its customers,
subject to compliance with all applicable federal and state laws and State
Public Service Commission orders, rules and regulations.
(Ord. 312, adopted 7-24-2000)
Sec. 45-15. INSURANCE.
   A.   The grantee shall obtain and maintain in full force and effect the
following insurance covering all insurable risks associated with its exercise
of the rights granted by this chapter: comprehensive general liability,
including completed operations liability, independent contractors liability,
contractual liability coverage and coverage for hazards in an amount no less
than $2,000,000 and workers’ compensation insurance with state statutory
limits, including employers’ liability coverage. In addition, the grantee shall
maintain motor vehicle liability insurance covering all owned, hired and non-
owned vehicles in use by the grantee, its employees and agents, with personal
protection insurance and property protection insurance to comply with the
provisions of the state’s no fault insurance law, including residual liability
insurance with minimum limits of $2,000,000 as the combined single limit for
each occurrence of bodily injury and property damage.
   B.   The city shall be named as an additional insured in all applicable
policies. All insurance policies shall provide that they shall not be canceled
or modified unless 30 days prior written notice is given to the city. If so
requested by the city, the grantee shall provide the city with a certificate of
insurance evidencing the coverage and maintain a current certificate on file
with the city. All insurance shall be issued by insurance carriers licensed to
do business by the state or by surplus line carriers on the State Insurance
Commission approved list of companies qualified to do business in the state.
All insurance and surplus line carriers shall be rated A+ or better by A.M.
Best Company. The grantee shall require that each and every one of its
contractors and their subcontractors carry the insurance in the same type and
amounts as grantee is required to obtain under this section.
(Ord. 312, adopted 7-24-2000)
Sec. 45-16. INTERPRETATION.
   Nothing in this franchise shall be construed to alienate the title of the
public in and to any highway, street, alley or public place. Nothing in this
franchise shall be construed in any manner as a surrender by the city of its
legislative power with respect to the subject matter of this franchise or with
respect to any other matter or in any manner limiting the right of the city to
lawfully regulate the use of any highway, street, alley or public place in the
city.
(Ord. 312, adopted 7-24-2000)
Sec. 45-17. LIMITATIONS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a waiver by the grantee of any
rights under state or federal law. The grantee shall, as to all other
conditions and elements of electrical service, not herein addressed or fixed,
be and remain subject to the orders, rules and regulations applicable to
electric service in the city as prescribed by the State Public Service
Commission or its successors and by any federal agency with authority and
jurisdiction to issue the orders, rules and regulations. If so requested by the
city, the grantee shall provide the city with copies of all documents which the
grantee sends to the State Public Service Commission and copies of all orders,
decisions or correspondence the grantee receives from the State Public Service
Commission that relate to this franchise. The grantee shall permit city
inspection and examination of all records that relate to this franchise that
grantee is required to maintain or file under State Public Service Commission
rules and regulations.
(Ord. 312, adopted 7-24-2000)
Sec. 45-18. ASSIGNMENT.
   This franchise may not be sold, leased, assigned, transferred or used by any
party other than the grantee without the consent of the city.
(Ord. 312, adopted 7-24-2000)
Sec. 45-19. CONSIDERATION.
   In consideration of the rights, power and authority granted, the grantee
shall faithfully perform all things required by the terms hereof.
(Ord. 312, adopted 7-24-2000)
Sec. 45-20. REVOCATION.
   The franchise granted by this chapter is subject to revocation at will and
without cause upon 60 days written notice by the party desiring the revocation.
(Ord. 312, adopted 7-24-2000)
Sec. 45-21. PUBLIC EMERGENCY.
   The city shall have the right to sever, disrupt, dig up or otherwise destroy
electrical facilities owned or used by the grantee, without any prior notice,
if the action is deemed necessary by the City Manager or the Mayor because of a
public emergency. PUBLIC EMERGENCY shall be any condition which, in the opinion
of either of the officials named, possesses an immediate threat to the lives or
property of the residents of the city, caused by any natural or human-made
disaster, including, but not limited to, storms, floods, fire, accidents,
explosions, major sewer or water main breaks, hazardous material spills and
similar events. The grantee or the owner of the electric facilities shall be
responsible for repair, at its sole expense, of the electric facilities damaged
pursuant to any action taken by the city.
(Ord. 312, adopted 7-24-2000)
Sec. 45-22. ACCEPTANCE AND EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall take effect ten days after adoption and upon the
publication thereof; provided, however, it shall cease and be of no effect
after 30 days from its adoption unless within the period the grantee shall
accept the same in writing filed with the City Clerk. Upon acceptance and
publication hereof, this chapter shall constitute a contract between the city
and the grantee.
(Ord. 312, adopted 7-24-2000)
CHAPTER 46: CHARTER COMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE
Section
   
46-1   Grant
   
46-2   Effecting the franchise
Sec. 46-1. GRANT.
   The City Council authorizes the granting of a non-exclusive cable television
franchise to CC Michigan, LLC doing business as Charter Communications pursuant
to the terms set forth in the City of Plainwell, Michigan Nonexclusive 2004
Cable Television Franchise with CC Michigan LLC d/b/a Charter Communications on
file at City Hall.
(Ord. 334, adopted 12-13-2004)
Sec. 46-2. EFFECTING THE FRANCHISE.
   The City Manager, City Clerk, City Attorney, Special Counsel and other city
officials are authorized and directed to take all actions necessary to effect
and implement the City of Plainwell, Michigan Nonexclusive 2004 Cable
Television Franchise with CC Michigan LLC.
(Ord. 334, adopted 12-13-2004)
CHAPTER 47: ELECTRIC POWER FRANCHISE
Section
   
47-1   Grantee defined
   
47-2   Grant, period of franchise
   
47-3   Conditions of work
   
47-4   Rights of grantee; indemnification
   
47-5   Rates
   
47-6   Bills; meters; right of access
   
47-7   Responsibility of grantee
   
47-8   Rights not exclusive
   
47-9   Revocation; acceptance and ratification of franchise
Sec. 47-1. GRANTEE DEFINED.
   Wherever the word “grantee” appears in this section, it is intended to
designate and shall be held to refer to the Consumers Power Company, a
corporation duly authorized to do business in the state, its successors and
assigns.
(Ord. 152, adopted 5-11-1964)
Sec. 47-2. GRANT, PERIOD OF FRANCHISE.
   The right, power and authority is granted and vested in the grantee to
construct, maintain and use electric lines, consisting of poles, masts, towers,
crossarms, guys, braces, feeders, transmission and distribution wires,
transformers and other electrical appliances on, along and across the highways,
streets, alleys, bridges and other public places in the city and to do a local
electric business therein, for a period of 30 years.
(Ord. 152, adopted 5-11-1964)
Sec. 47-3. CONDITIONS OF WORK.
   No highway, street, alley, bridge or other public place used by the grantee
shall be obstructed longer than necessary during the work of construction or
repair and shall be restored to the same good order and condition as when the
work was commenced.
(Ord. 152, adopted 5-11-1964)
Sec. 47-4. RIGHTS OF GRANTEE; INDEMNIFICATION.
   All poles, masts, towers and other supports shall be set and all wires shall
be suspended in a careful and proper manner so as not to injure persons or
property. The grantee shall have the right to trim trees if necessary in the
conducting of the business, subject, however, to the supervision of the
Superintendent of the Department of Public Works. The grantee shall, at all
times, keep and save the city free and harmless from all loss, costs and damage
to which it may be subject by reason of the negligent construction and
maintenance of the poles, masts, towers, wires and other structures and
appliances, the erection and maintenance of which are authorized.
(Ord. 152, adopted 5-11-1964)
Sec. 47-5. RATES.
   The grantee shall be entitled to charge the inhabitants of the city for
electric energy for light, heat and power, the rates as shown by the schedule
now on file in the office of the City Clerk. The rates shall be subject to
review and change at any time by the State Public Service Commission or its
successors, upon proper application by either the grantee or the city, acting
by the City Council, being made thereto and the regularly filed rates as
approved by the State Public Service Commission or its successors, as
applicable to the city, shall, at all times, be the lawful rates.
(Ord. 152, adopted 5-11-1964)
Sec. 47-6. BILLS; METERS; RIGHT OF ACCESS.
   All bills for electric energy shall be payable monthly. The grantee may
collect the minimum charge as specified in the schedule. It shall also furnish
and maintain commercially accurate meters to measure the energy furnished. The
grantee shall at all reasonable times have access to the premises of its
customers, for the purpose of reading, inspecting, removing and replacing the
meters.
(Ord. 152, adopted 5-11-1964)
Sec. 47-7. RESPONSIBILITY OF GRANTEE.
   In consideration of the rights, power and authority granted, all of which
shall vest in the grantee for a period of 30 years as aforesaid, the grantee
shall faithfully perform all things required by the terms hereof.
(Ord. 152, adopted 5-11-1964)
Sec. 47-8. RIGHTS NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   The rights, power and authority herein granted are not exclusive.
(Ord. 152, adopted 5-11-1964)
Sec. 47-9. REVOCATION; ACCEPTANCE AND RATIFICATION OF FRANCHISE.
   The franchise granted by this section is not subject to revocation and shall
be and become valid and binding only upon its ratification by the affirmative
vote of at least three-fifths of the electors of the city voting thereon at a
regular or special municipal election to be held in the manner provided by law.
This ordinance shall not be submitted to the electors unless the grantee shall,
within 30 days after the adoption hereof, file with the City Clerk its written
acceptance, subject to the ratification by the electors of the city. Upon the
acceptance hereof and the ratification by the electors as aforesaid, this
section shall constitute a contract between the city and the grantee for the
full term of 30 years from and after the date of the ratification by the
electors.
(Ord. 152, adopted 5-11-1964)
CHAPTER 48: BUILDING, ELECTRICAL, PLUMBING AND MECHANICAL CODES
Section
   
48-1   Codes adopted
   
48-2   Enforcing agency
   
48-3   Violations and penalties
Sec. 48-1. CODES ADOPTED.
   The city adopts by reference the following construction codes: the State
Building Code, Electrical Code, Plumbing Code and Mechanical Code, as amended.
(Ord. 216, eff. 3-20-1984)
Sec. 48-2. ENFORCING AGENCY.
   Pursuant to the provisions of the State Building, Electrical, Mechanical and
Plumbing Codes, in accordance with Public Act 230 of 1972, as amended, the
Building Official of the city is designated as the enforcing agency to
discharge the responsibilities of the city under Act 230 of the Public Acts of
1972, as amended. The city assumes responsibility for the administration and
enforcement of the Act throughout its corporate limits.
(Ord. 216, eff. 3-20-1984)
Sec. 48-3. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   As authorized by § 23 of Public Act 230 of 1972, as amended, any person who
violates any provision of the Codes adopted by this chapter or who disobeys any
lawful order issued in pursuance of those Codes is responsible for a municipal
civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than $500,
plus costs and other sanctions, for each violation. Repeat offenses shall be
subject to increased fines as provided by code.
(Ord. 318, adopted 11-12-2001)
CHAPTER 49: DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
Section
   
49-1   Short title
   
49-2   Definition
   
49-3   Prohibition
   
49-4   Notice
   
49-5   Hearing Officer
   
49-6   Hearing
   
49-7   Failure or refusal of owner to comply
   
49-8   Appeal
   
49-9   Fines and penalties
Sec. 49-1. SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and cited as the “City of Plainwell Dangerous
Buildings Chapter”.
(Ord. adopted 11-8-1982; Ord. 207, adopted 11-26-1982)
Sec. 49-2. DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DANGEROUS BUILDING. Any building or structure, residential or otherwise,
which has any of the following defects or is in any of the following
conditions.
      1.   Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of
ingress or egress does not conform to the Building Codes or any codes effective
within the city, it shall be considered that the building does not meet the
requirements of this chapter.
      2.   Whenever any portion has been damaged by fire, wind, flood or by any
other cause in a manner that the structural strength or stability is
appreciably less than it was before the catastrophe and is less than the
minimum requirements of the city’s Minimum Housing Code, as amended or the
Building Codes of the city for a new building or similar structure, purpose or
location.
      3.   Whenever any portion of a member or appurtenance is likely to fall
or to become detached or dislodged or to collapse and to injure persons or
damage property.
      4.   Whenever any portion has settled to an extent that walls or other
structural portions have materially less resistance to winds than is required
in the case of new construction by the Building Codes of the city.
      5.   Whenever the building or structure or any part, because of
dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction or because of the
removal or movement of some portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of
supporting the building or portion thereof or for other reason, is likely to
fall or give way.
      6.   Whenever for any reason whatsoever the building or structure or any
portion is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is used.
      7.   Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind
or flood or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become an
attractive nuisance to children or others who might play or enter therein to
their danger or as to afford a harbor for vagrants or criminals or as to enable
persons to resort thereto for the purpose of committing a nuisance or unlawful
acts.
      8.   Whenever a building or structure, because of dilapidation, decay,
damage or faulty construction or arrangement or otherwise, is unsanitary or
unfit for human habitation or is in a condition that is likely to cause
sickness or disease when so determined by the health officer of the county or
is likely to work injury to the health, safety or general welfare of those
living or working within.
      9.   Whenever any building becomes vacant, dilapidated and open at door
or window, leaving the interior of the building exposed to the elements or
accessible to entrance by trespassers.
(Ord. adopted 11-8-1982; Ord. 207, adopted 11-26-1982)
Sec. 49-3. PROHIBITION.
   It shall be unlawful for any owner or agent thereof to keep or maintain any
building or part thereof which is a dangerous building as defined in this
chapter.
(Ord. adopted 11-8-1982; Ord. 207, adopted 11-26-1982)
Sec. 49-4. NOTICE.
   A.   When the whole or any part of any building or structure is found to be
in a dangerous condition, the City Building Inspector shall issue a notice of
the dangerous condition.
   B.   The notice shall be directed to the owner of or party in interest in
the building in whose name the property appears on the last local tax
assessment records of the city.
   C.   The notice shall specify the time and place of a hearing on the
condition of the building or structure at which time and place the person to
whom the notice is directed shall have the opportunity to show cause why the
building or structure should not be ordered to be demolished or otherwise made
safe.
   D.   All notices required by this chapter shall be in writing and shall be
served upon the person to whom they are directed personally or in lieu of
personal service, may be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested,
addressed to the owner or party in interest at the address shown on the tax
records, at least ten days before the date of the hearing described in the
notice. If any person to whom a notice is directed is not personally served, in
addition to mailing the notice, a copy thereof shall be posted upon a
conspicuous part of the building or structure at least ten days prior to the
hearing date.
(Ord. adopted 11-8-1982; Ord. 207, adopted 11-26-1982)
Sec. 49-5. HEARING OFFICER.
   A.   The City Manager is designated as the Hearing Officer to conduct the
identified hearing.
   B.   The Building Inspector shall file a copy of the notice of the dangerous
condition of any building with the Hearing Officer.
   C.   At any hearing held, the Hearing Officer shall take testimony of the
Building Inspector, the owner of the property and any other interested party.
Upon the taking of the testimony, the Hearing Officer shall render his or her
decision either closing the proceedings or ordering the building to be
demolished or otherwise made safe. A report of the proceedings shall be
provided to the City Council at the next regularly scheduled meeting.
   D.   If it is determined by the Hearing Officer that the building or
structure should be demolished or otherwise made safe, he or she shall so
order, fixing a time in the order for the owner or party in interest to comply
therewith.
   E.   If the owner or party in interest fails to appear or neglects or
refuses to comply with the order, the Hearing Officer shall file a report of
his or her findings and a copy of the order with the City Council and request
that the necessary action be taken to demolish or otherwise make safe the
building or structure. A copy of the findings and order of the Hearing Officer
shall be served on the owner or party in interest in the manner prescribed
herein.
(Ord. adopted 11-8-1982; Ord. 207, adopted 11-26-1982)
Sec. 49-6. HEARING.
   Upon receiving the findings and order of the Hearing Officer, the
Construction Board of Appeals shall fix a date for hearing, reviewing the
findings and order of the Hearing Officer and shall give notice to the owner or
party in interest in the manner prescribed of the time and place of the
hearing. At the hearing, the owner or party in interest shall be given the
opportunity to show cause why the building should not be demolished or
otherwise made safe and the Board shall either approve, disapprove or modify
the order for demolition or making safe of the building or structure.
(Ord. adopted 11-8-1982; Ord. 207, adopted 11-26-1982)
Sec. 49-7. FAILURE OR REFUSAL OF OWNER TO COMPLY.
   In the event of the failure or refusal of the owner or party in interest to
comply with the decision of the Board, the City Council may, in its discretion,
contract for the demolition or making safe of the dangerous building. The cost
of the demolition or making the building safe shall be a lien against the real
property and shall be reported to the City Assessor who shall assess the cost
against the property on which the building or structure is located. The owner
or party in interest in whose name the property appears upon the last local tax
assessment records of the city shall be notified of the amount of the cost by
first class mail at the address shown on the records. If the owner or party of
interest fails to pay the same within 30 days after mailing by the assessor of
the notice of the amount thereof, the assessor shall add the same to the next
tax roll of the city and the same shall be collected in the same manner in all
respects as provided by law for the collection of taxes by the city.
(Ord. adopted 11-8-1982; Ord. 207, adopted 11-26-1982)
Sec. 49-8. APPEAL.
   An owner or party in interest aggrieved by any final decision of the Board
may appeal the decision or order to the Circuit Court for the county, by filing
a petition for an order of superintending control within 20 days after the date
of the decision.
(Ord. adopted 11-8-1982; Ord. 207, adopted 11-26-1982)
Sec. 49-9. FINES AND PENALTIES.
   A person who violates any provision of this chapter is responsible for a
municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than
$1,000, plus costs and other sanctions, for each violation. Repeat offenses
shall be subject to increased fines as provided by code, except that the
increased fine for a repeat offense shall be as follows.
   A.   The fine for any offense which is a first repeat offense shall be not
less than $2,500, plus costs and other sanctions.
   B.   The fine for any offense which is a second repeat offense or any
subsequent repeat offense shall be not less than $5,000, plus costs and other
sanctions.
(Ord. 318, adopted 11-12-2001)
CHAPTER 50: HOUSING CODE
Section
   
50-1   Title and scope
   
50-2   Purpose
   
50-3   Definitions
   
50-4   Enforcement
   
50-5   Minimum standards for basic equipment and facilities
   
50-6   Minimum standards for light, ventilation and heating
   
50-7   Minimum space, use and location requirements
   
50-8   General requirements relating to the safe and sanitary maintenance of
dwellings and nondwelling structures
   
50-9   Egress
   
50-10   Responsibilities of owners, operators and occupants
   
50-11   Rooming houses, motels and hotels
   
50-12   Substandard buildings
   
50-13   Penalties
Sec. 50-1. TITLE AND SCOPE.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Minimum Housing Code,” may be cited as
such and will be referred to herein as “this Code”.
(Ord. 175, eff. 10-1-1977)
Sec. 50-2. PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this Code is to provide minimum requirements for the
protection of health, safety and welfare of the general public and the owners
and occupants of residential buildings.
(Ord. 175, eff. 10-1-1977)
Sec. 50-3. DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Words
used in the singular include the plural and the plural the singular. Words used
in the masculine gender include the feminine and the feminine the masculine.
The word “shall” is always mandatory and not merely directory. Where terms are
not defined, they shall have their ordinarily accepted meanings or such as the
context may imply.
   APARTMENT. A dwelling unit as defined in this Code.
   APARTMENT HOUSE. Any building or portion thereof, which is designed, built,
rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied or which is occupied as the
home or residence of three or more families living independently of each other
in dwelling units as defined in this Code.
   APPROVED. Constructed, installed and maintained in accordance with the
provisions of this Code and other pertinent ordinances of the city with the
rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereof.
   AUTHORIZED INSPECTOR. Includes, but is not be limited to, the Building
Inspector, Electrical Inspector, Fire Chief, Health Officer and the Plumbing
Inspector and/or their duly appointed representative of the city.
   BASEMENT. The portion of a building wholly or partly below grade, but so
constructed that the vertical distance from the average grade to the basement
floor is greater than the vertical distance from the average grade to the
basement ceiling. A BASEMENT shall not be included as a story for height
measurement.
   BOARDING HOUSE. Any dwelling occupied in any manner that certain rooms in
excess of those used by members of the family, as hereinafter provided and
occupied as a home or family unit, are leased or rented to persons outside of
the family, without any attempt to provide there or therewith cooking or
kitchen accommodations.
   BUILDING INSPECTOR. The Building Inspector of the City of Plainwell or his
or her authorized representative.
   CEILING HEIGHT. The clear vertical distance from the finished floor to the
finished ceiling.
   CELLAR. The portion of a building located partly or wholly underground and
having half or more than half of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the
average natural level of the adjoining ground.
   DWELLING. Any building or structure, except temporary housing, as herein
termed, which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living or
sleeping by human occupants.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE. A building used for and as a residence for three or more
families living independently of each other and each having their own cooking
facilities therein, including apartment houses, townhouses and apartment
hotels, but not including homes.
   DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY. A detached building occupied by one family and so
designed and arranged as to provide living, cooking and kitchen accommodations
for one family only. Also known as a SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A detached two-family dwelling is that occupied by two
families, each provided with separate facilities for each family for living
accommodations. Also known as a DUPLEX DWELLING.
   DWELLING UNIT. A room or a group of rooms located within a dwelling and
forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to
be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
   EXIT. A continuous and unobstructed means of egress to a public way and
shall include intervening doorways, corridors, ramps, stairways, smoke proof
enclosures, horizontal exits, exterior courts and yards.
   EXTERMINATION. The control and elimination of insects, rodents or other
pests by eliminating their harborage places, by removing or making inaccessible
materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating,
trapping or by any other recognized and legal pest eliminative methods approved
by the Authorized Inspector.
   FAMILY. Persons related by bonds of marriage, blood or legal adoption or a
group of not more than five persons (excluding servants and gratuitous guests)
who need not be related by marriage, blood or legal adoption, occupying a
dwelling unit as a single non-profit, housekeeping unit as distinguished from a
group occupying a hotel, club, boarding house, fraternity or sorority house.
   FIRE CHIEF. The Fire Chief of the City of Plainwell.
   FLOOR AREA. The net floor area within the enclosing walls of the room
excluding built-in equipment such as wardrobes, cabinets, kitchen units or
fixtures.
   GARBAGE. The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
   GUEST ROOM. Any room or rooms used or intended to be used by a guest for
sleeping purposes.
   HABITABLE ROOM. A room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used
for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, water
closet compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers, communicating corridors,
stairways, closets, unfinished attics, cellars, basement recreation rooms,
private workshops or hobby rooms, utility rooms and storage spaces.
   HEALTH OFFICER. The Health Officer or his or her duly appointed
representative of the County of Allegan.
   INFESTATION. The presence, within or around a dwelling, of any insects,
rodents or other pests.
   MOTOR VEHICLE, ABANDONED. An inoperable and/or unlicensed motor vehicle.
   MULTIPLE DWELLING. Any dwelling containing three or more dwelling units.
   MUNICIPALITY. The City of Plainwell, Allegan County, Michigan.
   NUISANCE. The following shall be defined as nuisances:
      1.   Any public nuisance known at common law or in equity jurisprudence;
      2.   Any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to children
whether in a building or upon an unoccupied lot. This includes any abandoned
wells, shafts, basements or excavations; abandoned refrigerators and motor
vehicles; or any structurally unsound fences or structures; or any lumber,
trash, fences, debris or vegetation which may prove a hazard for inquisitive
minors;
      3.   Whatever is dangerous to human life or is detrimental to health;
      4.   Overcrowding a room with occupants;
      5.   Insufficient ventilation or illumination;
      6.   Inadequate or unsanitary sewerage or plumbing facilities;
      7.   Uncleanliness;
      8.   Whatever renders air, food or drink unwholesome or detrimental to
the health of human beings; and
      9.   The presence of hazardous materials in a quantity which is or may
become injurious to the public health, safety or welfare or the environment.
   OCCUPANT. Any person including an owner or operator living, sleeping,
cooking or eating in or having actual possession of, a dwelling unit or rooming
unit.
   OPENABLE AREA. The part of a window or door which is available for
unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors.
   OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care or control of a building or part
thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.
   OWNER. Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others:
      1.   Shall have legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or
without accompanying actual possession thereof; or
      2.   Shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit,
as owner or agent of the owner or as executor, executrix, administrator,
administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any person thus
representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of
this Code and of rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same
extent as if he or she were the owner.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, corporation, association or partnership.
   PLUMBING. All of the following supplied facilities and equipment: gas pipes,
gas-burning equipment, water pipes, garbage disposal units, waste pipes, water
closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bath tubs, shower baths,
installed cloth-washing machines, catch basins, drains, vents, storm drains and
any other similar supplied fixtures, together with all connections to water,
sewer or gas lines.
   PREMISES. A lot, plot or parcel of land including the buildings and
structures thereon.
   ROOMING HOUSE (BOARDING HOUSE). See Section 50-11.
   ROOMING UNIT. Any rooms or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit
used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or
eating purposes.
   RUBBISH. All waste materials except garbage; and the term shall include the
residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other combustible material,
paper, rags, cartons, boxes, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard
trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust.
   SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING. Any dwelling containing one dwelling unit.
   SUBSTANDARD BUILDING. See Section 50-12.
   UNFIT DWELLING. Any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house or rooming unit,
in whole or in part, which shall be found to have any of the following defects
shall be deemed to be unfit for human habitation:
      1.   One which is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe or
vermin-infested that it creates a serious hazard to the health or safety of the
occupants or to the public;
      2.   One which lacks light, ventilation, heating or sanitation facilities
adequate to protect the health or safety of the occupants or of the public as
prescribed by the provisions of this Code; and/or
      3.   One which because of its general condition or location is unsanitary
or otherwise dangerous to the health or safety of the occupants or of the
public.
(Ord. 175, eff. 10-1-1977; Ord. 318, adopted 11-12-2001)
Sec. 50-4. ENFORCEMENT.
   A.   Authority. The Municipal Building Inspector is authorized and directed
to administer and enforce all of the provisions of this Code.
   B.   Right of entry. Upon presentation of proper credentials, the Authorized
Inspector and/or his or her duly authorized representatives may enter any
dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or premises at all reasonable times and
at any time in an emergency, for the purpose of determining whether the
dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or premises complies with the provisions
of this Code. The owner, operator or occupant of any dwelling, dwelling unit or
rooming unit shall give the Authorized Inspector or his or her agent free
access to the dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit and its premises for the
purpose of the inspection. The occupant of any dwelling, dwelling unit or
rooming unit shall give the owner or his or her agent, access to any part of
the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or its premises at all reasonable
times and any time in an emergency, for the purpose of making repairs or
alterations in order to comply with the provisions of this Code.
   C.   Notice of violation. Whenever the Authorized Inspector determines that
there exists a violation of any provision of this Code or of any rule or
regulation adopted pursuant thereto, he or she shall give notice of the
violation to the person or persons responsible therefor and order compliance.
The notice and order shall:
      1.   Be in writing;
      2.   Include a list of violations referring to the sections of the Code
violated;
      3.   Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this Code;
      4.   Set a reasonable time, not to exceed 90 days in any event, for
compliance;
      5.   Advise the owner or occupant of the procedure for appeal;
      6.   Be served upon the owner, his or her agent or the operator or
occupant by delivering the same at his residence, office or place of business
with some person of suitable age and discretion who shall be informed of the
contents thereof or by mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to his or her
last known address or if the person to be served is unknown, by posting the
notice in some conspicuous place on the premises; and
      7.   If necessary and anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding,
also require the dwelling place or portion thereof to be vacated forthwith and
not reoccupied until the required repairs and improvements are completed,
inspected and approved by the Authorized Inspector.
   D.   Duplicate notice of violation. Whenever the owner, his or her agent or
the operator of a dwelling is notified by the Authorized Inspector of a
violation for which he or she is responsible, a copy of the notice of violation
shall also be posted on the premises, delivered or sent by regular mail to the
occupants of the dwelling; and whenever an occupant is notified by the
Authorized Inspector of a violation for which he or she is responsible, a copy
of the notice of violation shall also be delivered or sent by regular mail, to
the owner of the dwelling. Failure to send the duplicate notice of violation,
however, shall not affect the validity of any proceedings against the owner or
occupant.
   E.   Appeals. Any person served with a notice of violation or order which
has been issued in connection with the enforcement of this Code may request and
shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the Board of Zoning Appeals;
provided that, a person shall file in the office of the City Clerk a written
petition requesting the hearing and setting forth the name, address and phone
number of the petitioner and a brief statement of the grounds for the hearing.
Petition shall be filed within ten days after the day the notice of violation
and order is served and shall be accompanied by a fee of $25 to cover the
city’s cost of handling the appeal. Upon receipt of a petition, the City Clerk
shall set a date, not to exceed 30 days, for a hearing before the Board of
Zoning Appeals and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. If the
violator does not appear for the hearing, the provisions of this Code shall be
enforced.
   F.   Decisions. After the hearing, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall
sustain, modify or withdraw the notice of violation and order depending upon
its findings. If it clearly appears that, by reason of special conditions,
undue hardship would result from the strict application of any section of this
Code, the Board may permit a variance from the mandatory provisions thereof in
a manner that the public safety shall be secured, substantial justice done and
the spirit of the provisions of this Code upheld.
   G.   Orders to condemn. Any dwelling, rooming house, hotel, motel or other
structure covered by the provisions of this Code may be condemned as unfit for
human habitation by the Authorized Inspector if the owner, operator or occupant
fails to comply with any provision of this Code.
   H.   Orders to vacate. Where a notice of violation and order to comply has
been served and upon reinspection at the end of the time specified for
compliance, it is found that the violation or violations have not been
corrected and if no petition for a hearing before the Board of Zoning Appeals
is pending, the Authorized Inspector may order the dwelling or the parts
thereof affected by the continued violations, vacated in accordance with the
following procedures.
      1.   Dwellings or parts thereof shall be vacated within a reasonable time
not to exceed 60 days.
      2.   No owner or operator shall let any person occupy a dwelling or
dwelling unit which has been condemned and posted after the time allowed by the
Authorized Inspector for vacating.
      3.   Vacated dwellings shall have all outer doors and windows barricaded
to prevent entry.
      4.   Vacated dwellings shall have posted at each entrance a sign to read
“DO NOT ENTER, UNSAFE TO OCCUPY”.
      5.   Vacated dwellings or parts thereof shall not again be used for human
habitation until all violations have been corrected and written determination
is obtained from and the notice or placard is removed by the Authorized
Inspector indicating that the dwelling complies with this Code.
      6.   If a dwelling or part thereof is not vacated within the time
specified in the vacation order, the Authorized Inspector may cause the owner
of the dwelling prosecuted as a violator of the provisions of this Code and may
cause the order to vacate to be carried out at the expense of the city. A
statement of cost of the work shall be transmitted to the City Council who
shall cause the cost to be paid and levied as a special assessment against the
property.
   I.   Noncompliance. In case the owner shall fail, neglect or refuse to
comply with the notice and order to repair, improve, rehabilitate or demolish
and remove the condemned dwelling or portion thereof, the Authorized Inspector
may cause the owner of the dwelling prosecuted as a violator of the provisions
of this Code and may cause to proceed with the work specified in the notice at
the expense of the city. A statement of the cost of the work shall be
transmitted to the City Council, who shall cause the same to be paid and levied
as a special assessment against the property.
   J.   Right to demolish. The Authorized Inspector may cause any vacant
building or structure to be demolished and removed at the expense of the city
after violation notices and orders for condemnation in a manner provided, when
these buildings or structures constitute an immediate menace to public health,
safety or welfare. A statement of the cost of the work shall be transmitted to
the City Council, who shall cause the same to be paid and levied as a special
assessment against the property.
   K.   Unauthorized removal of notice or placard. No person shall interfere
with, obstruct, mutilate, deface or remove the official notice or placard from
any dwelling or dwelling unit.
   L.   Costs. Costs incurred shall be paid by the city. The costs shall be
charged to the owner of the premises involved as a special assessment on the
land on which the building or structure is located and shall be collected in
the manner provided for special assessments.
(Ord. 175, eff. 10-1-1977)
Sec. 50-5. MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR BASIC EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES.
   No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or shall let to another for
occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living, sleeping,
cooking or eating therein, which does not comply with the following
requirements.
   A.   Kitchen sink. Every dwelling unit shall contain a room or space for the
storage, preparation and cooking of food, which shall include space for a stove
or other cooking facilities and space for dry food storage and space for
refrigerated food storage; and shall include a kitchen sink installed. The sink
shall be of nonabsorbent material, in good working condition and properly
connected to hot and cold running water system under pressure and sewer system,
which sink and systems shall be installed and maintained in a manner prescribed
by ordinance, rules and regulations of the city.
   B.   Lavatory facilities. Every dwelling unit shall be equipped with a
complete bathroom group consisting of a flush water closet, lavatory basin and
bathtub or shower in good working condition and installed and maintained in a
manner prescribed by ordinances, rules and regulations of the city. The fixture
group shall be properly connected to an approved sewer system and to an
approved hot and cold running water system under pressure, except that the
flush water closet shall be connected to an approved sewer system and to an
approved cold running water system under pressure. The flush water closet,
lavatory basin and bathtub or shower need not be installed in the same room,
but the room or rooms shall afford privacy to a person within the room or
rooms.
   C.   Laundry facilities. Every dwelling unit shall be provided with laundry
trays or equipment in either of the following locations:
      1.   Within each living unit having one or more bedrooms and located in
the kitchen or other suitable service space; or
      2.   In basement cellar or other suitable public space within the
building for use of all occupants.
   D.   Rubbish storage and garbage disposal. Every dwelling unit shall have
adequate rubbish and garbage storage containers in which to place the garbage
and rubbish produced therein. The containers shall consist of watertight cans,
not more than 20 gallons in capacity, equipped with adequate handles. In lieu
of a garbage container, a dwelling unit may be equipped with garbage disposal
unit connected with an integral part of the sewerage system of the building and
capable of reducing all garbage deposited therein to particles no greater than
one-half inch in any dimension.
   E.   Water-heating facilities. Every dwelling unit shall have supplied
water-heating facilities which are properly installed, maintained in safe and
good working condition, properly connected with hot water lines required under
this Code and are capable of heating water to a temperature as to permit an
adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required kitchen sink, lavatory
basin, bathtub or shower at a temperature of not less than 120°F even when the
heating facilities required by the Code are not in operation.
   F.   Rooming house - additional sanitary standards. See § 
50-11.
(Ord. 175, eff. 10-1-1977)
Sec. 50-6. MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR LIGHT, VENTILATION AND HEATING.
   No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy any
dwelling, rooming house, dwelling unit or rooming unit which does not comply
with the following minimum standards for ventilation, light and heating.
   A.   Windows. Every habitable room shall have at least one window facing
directly to the outdoors. The minimum total window area for every habitable
room shall be not less than one-tenth of the floor area of the room nor less
than ten square feet, whichever is greater. Wherever walls or other portions of
structures face a window of any room and the light-obstruction structures are
located less than three feet from the window and extend to a level above that
of the ceiling of the room, a window shall not be deemed to face directly to
the outdoors and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum
total window area. Whenever the only window in a room is a skylight type window
in the top of the room, the total window area of the skylight shall equal at
least 15% of the total floor area of the room.
   B.   Electric lighting. Every habitable room shall contain at least two
separate floor or wall-type electric convenience outlets or one convenience
outlet and one supplied ceiling type electric light fixture and every laundry
room, furnace room and public hall shall contain at least one supplied ceiling
or wall-type electric light fixture. Every outlet and fixture shall be in
working condition and installed in accordance with the requirements of the City
Building Code.
   C.   Lighting of public halls. Every public hall and stairway in every
multiple dwelling and rooming house shall be adequately lighted with lighting
facilities sufficient to provide at least one foot candle of light at the floor
or stair tread level at all times. Every public hall and stairway in a
structure containing not more than four dwelling units may be supplied with
conveniently located light switches controlling an adequate lighting system
which may be turned on when needed instead of full-time lighting.
   D.   Lighting of bathrooms. Every bathroom and water closet compartment
shall conform to the electric lighting requirements for habitable rooms.
   E.   Ventilation. Every habitable room shall have at least one window or
skylight opening directly to the outdoors which can easily be opened or other
device as will adequately ventilate the room. The total of openable window area
in every habitable room shall be equal to one-half of the minimum total window
area required herein, except where there is supplied some other device
affording adequate ventilation and in accordance with the City Building Code.
   F.   Ventilation of bathrooms. Every bathroom and water closet compartment
shall comply with the light and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms
contained herein, except where the bathroom or water closet compartment is
adequately ventilated by a ventilation system which is kept in continuous or
automatic operation and in accordance with the City Building Code.
   G.   Screening. Every door opening directly from a dwelling unit to outdoor
space shall have supplied screens and a self-closing device; and every window
or other device with openings to outdoor space, used for ventilation, shall
likewise be supplied with screens. Screens shall not be required on windows in
rooms above the fourth story. All screens shall not be less than 20-inch x 20-
inch mesh nor more than 18-inch x 14-inch mesh.
   H.   Screens on basement windows. Every basement or cellar window used for
or intended to be used for ventilation and every other opening to a basement
which might provide an entry for rodents shall be supplied with a screen or the
device as will effectively prevent their entrance.
   I.   Heating. Every dwelling shall have heating facilities which are
properly installed, maintained in good working condition and are capable of
safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms and water closet
compartments in every dwelling unit located therein to a temperature of at
least 68°F at a distance of three feet above floor level, when the outside
temperature is -10°F. The facilities shall be installed and maintained in a
safe condition and in accordance with the City Building Code and all other
applicable laws. No unvented or open flame heater shall be permitted. All
heating devices or appliances shall be of an approved type.
(Ord. 175, eff. 10-1-1977)
Sec. 50-7. MINIMUM SPACE, USE AND LOCATION REQUIREMENTS.
   No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or
dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with
the following minimum standards for space, location and occupancy.
   A.   Size of dwelling unit. Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 250
square feet of floor space for the first occupant thereof and at least 100
additional square feet of floor area for every additional occupant thereof, the
floor space to be calculated on the basis of total habitable room area.
   B.   Size of rooms. In every dwelling unit, every room shall contain at
least 80 square feet of floor area, except that kitchens, kitchenettes and
dinettes may be 60 square feet in area, bathrooms 35 square feet in area and
water closet compartments 20 square feet in area. In every dwelling unit of two
or more rooms, every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall
contain at least 80 square feet of floor space and every room occupied for
sleeping purposes by more than one occupant shall contain at least 50 square
feet of floor space for each occupant thereof. Every room used as a living room
shall have a minimum dimension of not less than ten feet. Every other habitable
room, except a kitchen, shall have a minimum dimension of not less than eight
feet.
   C.   Ceiling height. At least one-half of the floor area of every habitable
room shall have a ceiling height of at least eight feet. The floor area of that
part of any room where the ceiling height is less than five feet or when the
room width is less than eight feet shall not be considered in computing the
usable floor area of the room for the purpose of determining the maximum
permissible occupancy thereof.
   D.   Privacy. Access to all rooms of a dwelling unit shall be provided
without passing through a public corridor or passageway. Access to every living
room and to every bedroom shall be had without passing through a bedroom or
through a room containing a water closet. In a one- and two-family dwelling,
the provisions of this section shall not apply to a sleeping porch, sun parlor,
solarium or any other enclosed outside porch adjacent to and entered by way of
a bedroom.
   E.   Cellars. No cellar space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling
unit; provided, however, that, this division shall not prohibit a recreation
room in a cellar as long as it is not used for sleeping purposes. The room
cannot be used in computing the total floor area of the dwelling for the
purpose of determining the maximum permissible occupancy thereof.
   F.   Basements. No basement shall be used for living purposes unless:
      1.   The floor and walls are substantially watertight;
      2.   The total window area, total openable area and ceiling height are in
accordance with this Code; or
      3.   The required minimum window area of every habitable room is entirely
above natural grade of the ground adjoining such window area, not including
stairwells or access ways.
   G.   Kitchen, use of jointly by more than one family prohibited. No kitchen
or cooking accommodations shall be permitted or maintained in any room or space
of any building for the common or joint use of the individual occupants of a
two-family or multiple-family dwelling.
   H.   Prohibited uses. No horse, cow, calf, swine, sheep, goat, chicken,
geese, ducks, donkeys, rabbits or pigeons shall be kept in any dwelling or part
thereof. No dwelling, nor the lot, nor premises thereof shall be used for the
storage or handling of rags or junk.
   I.   Temporary or garage dwellings. It shall be unlawful to erect or occupy
any structure which is intended to be occupied in whole or part as a temporary
dwelling unless it complies with all provisions of this Code.
   J.   Access to public street. Every dwelling shall have direct vehicular
access to a public street or a recorded, permanent, unobstructed easement,
other than an alley, not less than 20 feet in width which leads to a public
street.
   K.   Certificate of compliance. No building constructed as or altered into a
dwelling shall be occupied in whole or in part for human habitation until the
issuance of a certificate by the Authorized Inspector that the dwelling
substantially conforms in all respects to the requirements of this Code. The
certificate shall be issued within 15 days after written application therefor
if the dwelling at the date of the application shall be entitled thereto.
   L.   Unlawful occupation. If any building constructed as or altered into a
dwelling be occupied in whole or in part for human habitation in violation of
this Code or without obtaining a certificate of compliance. During the unlawful
occupation, no rent shall be recoverable by the owner or leaser of the premises
for the period and no action or special proceedings shall be maintained
therefor or payment of it for possession of the premises for non-payment and
the premises shall be deemed unfit for human habitation and the Authorized
Inspector may cause them to be vacated accordingly.
(Ord. 175, eff. 10-1-1977)
Sec. 50-8. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS RELATING TO THE SAFE AND SANITARY MAINTENANCE
OF DWELLINGS AND NONDWELLING STRUCTURES.
   No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy any
dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house or guest room which does not comply with
the following minimum standards for safe and sanitary maintenance.
   A.   Foundations, exterior walls and roofs. Every foundation, exterior wall
and roof shall be substantially weather-tight, water-tight and rodent-proof;
shall be kept in sound condition and good repair; shall be capable of affording
privacy; and shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load which
normal use may cause to be placed thereon.
   B.   Floors, interior walls and ceiling. Every floor, interior wall and
ceiling shall be substantially rodent-proof; and shall be kept in sound
condition and good repair: and shall be safe to use and capable of supporting
the load which normal use may cause to be placed thereon.
   C.   Windows, exterior doors and basement hatchways. Every window, exterior
door and basement or cellar door and hatchway shall be weather-tight, water-
tight and rodent-proof; and shall be kept in sound working condition and good
repair.
   D.   Stairways and porches. Every inside and outside stair, porch and any
appurtenance thereto shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load
that normal use may cause to be placed thereon; and shall be kept in sound
condition and good repair.
   E.   Plumbing fixtures. Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe
shall be properly installed and maintained in good sanitary working condition,
free from defects, leaks and obstructions and in accordance with the City
Building Code.
   F.   Bathroom and kitchen floor surfaces. Every water closet compartment
floor surface, bathroom floor surface and kitchen floor surface shall be
constructed and maintained so as to be substantially impervious to water and so
as to permit the floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
   G.   Drains. All rain water shall be so drained and conveyed from every roof
so as not to cause dampness in the walls, ceiling or floors of any habitable
room or of any bathroom or water closet compartment.
   H.   Exterior wood surfaces. All exterior wood surfaces shall be adequately
protected from water seepage and against deterioration with a paint covering or
some other suitable material.
   I.   Walls, ceilings and interior woodwork. All walls, ceilings, interior
woodwork, doors and windows shall be kept free from flaking, peeling or loose
wallpaper, paint or similar material.
   J.   Maintenance of required equipment and utilities. Every supplied
facility, piece of equipment or utility which is required under this Code and
every chimney and smoke-pipe, shall be so constructed and installed that it
will function safely and effectively and shall be maintained in sound working
condition.
   K.   Cooking equipment. No owner, operator, nor occupant shall furnish or
use any cooking equipment which does not comply with the following minimum
standards.
      1.   Every piece of cooking equipment shall be so constructed and
installed that it will function safely and effectively and shall be maintained
in sound working condition.
      2.   Portable cooking equipment employing flame and cooking equipment
using gasoline or kerosene as fuel for cooking are prohibited.
   L.   Removal of service, facility, utility or equipment. No owner, operator
or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment or utility which is
required under this Code to be removed from or shut off from or discontinued
for any occupied dwelling let or occupied by him or her, except for the
temporary interruption as may be necessary while actual repairs or alterations
are in process or during temporary emergencies when discontinuance of service
is approved by the Authorized Inspector.
   M.   Occupancy of vacant dwelling. No owner shall occupy or let to any other
occupant any vacant dwelling unit unless it is clean, sanitary and fit for
human occupancy.
   N.   Nondwelling structures and fences. Every nondwelling structure and
fence shall be properly maintained and kept in good repair or shall be removed.
(Ord. 175, eff. 10-1-1977)
Sec. 50-9. EGRESS.
   Every dwelling unit or guest room shall have access directly to the outside
or to a public corridor. For each dwelling unit of every multiple dwelling
above the first story, there shall be access to two separate usable,
unobstructed means of egress either of which is accessible without passing
through the other and every exit from the dwelling units shall lead to a public
thoroughfare either directly or through a court or yard.
(Ord. 175, eff. 10-1-1977)
Sec. 50-10. RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS, OPERATORS AND OCCUPANTS.
   The following responsibilities of owners, operators and occupants are in
addition to those specified elsewhere throughout this Code:
   A.   Public areas. Every owner or operator of a dwelling containing more
than two dwelling units or rooming house shall be responsible for maintaining
in a clean and sanitary condition the shared or public areas of the dwelling
and premises thereof. In all other cases, it shall be the responsibility of the
occupant.
   B.   Dwelling unit. Every occupant of a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming
unit shall maintain in a clean and sanitary condition that part of the
dwelling, dwelling unit and premises which he or she occupies and controls.
   C.   Supplied facilities. Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all
supplied facilities, including plumbing fixtures and cooking equipment in a
clean and sanitary condition and shall be responsible for the exercise of
reasonable care in their proper use and operation.
   D.   Removal of waste matter. Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall
dispose of all his or her rubbish, ashes, garbage and other organic waste,
which might provide food for rodents, in a clean and sanitary manner by placing
it in garbage disposal facilities or garbage storage containers or rubbish
containers, required in this Code. Every occupant shall provide the facilities
for his or her dwelling unit and shall maintain them in a clean and sanitary
manner. The owner or operator of a dwelling containing more than two dwelling
units shall be responsible for the clean and sanitary maintenance of common
storage or disposal facilities. He or she shall be responsible further for
placing out for collection of all common garbage and rubbish containers, except
where the facilities are for the sole use of an occupant, under which
circumstances it shall be the responsibility of the occupant to place these
containers out for collection. Every owner or operator of every rooming house
shall dispose of all rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in
storage or disposal facilities required by § 
50-5D.
   E.   Screens. Every owner or operator of a dwelling unit containing more
than two dwelling units shall be responsible for hanging and removing all
supplied screens, screen doors or storm doors or windows. In all other cases,
it shall be the responsibility of the occupant.
   F.   Extermination of pests. Every occupant of a dwelling containing a
single dwelling unit shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects,
rodents or other pests therein on the premises. Every occupant of a dwelling
containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for the
extermination whenever his or her dwelling unit is the only one infested. When,
however, infestation is caused by failure of the owner or operator to maintain
a dwelling in a rodent-proof or substantially insect-proof condition,
extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner or operator. Whenever
infestation exists in two or more of the dwelling units, in any dwelling or in
the shared or public parts of any dwelling containing two or more dwelling
units, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner or operator.
Every owner or operator of a rooming house shall be responsible for the
extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests therein or on the
premises.
   G.   Notice of maximum occupancy. Every owner or operator shall advise the
occupant in writing either by insertion in the lease between the parties or
otherwise of the maximum number of occupants permitted in the occupied premises
under this Code.
(Ord. 175, eff. 10-1-1977)
Sec. 50-11. ROOMING HOUSES, MOTELS AND HOTELS.
   No person shall operate a rooming house, motel or hotel or shall occupy or
let to another for occupancy any rooming unit in any rooming house, motel or
hotel, except in accordance with the provisions of every section of this Code.
   A.   Basic equipment. Every rooming house, motel or hotel shall be equipped
with at least one flush water closet, one lavatory basin and one bathtub or
shower, properly connected to a water and sewer system approved by the
Authorized Inspector and in good working condition. These facilities shall be
supplied for each six persons or fraction thereof residing within a rooming
house, motel or hotel, including members of the operator’s family if they share
the use of the facilities. In any rooming house, motel or hotel, every room
occupied for sleeping purposes, except those occupied by the operator’s family
members, shall contain one lavatory basin properly connected to water and sewer
system approved by the Authorized Inspector and in good working condition. In a
rooming house, motel or hotel in which both sexes are accommodated, a minimum
of two flush water closets and lavatory basins located in separate rooms which
are conspicuously marked shall be required. All facilities shall be so located
within the rooming house, motel or hotel as to be accessible from a common hall
to all persons sharing the facilities, afford privacy and be separated from the
habitable rooms. Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied
with hot water at all times. No facilities shall be located in a basement,
except by written approval of the Authorized Inspector.
   B.   Bedding, bed linen and towels. The owner or operator of every rooming
house, motel or hotel shall maintain the supplied bedding in a clean and
sanitary manner, shall change supplied bed linens and towels therein at least
once a week and prior to the letting of any room to any occupant.
   C.   Minimum space. Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one person
shall contain at least 80 square feet of floor space and every room occupied
for sleeping purposes by more than one person shall contain at least 50 square
feet of floor space for each occupant thereof.
   D.   Means of egress. Every rooming unit in a rooming house, motel or hotel
shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress leading to safe and open space at
ground level as required by the laws of the state and the city.
   E.   Sanitary maintenance by owner. The owner or operator of every rooming
house, motel or hotel shall be responsible for the sanitary maintenance of all
walls, floors, ceilings and for maintenance of a sanitary condition in every
other part of the rooming house, motel or hotel. He or she shall be further
responsible for the sanitary maintenance of the entire premises where the
entire structure is a building leased or occupied by the operator.
   F.   Guest register. The owner or operator of every rooming house, motel or
hotel shall keep, at all times, in a convenient place a book or register
wherein every person applying for accommodations must sign his or her name and
place of residence before the accommodations are furnished and the book or
register shall be available for inspection by the Authorized Inspector at all
times.
(Ord. 175, eff. 10-1-1977)
Sec. 50-12. SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS.
   Any building or portion thereof including any dwelling, dwelling unit,
rooming house, rooming unit, motel, hotel or the premises on which the same is
located, in which there exists any of the following listed conditions to an
extent that endangers the health, safety and welfare of the public or the
occupants thereof shall be deemed and is declared to be a substandard building
and shall be condemned as unfit for human habitation.
   A.   Inadequate sanitation, which shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
      1.   Lack of or improper water closet, lavatory, bathtub or shower in a
dwelling unit;
      2.   Lack of or improper water closets, lavatories and bathtubs or
showers per number of persons in a rooming house, motel or hotel;
      3.   Lack of or improper kitchen sink;
      4.   Lack of hot and cold running water to plumbing fixtures in a
dwelling unit, rooming house, motel or hotel;
      5.   Lack of adequate heating facilities;
      6.   Lack or improper operation of required ventilating equipment;
      7.   Lack of minimum amounts of light and ventilation required by this
Code;
      8.   Room and space dimensions less than required by this Code;
      9.   Dampness of habitable rooms;
      10.   Infestation of insects, vermin or rodents;
      11.   General dilapidation or improper maintenance;
      12.   Lack of connection or required sewage disposal system;
      13.   Improperly enclosed, ventilated or unsanitary under floor area; and
      14.   Lack of adequate garbage and rubbish storage and removal
facilities.
   B.   Structural hazards, which shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
      1.   Deteriorated or inadequate foundations;
      2.   Defective or deteriorated flooring or floor supports;
      3.   Flooring or floor supports of insufficient size to carry imposed
loads with safety;
      4.   Members of walls, partitions or other vertical supports that split,
lean, list or buckle due to defective material or deterioration;
      5.   Members of walls, partitions or other vertical supports that are of
insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety;
      6.   Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports or other
horizontal members which sag, split or buckle due to defective material or
deterioration;
      7.   Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports or other
horizontal members that are of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with
safety;
      8.   Fireplaces or chimneys which list, bulge or settle or which are of
insufficient size or strength to carry imposed loads with safety; and
      9.   Sidewalks, walks and other paved areas on private property shall be
kept in sound condition and good repair.
   C.   Any nuisance as defined in § 
50-3 of this Code;
   D.   Any dwelling or dwelling unit unfit for human habitation as defined in
this Code;
   E.   All wiring except that which conformed with all applicable laws in
effect at the time of installation and which has been maintained in good
condition and is being used in a safe manner;
   F.   All plumbing that which does not meet the requirements of this Code;
   G.   All mechanical equipment including vents, except that which conformed
with all applicable laws in effect at the time of installation and which has
been maintained in good and safe condition;
   H.   Faulty weather protection, which shall include, but not be limited to,
the following:
      1.   Deteriorated, crumbling or loose plaster;
      2.   Deteriorated or ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roof,
foundations or floors, including broken windows or doors;
      3.   Defective or lack of weather protection for exterior wall coverings,
including lack of paint or weathering due to lack of paint or other approved
protective covering; and
      4.   Broken, rotted, split or buckled exterior wall coverings or roof
coverings.
   I.   Any building or portion thereof, device, apparatus, equipment,
combustible waste or vegetation which in the opinion of the Chief of the Fire
Department or his or her deputy, is in a condition as to cause a fire or
explosion or provide a ready fuel to augment the spread and intensity of fire
or explosion arising from any cause;
   J.   All materials of construction, except those which are specifically
allowed or approved by this Code and the City Building Code and which have been
adequately maintained in good and safe condition;
   K.   Those premises on which an accumulation of weeds, vegetation, lumber
(new or used), junk, dead organic matter, debris, garbage, offal, rat
harborages, stagnant water, combustible materials, abandoned or inoperable
motor vehicles and similar materials or conditions which constitute fire,
health or safety hazards;
   L.   All buildings or portions thereof not provided with adequate exit
facilities as required by this Code, except those buildings or portions thereof
whose exit facilities conformed with all applicable laws at the time of their
construction and which have been adequately maintained and increased in
relation to any increase in occupant load, alteration or addition or any change
in occupancy;
   M.   All buildings or portions thereof which are not provided with the fire
resistive construction or fire extinguishing systems or equipment required by
this Code, except those buildings or portions thereof which conformed with all
applicable laws at the time of their construction and whose fire resistive
integrity and fire extinguishing systems or equipment have been adequately
maintained and improved in relation to any increase in occupant load,
alteration or addition or any change in occupancy; and
   N.   All buildings or portions thereof occupied for living, sleeping,
cooking or eating purposes which were not designed nor intended to be used for
the occupancies.
(Ord. 175, eff. 10-1-1977)
Sec. 50-13. PENALTIES.
   A.   A person who violates any provision of this Housing Code is responsible
for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not
less than $500, plus costs and other sanctions, for each violation. Repeat
offenses shall be subject to increased fines as provided by Code.
   B.   For purposes of this Housing Code, the city officials authorized to
issue municipal civil infraction citations and notices include, but are not
limited to, any Authorized Inspector, as defined by the Housing Code.
(Ord. 318, adopted 11-12-2001)
CHAPTER 51: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section
Article I. Title and Purpose
   
51-1   Short title
   
51-2   Purposes
Article II. Definitions
   
51-3   Definitions
Article III. Subdivision Procedure
   
51-4   General procedure
   
51-5   Pre-preliminary plat investigation
   
51-6   Preliminary plat procedure (stage 1)
   
51-7   Preliminary plat (stage 2)
   
51-8   Final plat
   
51-9   Subdivision lot division
Article IV. Design Layout Standards
   
51-10   Generally
   
51-11   Streets
   
51-12   Blocks
   
51-13   Lots
   
51-14   Natural features
   
51-15   Floodplain
Article V. Improvements
   
51-16   Generally
   
51-17   Streets
   
51-18   Utilities
   
51-19   Other improvements
Article VI. Compliance Standards
   
51-20   Compliance standards
Article VII. Interpretation
   
51-21   Interpretation
Article VIII. Fees
   
51-22   Generally
   
51-23   Planning review fees
   
51-24   Engineering review fees
Article IX. Violations and Penalties
   
51-25   General penalty
Article X. Severability
   
51-26   Severability
Article XI. Repeal
   
51-27   Repeal of inconsistent regulations
Article XII. Variance
   
51-28   Variances
ARTICLE I. TITLE AND PURPOSE
Sec. 51-1. SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be designated as the “City of Plainwell
Subdivision Regulations Chapter”.
(Ord. 269, eff. 7-27-1991)
Sec. 51-2. PURPOSES.
   The purposes of this chapter are to provide for the orderly growth and
harmonious development of the community; to secure adequate traffic circulation
through coordinated street systems with relation to major thoroughfares,
adjoining subdivisions and public facilities; to achieve individual property
lots of maximum utility and livability; to secure adequate provisions for water
supply, drainage and sanitary sewerage and other health requirements; to secure
adequate provisions for recreational areas, school sites and other public
facilities; and to provide logical procedures for the achievement of these
purposes.
(Ord. 269, eff. 7-27-1991)
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS
Sec. 51-3. DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BLOCK. Property abutting one side of a street and lying between the two
nearest intersecting streets; or between the nearest street and railroad right-
of-way, unsubdivided acreage, river or live stream; or between any of the
foregoing and any other barrier to the continuity of development.
   EASEMENT. A grant by the owner of the use of a strip of land by the public,
a corporation or persons, for specific uses and purposes, to be designated as a
“public” or “private” easement depending on the nature of the use.
   IMPROVEMENTS. Grading; street surfacing, curb and gutter, sidewalks,
crosswalks, water mains and lines, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, culverts,
bridges, utilities and other additions to the natural state of land which
increase its value, utility or habitability.
   LAND DIVISION ACT. The Land Division Act, Public Act 288 of 1967, as
amended.
   LOT. A measured portion or a parcel or tract of land, which is described or
fixed in a recorded plat.
   MASTER PLAN. The comprehensive Land Use Plan for the city, including graphic
and written proposals indicating the general locations recommended for the
streets, parks, schools, public buildings, zoning districts and all physical
developments of the municipality and includes any unit or part of the plan
separately adopted and any amendments to the plan or parts thereof duly adopted
by the Planning Commission.
   MASTER STREETS OR THOROUGHFARE PLAN. The part of the Master Plan which sets
forth the location, alignment and dimensions of existing and proposed streets
and thoroughfares.
   PLANNING COMMISSION. The City Planning Commission of the City of Plainwell.
   PLAT. A map or chart of a subdivision of land.
      1.   FINAL PLAT. A map of all or part of a subdivision providing
substantial conformance to the preliminary plat (stage 2) of the subdivision
prepared in conformance with the requirements of the Land Division Act, Public
Act 288 of 1967, as amended and suitable for recording by the County Register
of Deeds.
      2.   PRELIMINARY PLAT (STAGE 1). A preliminary plat shall include an
investigation of street, utility, drainage, flooding and school considerations.
The plat shall be in sufficient detail to provide adequate basis for review and
may be prepared by a land surveyor, civil engineer or land planner or other
qualified persons.
      3.   PRELIMINARY PLAT (STAGE 2). A map showing the salient features of a
proposed subdivision submitted to an approving authority for purposes of
preliminary consideration.
   PARCEL or TRACT. A continuous area or acreage of land which can be described
as provided for in the Land Division Act.
   PROPRIETOR. A natural person, firm, association, partnership, corporation or
combination of any of them which may hold any ownership interest in land
whether recorded or not.
   STREET. Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, viaduct, alley
or other way which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway; or, a
street or way shown in a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law or approved
by official action; or, a street or way on a plat duly filed and recorded in
the office of the County Register of Deeds. A STREET includes the land between
the street lines whether improved or unimproved and may comprise pavement,
shoulders, gutters, sidewalks, parking areas and lawns.
      1.   ALLEY. A minor service street used primarily to provide secondary
vehicular access to the rear or side of properties otherwise abutting upon a
street.
      2.   BOULEVARD STREET. A street developed to 2, two-lane, one-way
pavements separated by a median.
      3.   COLLECTOR STREET. A street within a neighborhood used primarily to
carry traffic from minor streets to major thoroughfares; including principal
entrance streets to a residential development.
      4.   CUL-DE-SAC STREET. A short minor street having one end permanently
terminated by a vehicular turn-around.
      5.   MAJOR THOROUGHFARE. Any interstate, state or county highway or any
local traffic artery of considerable continuity carrying a large volume of both
private and commercial vehicles; i.e., a “section line road”.
      6.   MARGINAL ACCESS STREET. A minor street paralleling and adjacent to a
major thoroughfare which provides access to abutting properties and protection
from through traffic.
      7.   MINOR STREET. A street of limited continuity used primarily for
access to abutting residential properties.
      8.   TURN-AROUND. A short boulevard street permanently terminated by a
vehicular turn-around.
   SUBDIVISION. The partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of land by
the proprietor thereof or by his or her heirs, executors, administrators, legal
representatives, successors or assigns for the purpose of sale or lease of more
than one year or of building development that results in one or more parcels of
less than 40 acres or the equivalent and that is not exempted from the platting
requirements by §§ 108 and 109 of the Land Division Act. SUBDIVIDE or
SUBDIVISION does not include a property transfer between two or more adjacent
parcels, if the property taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel;
and any resulting parcel shall not be considered a building site unless the
parcel conforms to the requirements of the Land Division Act or the
requirements of the City Code.
(Ord. 269, eff. 7-27-1991)
ARTICLE III. SUBDIVISION PROCEDURE
Sec. 51-4. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   The preparation of a subdivision for platting shall be preceded by a
preliminary investigation and shall go through three phases: pre-preliminary
plat investigation, preliminary plat (stages 1 and 2) and final plat, all in
accordance with the procedure as follows.
(Ord. 269, eff. 7-27-1991)
Sec. 51-5. PRE-PRELIMINARY PLAT INVESTIGATION.
   A.   Prior to the preparation of a preliminary plat, it is suggested that
the proprietor meet informally with the Planning Commission to investigate the
procedures and standards of the municipality with reference to this chapter and
with the proposals of the Master Plan as they affect the area in which the
proposed subdivision is located.
   B.   The proprietor should concern himself or herself with the following
factors.
      1.   The proprietor shall secure a copy of the zoning ordinance,
subdivision regulations, engineering specifications and other similar
ordinances or controls relative to the subdivision and improvement of land so
as to make himself or herself aware of the requirements of the municipality.
      2.   The area for the proposed subdivision shall be properly zoned for
the intended use.
      3.   An investigation of adequacy of existing schools and the adequacy of
public open spaces including parks and playgrounds to serve the proposed
subdivision shall be made by the proprietor.
      4.   The relationship of the proposed subdivision with respect to major
thoroughfares and plans for widening of thoroughfares shall be investigated by
the proprietor.
      5.   Standards for sewage disposal, water supply and drainage of the city
shall be investigated by the proprietor.
      6.   The relationship of the proposed subdivision with the city’s Master
Land Use Plan.
(Ord. 269, eff. 7-27-1991)
Sec. 51-6. PRELIMINARY PLAT PROCEDURE (STAGE 1).
   The procedure, under this stage 1, for preparation and submittal of a
preliminary plat of the land area to be subdivided shall be as follows.
   A.   Filing.
      1.   Ten copies of the preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision,
together with written application in triplicate shall be submitted to the Clerk
who shall transmit the plat to the Planning Commission for processing.
      2.   Submittal with the Clerk shall be at least ten days prior to the
regular Commission meeting which meeting shall be considered as the date of
filing. Should any of the data required in this section of this chapter be
omitted, the Planning Commission shall direct the Clerk to notify the
proprietor of the additional data required and Commission action shall be
delayed until the required data is received. The Commission will act on the
preliminary plat within 30 days after the date of filing unless the proprietor
agrees to an extension of time in writing. Written statement verifying prior
submission of the preliminary plat to the City Council and the County Drain
Commission, State Department of Transportation, State Department of Natural
Resources, County Health Department, Country Plat Board and all public
utilities.
   B.   Identification and description. The preliminary plat (stage 1) shall
include:
      1.   Proposed name of subdivision;
      2.   Location by section, town and range or by other legal description;
      3.   Names and addresses of the proprietor, owner proprietor and the
planner, designer, engineer or surveyor who designed the subdivision layout.
The proprietor shall also indicate his or her interest in the land;
      4.   Scale of plat, one inch equals 100 feet as minimum acceptable scale;
      5.   Date; and
      6.   Northpoint.
   C.   Existing conditions. The preliminary plat (stage 1) shall include:
      1.   An overall area map showing the relationship of the subdivision to
surrounding areas within one-half mile; information on the area map shall
include such things as section lines and/or major streets or collector streets.
Scale shall be not less than one inch equals 500 feet;
      2.   Boundary lines of proposed subdivision, section or corporation lines
within or adjacent to the tract and overall property dimensions;
      3.   Property lines of adjacent tracts of subdivided and un-subdivided
land shown in relation to the tract being proposed for subdivision including
those of areas across abutting roads;
      4.   Location, widths and names of existing or prior platted streets and
private streets and public easements within or adjacent to the tract being
proposed for subdivision, including those located across abutting roads;
      5.   Existing zoning of proposed subdivision and zoning of adjacent lands
and/or parcels;
      6.   Location of existing sewers, water mains, storm drains and other
underground facilities within or adjacent to the tract being proposed for
subdivision, as well as any existing overhead utilities; and
      7.   Topography drawn as contours with an interval of at least two feet.
Topography to be based on U.S.O.S. datum.
   D.   Proposed conditions. The preliminary plat (stage 1) shall include:
      1.   Layout of streets indicating proposed street names, right-of-way
widths and connections with adjoining platted streets and also the widths and
location of alleys, easements and public walkways. Street names shall be
indicated as approved by the City Council;
      2.   Layout, numbers and dimensions of lots, including building setback
lines showing dimensions;
      3.   Indication of parcels of land intended to be dedicated or set aside
for public use or for the use of property owners in the subdivision;
      4.   An indication of the ownership and existing and proposed use of any
parcels identified as “excepted” on the preliminary plat. If the proprietor has
an interest or owns any parcel so identified as “excepted”, the preliminary
plat shall indicate how this property could be developed in accordance with the
requirements of the existing zoning district in which it is located and with an
acceptable relationship to the layout of the proposed preliminary plat;
      5.   An indication of system proposed for sewage by a method approved by
the City Council and the Department of Public Works;
      6.   An indication of system proposed for water supply by a method
approved by the City Council and the Department of Public Works provided by the
proprietor;
      7.   An indication of storm drainage proposed by a method approved by the
City Council, and the Department of Public Works and, if involving county
drains, the proposed drainage shall be acceptable to the County Drain
Commissioner; and
      8.   In the case where the proprietor wishes to subdivide a given area,
but wishes to begin with only a portion of the total area, the preliminary plat
shall include the proposed general layout for the entire area. The part which
is proposed to be subdivided first shall be clearly superimposed upon the over-
all plan in order to illustrate clearly the method of development which the
proprietor intends to follow. Each subsequent plat shall follow the same
procedure until the entire area controlled by the proprietor is subdivided.
   E.   Preliminary plat (stage 1) review by Planning Commission.
      1.   The Planning Commission shall transmit a copy of the preliminary
plat to the City Engineer and the City Planner for their technical review and
recommendation.
      2.   It shall be the duty of the Clerk to send a notice by first class
mail to the owners of land immediately adjoining the property to be platted of
the presentment of the preliminary plat and the time and place of the meeting
of the Commission to consider the preliminary plat. The notice shall be sent
not less that 15 days before the date of the meeting. Similar notice shall also
be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city not less
than 15 days before the date of the meeting.
      3.   The Planning Commission shall review all details of the proposed
subdivision within the framework of the zoning ordinance, within the various
elements of the Master Plan and within the standards of this chapter.
      4.   The Planning Commission shall approve conditionally, disapprove or
approve the preliminary plat.
         a.   Should the approval be a conditional approval and therefore
tentative, the preliminary plat shall not be forwarded to the City Council
until the conditions have been satisfied by the proprietor. The proprietor
shall submit the revised preliminary plat to the Planning Commission for
review.
         b.   Should the Planning Commission disapprove the preliminary plat,
it shall record the reasons in the minutes of the regular meeting. A copy of
the minutes shall be sent to the proprietor. The proprietor may submit a
revised preliminary plat to the Planning Commission for review.
         c.   Should the Planning Commission find that all conditions have been
satisfactorily met, it may give approval to the preliminary plat; the
Chairperson shall make a notation to that effect on each copy of the
preliminary plat and distribute copies of same as follows:
            (1)   Return one copy to the proprietor;
            (2)   Retain one copy which shall become a matter of permanent
record in the Commission files; and
            (3)   The balance of the copies shall be retained by the city which
may keep them for their records.
(Ord. 269, eff. 7-27-1991; Ord. 349, adopted 11-10-2008)
Sec. 51-7. PRELIMINARY PLAT (STAGE 2).
   The procedure for the preparation and review of a preliminary plat (stage 2)
requires tentative and final approval as follows.
   A.   Preliminary plat (stage 2); tentative approval.
      1.   Filing.
         a.   The preliminary plat shall comply with the provisions of the Land
Division Act.
         b.   The preliminary plat (stage 2) shall conform substantially to the
preliminary plat (stage 1) as approved and it may constitute only that portion
of the approved preliminary plat which the proprietor proposes to record and
develop at the time; provided, however, that, the portion conforms to this
chapter.
         c.   The proprietor shall submit as evidence of title, an abstract of
title certified to date with the written opinion of an attorney-at-law thereon
or at the option of the proprietor, a policy of title insurance for examination
in order to ascertain as to whether or not the proper parties have signed the
plat.
         d.   Ten copies of the preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision,
together with written application in triplicate, shall be submitted to the
Clerk at least ten days prior to the regular Commission meeting (which meeting
shall be considered as the date of filing). The Clerk shall transmit five
copies to the City Engineer.
         e.   The proprietor shall also provide proof that preliminary plat
plans have been submitted to the following parties:
            (1)   Three copies to the engineer or Chairperson of the County
Road Commission if the proposed subdivision includes or abuts roads under the
Commission’s jurisdiction;
            (2)   Three copies to the County Drain Commission, if there is one;
            (3)   If the subdivision includes or abuts a state trunkline
highway or includes streets or roads that connect with or lie within the right-
of-way of the state trunkline highway then the proprietor must submit plans to
the State Transportation Department;
            (4)   If the proposed subdivision abuts a lake or stream or abuts
an existing or proposed channel or lagoon affording access to a lake or stream,
where public rights may be affected then proprietor shall submit two copies to
the Department of Environmental Quality;
            (5)   If any of the subdivision lies wholly or in part within the
floodplain of a river, stream, creek or lake, then the proprietor shall submit
three copies of the preliminary plat to the Department of Environmental Quality
for its approval; and
            (6)   If public water and public sewers are not available and
accessible to the land that is proposed to be subdivided, then the proprietor
shall submit three copies of the preliminary plat to the Health Department.
         f.   The City Engineer shall check the proposed plat for completeness.
Should any of the data required in Land Division Act or these regulations be
omitted, the Clerk shall be directed to inform the proprietor of the data
required and that the application will be delayed until the required data is
received.
         g.   The City Engineer shall transmit a copy of the preliminary plat
to the City Planner for his or her technical review and recommendation.
      2.   Planning Commission review (tentative approval).
         a.   The City Clerk shall place plats filed with all necessary
information on the next regular Planning Commission agenda, at which meeting
the proprietor will be scheduled to appear. The Planning Commission will act on
the preliminary plat within 20 days after the date of filing of the preliminary
plat (stage 2) unless the proprietor agrees to an extension in writing, of time
required for approval by the City Council and Planning Commission.
         b.   The preliminary plat (stage 2) shall be reviewed by the City
Engineer as to compliance with the approved preliminary plat (stage 1) and
plans for utilities and other improvements.
         c.   The City Engineer shall notify the Commission of his or her
recommendation for either approval or rejection of the preliminary plat.
         d.   The preliminary plat (stage 2) documents shall be reviewed by the
Planning Commission as to compliance with the approved preliminary plat (stage
1).
         e.   Should the Planning Commission find that the preliminary plat
(stage 2) is in close agreement with the preliminary plat (stage 1), it shall
approve same and notify the City Council of this action in its official minutes
and forward the same, together with all accompanying data to the City Council
for their review.
         f.   Should the Planning Commission find that the preliminary plat
(stage 2) does not conform substantially to the previously approved preliminary
plat (stage 1) and/or that it is not acceptable, they shall record the reasons
in their official minutes and forward same together with all accompanying data
to the City Council; and recommend that the governing body disapprove the
preliminary plat until the objections causing disapproval have been changed to
meet with the approval of the Commission.
      3.   Preliminary plat (stage 2) review by City Council; (tentative
approval).
         a.   The City Council will not review a preliminary plat (stage 2)
until it has received the review and recommendations of the Planning
Commission. Following the receipt of the recommendations, the City Council
shall consider the preliminary plat at the meeting that the matter is placed on
the regularly scheduled agenda. The City Council shall take action on the
preliminary plat (stage 2) within 30 days of its filing date.
         b.   The City Council shall take action on the preliminary plat within
20 days of the submission of all necessary approved plats.
         c.   If the preliminary plat conforms substantially to the plat
tentatively approved by the City Council and meets all conditions laid down for
tentative approval, the City Council shall approve the preliminary plat.
         d.   The Clerk shall promptly notify the proprietor of approval or
rejection in writing; if rejected, reasons shall be given.
      4.   Approval required. No installation or construction of any
improvements shall be made before the plat has received approval of the City
Council and the engineering plans have been approved by the City Engineer.
(Ord. 269, eff. 7-27-1991)
Sec. 51-8. FINAL PLAT.
   The procedure for preparation and review of a final plat shall be as
follows.
   A.   Preparation.
      1.   The final plat shall comply with the provisions of the Land Division
Act, as amended.
      2.   The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat
as approved and it may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary
plat which the proprietor proposes to record and develop at the time; provided,
however, that, the portion conforms to this chapter.
      3.   The proprietor shall submit as evidence of title an abstract of
title certified to date with the written opinion of an attorney-at-law thereon
or at the option of the proprietor, a policy of title insurance for examination
in order to ascertain as to whether or not the proper parties have signed the
plat.
   B.   Final plat review.
      1.   One Mylar copy and three paper prints of the final plat shall be
made by the proprietor with the City Clerk and he or she shall deposit the sums
of money as the City Council may require herein or by other ordinance or
resolution.
      2.   Prior to approving the final plat, the proprietor shall meet with
and provide the City Clerk with a true copy of an escrow agreement showing that
the proprietor has deposited with a bank or other agent acceptable to the city,
cash, certified check or irrevocable bank letter of credit, sufficient to
guarantee payment for and faithful completion of all improvements within the
time specified. Amount of the deposit shall be 125% of the completion estimate
by the City Engineer. The escrow agreement shall provide that the funds so
deposited will only be released for payment of work completed on approval by
the City Council.
      3.   The final plat shall be reviewed by the City Engineer as to
compliance with the approved preliminary plat (stage 2) and plans for utilities
and other improvements.
      4.   The City Engineer shall notify the City Council of his or her
recommendation for either approval or rejection of the final plat.
      5.   The City Council shall review all recommendations and take action on
the final plat within 20 days of its date of filing.
      6.   Upon the approval of the final plat by the City Council, the
subsequent approvals shall follow the procedure set forth in the Land Division
Act. The three prints of the final plat shall be forwarded, one to the Planning
Commission and one to the Building Department and one to the Department of
Public Works office.
      7.   When all necessary improvements have been approved and accepted by
the City Council, a certified approved plat shall be transmitted to the Clerk
of the County Plat Board. One paper print and one Mylar copy of the utilities
as built shall be filed with the Department of Public Works.
      8.   Following final approval of the preliminary plat, the proprietor
shall obtain a survey and a true plat from the surveyor.
      9.   After the approval of the preliminary plat, the proprietor shall
provide the City Clerk with a list of authorities required by the Land Division
Act to review the preliminary plat, as well as all written approvals to the
City Clerk.
(Ord. 269, eff. 7-27-1991)
Sec. 51-9. SUBDIVISION LOT DIVISION.
   After a subdivision has been recorded, platted lots may thereafter be
partitioned or divided with the approval of the city into not more than four
parts, provided that the resulting lots or parcels of combinations or portions
of two or more divided lots shall not be less in width or size than the more
restrictive of this chapter, the City Zoning Chapter or the State Land Division
Act of 1967; and, provided further that, the resulting lots shall each have
direct access to a public roadway or private roadway constructed to the
standards of this chapter and also to public utilities necessary or required to
service the lot; and, provided further that, all resulting lots shall conform
in all particulars to the requirements of the State Land Division Act of 1967
and all city ordinances.
(Ord. 269, eff. 7-27-1991)
ARTICLE IV. DESIGN LAYOUT STANDARDS
Sec. 51-10. GENERALLY.
   The subdivision design layout standards set forth under this section are
development guides for the assistance of the proprietor. All final plan’s must
be reviewed and approved by the City Council.
(Ord. 269, eff. 7-27-1991)
Sec. 51-11. STREETS.
   Streets shall conform to at least all minimum requirements of the general
specifications and typical cross-sections as set forth in this article and
other conditions set forth by the City Council.
   A.   Location and arrangement.
      1.   The proposed subdivision shall conform to the various elements of
the Master Plan and shall be considered in relation to the existing and planned
major thoroughfares and collector streets and the part shall be platted in the
location and the width indicated on the plan.
      2.   The street layout shall provide for continuation of collector
streets in the adjoining subdivisions or of the proper projection of streets
when adjoining property is not subdivided or conform to a plan for a
neighborhood unit drawn up and adopted by the Planning Commission.
      3.   The street layout shall include minor streets so laid out that their
use by through traffic shall be discouraged.
      4.   Should a proposed subdivision border on or contain an existing or
proposed major thoroughfare, the Planning Commission may require marginal
access streets, reverse frontage or other treatment as may be necessary for
adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation and
reduction of traffic hazards.
      5.   Should a proposed subdivision border on or contain a railroad,
expressway or other limited access highway right-of-way, the Commission may
require the location of a street approximately parallel to and on each side of
the right-of-way at a distance suitable for the development of an appropriate
use of the intervening land such as for parks in residential districts. The
distances shall be determined with due consideration of the minimum distance
required for approach grades to future grade separation.
   B.   Right-of-way widths. Street right-of-way widths shall conform to at
least the following minimum requirements:
Street Type Right-of-Way Widths
Street Type                         Right-of-Way Widths
Alley                               20 feet
Collector streets                   86 feet
Cul-de-sac streets turn-arounds
   Industrial                    75 feet radius
   Residential and others        60 feet radius
   Maximum length for residential cul-de-sac streets shall generally be
1,000 feet. Maximum length for industrial and other cul-de-sac streets may
exceed 1,000 feet subject to the approval of the City Council.
Industrial service streets          66 feet
Major thoroughfare                  In conformance with the Major
                                    Thoroughfare Plan
Marginal access streets             60 feet
Minor (single-family residential)   66 feet
streets
Multiple-family residential streets 66 feet
where platted
Turn-around (loop) street           120 feet
 
   C.   Street grades. For adequate drainage, the minimum street grade shall
not be less than 0.5%. The maximum street grade shall be 6%.
   D.   Street geometrics. Standards for maximum and minimum street grades,
vertical and horizontal street curves and sight distances shall be established
by resolution of the City Council and shall in no case be less restrictive than
the standards of the city.
   E.   Street intersections. Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as
nearly as possible to 90 degrees. Curved streets, intersecting with major
thoroughfares and secondary thoroughfares shall do so with a tangent section of
centerline 50 feet in length, measured from the right-of-way line of the major
or secondary thoroughfare.
   F.   Prohibited intersections. Where the proposed continuation of a street
at an intersection is not in alignment with the existing street, it must not
intersect the cross street closer than 175 feet from the opposite existing
street, as measured from the centerline of the streets.
   G.   Grading and centerline gradients. Per plans and profiles approved by
the City Engineer.
   H.   Street naming. All new streets shall be named as follows; Streets with
predominant north-south directions shall be named “Street”; streets with
predominant east-west direction shall be named “Avenue”; meandering streets
shall be named “Drive”, “Bylane”, “Path”, “Road” or “Trail”, etc. and cul-de-
sacs shall be named “Circle”, “Court”, “Way” or “Place”, etc.
(Ord. 269, eff. 7-27-1991)
Sec. 51-12. BLOCKS.
   Blocks within subdivisions shall conform to the following standards.
   A.   Sizes.
      1.   Maximum length for blocks shall not exceed 1,000 feet in length,
except where, in the opinion of the Commission, conditions may justify a
greater distance.
      2.   Widths of blocks shall be determined by the condition of the layout
and shall be suited to the intended layout.
   B.   Public walkways and/or bikeways.
      1.   Location of public walkways and/or bikeways or crosswalks may be
required by the Commission to obtain satisfactory pedestrian access to public
or private facilities such as, but not limited to, schools and parks.
      2.   Widths of public walkways shall be at least 12 feet and shall be in
the nature of an easement for this purpose.
   C.   Easements.
      1.   Location of private and public utility line easement shall be
provided along the rear or side lot lines as necessary for utility lines.
However, whenever feasible utilities shall be installed within the public
right-of-way, easements shall give access to every lot, park or public grounds.
The easements shall be a total of not less than 12 feet wide, six feet from
each parcel.
      2.   Recommendations on the proposed layout of telephone and electric
company easements should be sought from all of the utility companies serving
the area. It shall be the responsibility of the proprietor to submit copies of
the approved preliminary plat to all appropriate public utility agencies.
      3.   Easements three feet in width shall be provided where needed along
side lot lines so as to provide for street light dropouts (electric cable
encased in conduit). Prior to the approval of the final plat for a proposed
subdivision, a statement shall be obtained from the appropriate public utility
indicating that easements have been provided along specific lots. A notation
shall be made on the final plat indicating: “The side lot lines between lots
(indicate lot numbers) are subject to street light dropout rights granted to
the (utility) Company”.
(Ord. 269, eff. 7-27-1991)
Sec. 51-13. LOTS.
   Lots within subdivisions shall conform to the following standards.
   A.   Sizes and shapes.
      1.   The lot size, width, depth and shape in any subdivision proposed for
residential uses shall be appropriate for the location and the type of
development contemplated.
      2.   Lot areas and widths shall conform to at least the minimum
requirements of the Zoning Chapter for the district in which the subdivision is
proposed.
      3.   Building setback lines shall conform to at least the minimum
requirements of the Zoning Chapter.
      4.   Corner lots generally should have extra width to permit appropriate
building setback from both streets.
      5.   Excessive lot depth in relation to width should be avoided. A depth-
to-width ratio of three to one should normally be considered a maximum.
      6.   Lots intended for purposes other than residential use shall be
specifically designed for such purposes and shall have adequate provision for
off-street parking; setbacks and other requirements in accordance with the
Zoning Chapter.
   B.   Arrangement.
      1.   Every lot shall abut on a street.
      2.   Residential lots abutting major thoroughfares or collector streets,
where marginal access streets are not desirable or possible to attain shall be
platted with extra depth to permit generous distances between buildings and the
traffic way.
      3.   Where lots border upon bodies of water, the front yard may be
designated as the waterfront side of the lot; provided, the lot has sufficient
depth to provide adequate setback on the street side to maintain a setback for
all structures equal to the front setback on the street side as well as on the
waterfront side.
(Ord. 269, eff. 7-27-1991)
Sec. 51-14. NATURAL FEATURES.
   The natural features and character of lands must be preserved wherever
possible. Due regard must be shown for all natural features such as large
trees, natural groves, water courses and similar community assets that will add
attractiveness and value to the property, if preserved. The preservation of
drainage and natural stream channels must be considered by the proprietor and
the dedication and provision of adequate barriers, where appropriate, shall be
required.
(Ord. 269, eff. 7-27-1991)
Sec. 51-15. FLOODPLAIN.
   Any areas of land within the proposed subdivision which lie either wholly or
in part within the floodplain of a river, stream, creek or lake or any other
areas which are subject to flooding. Lands subject to flooding or otherwise
determined by the City Council to be uninhabitable should not be platted for
residential, commercial or industrial purposes. The lands within a subdivision
may be set aside for other purposes such as parks and/or open space. The city
will consider accepting land on a case by case basis.
(Ord. 269, eff. 7-27-1991)
ARTICLE V. IMPROVEMENTS
Sec. 51-16. GENERALLY.
   A.   The improvements set forth under this section are to be considered as a
minimum acceptable standard. All those improvements for which standards are not
specifically set forth shall have the standards set by other ordinance of the
City Council. All improvements must meet the approval of the City Council.
   B.   Prior to the undertaking of any improvements, the proprietor shall file
with the City Clerk a true copy of an escrow agreement showing that the
proprietor has deposited with a bank or other agent acceptable to the city,
cash, certified check or irrevocable bank letter of credit, sufficient to
guarantee payment for and faithful completion of all improvements within the
time specified. Amount of the deposit shall 125% of the completion estimate
based on an estimate by the City Engineer.
   C.   The escrow agreement shall provide that the funds so deposited will
only be released for payment of work completed on approval of the city.
   D.   Prior to the acceptance by the city of improvements, a two-year
maintenance bond in an amount set by the City Council shall be posed by the
proprietor.
   E.   Improvements shall be provided by the proprietor in accordance with the
standards and requirements established in this article and/or any other
standards and requirements which may from time to time be established by
municipal ordinance.
(Ord. 269, eff. 7-27-1991)
Sec. 51-17. STREETS.
   A.   Generally. All subdivision streets covered under this chapter shall be
constructed of asphalt over base stone or full depth asphalt as recommended by
the City Engineer and approved by the City Council. All subdivision streets
shall be constructed with concrete curb and gutter in accordance with current
city standards for material and design.
   B.   Street pavement width standards.
Street Type Pavement Width (Measured from Back of Curb to Back of Curb, in A.,
            B. and C. from Pavement Edge to Pavement Edge in E., F., G. and H.)
                                    Pavement Width (Measured from Back of
Street Type                         Curb to Back of Curb, in A., B. and C.
                                    from Pavement Edge to Pavement Edge in
                                    E., F., G. and H.)
Alley                               20 feet
Collector streets                   48 feet
Cul-de-sac streets turn-around
   Industrial                    6 inches radius
   Residential and others
      Industrial              65-foot radius
      Residential             45-foot radius
Industrial streets                  40 feet
                                    In conformance with the standards and
                                    specifications established by the
Major thoroughfares                 Municipal Engineer or the governing body.
                                    This width is generally established as 48
                                    feet.
Marginal access streets             24 feet
Minor residential streets           36 feet
Multiple-family residential streets 36 feet
where dedicated
Turn-around (loop) streets          Not less than 80 feet diameter at
                                    terminating loop - 36 feet wide pavement
 
 
(Ord. 269, eff. 7-27-1991)
Sec. 51-18. UTILITIES.
   A.   Requirements for underground wiring. The proprietor shall make
arrangements for all lines for telephone, electric, television and other
similar services distributed by wire or cable to be placed underground entirely
throughout a subdivided area, except for major thoroughfare right-of-way and
the conduits or cables shall be placed within private easements provided to the
service companies by the proprietor or within dedicated public ways; provided
only that, overhead lines may be permitted upon written recommendation of the
City Engineer, City Planner, Planning Commission and the approval of the City
Council at the time of final plat approval where it is determined that overhead
lines will not constitute a detriment to the health, safety, general welfare,
plat design and character of the subdivision. All facilities placed in
dedicated public ways shall be planned so as not to conflict with other
underground utilities. All facilities shall be constructed in accordance with
standards of construction approved by the State Public Service Commission. All
drainage and underground utility installations which traverse privately owned
property shall be protected by easements granted by the proprietor.
   B.   Street lighting. The proprietor shall provide street lighting in
residential subdivisions in accordance with local utility company standards.
   C.   Sewage disposal. The proprietor shall cause the design and construction
of a sanitary sewer collection system which will deliver the sewage to existing
sanitary sewers now flowing to the city treatment plant. The sanitary sewer
collection system shall be extended to each lot in the subdivision. In the
event that grades of existing sewers are not low enough for gravity flow from
the proposed subdivision, the proprietor shall cause sewage lift station(s) to
be designed and constructed to move the sewage to existing active sanitary
sewers. In the event that the size of existing sewers are not large enough to
receive the proposed additional flow, the proprietor shall cause the design and
construction of larger sanitary sewers extended to a location at which the
existing sanitary sewer will accommodate the additional flow. All features of
the sewage disposal system shall be designed and constructed using current city
standards for materials and design. All design features must be reviewed and
approved by the City Engineer with approval by the City Council.
   D.   Water supply and distribution. The proprietor shall cause the design
and construction of an extension to the existing municipal water system which
will serve all lots in the proposed subdivision, both for domestic use and fire
protection. All features of the water distribution system shall be designed and
constructed using current city standards for materials and design. All design
features must be reviewed and approved by the City Engineer with approval by
the City Council.
   E.   Storm drainage system.
      1.   All surface waters shall be adequately drained within each plat by a
system of catch basins and underground piping which leads either to a recharge
basin, or, into an adjoining system which is designed to accommodate the
additional flow.
      2.   Adequate provision shall be made for proper drainage of storm water
run-out from side and rear yards. Each yard shall be self-contained and shall
be drained from rear to front, except where topographical features make this
approach unreasonable. Rear yards shall slope at a minimum grade of 0.5%.
      3.   All features of the drainage system shall be designed and
constructed using current city standards for material and design. All design
features must be reviewed and approved by the City Engineer with approval of
the City Council.
(Ord. 269, eff. 7-27-1991)
Sec. 51-19. OTHER IMPROVEMENTS.
   A.   Sidewalks.
      1.   Major thoroughfares. A five-foot wide concrete sidewalk located one
foot from the property line on the side or sides of the roadway abutting the
subdivision shall be provided.
      2.   Collector streets. A five-foot concrete sidewalk located one foot
from the property line on each side of the roadway shall be provided.
      3.   Minor streets. A five-foot concrete sidewalk located one foot from
the property line on each side of the roadway shall be provided.
      4.   Marginal access streets. A four-foot concrete sidewalk located one
foot from the property line on the private property side of the roadway shall
be provided.
      5.   Public walkways. The surface of the walkways shall be developed in
concrete. Planting pockets shall be provided in public walkways for tree and
shrub planting. The planting plan and surface treatment shall meet the approval
of the Planning Commission. Fences and/or other improvements may also be
required if the Planning Commission and/or City Council determines they are
necessary to protect the adjacent property owners.
   B.   Street trees; builder responsibility.
      1.   General. Builders shall be required to fulfill tree planting and
protection requirements as provided under the ordinances and policies of the
city and its City Parks and Tree Commission including, but not limited to,
subdivision regulations and site plan requirements.
      2.   Minimum planting requirements. One street tree of an approved
species measuring at least one and one-half inch caliper shall be planted on
all new construction sites, residential or otherwise, for each site or lot of
75 feet or less and at least two trees for every lot in excess of 75 feet
frontage. Corner lots shall require at least one tree for each street. The
builder shall be responsible for fulfilling these requirements.
(Ord. 269, eff. 7-27-1991)
ARTICLE VI. COMPLIANCE STANDARDS
Sec. 51-20. COMPLIANCE STANDARDS.
   The approvals required under the provisions of this chapter shall be
obtained prior to the installation of any subdivision or project improvements
within the city, in public streets, public walkways, public rights-of-way and
public easements and/or under the ultimate jurisdiction of the city. All
subdivision or project improvements within the city installed in public
streets, public alleys, public rights-of-way or public easements and/or under
the ultimate jurisdiction of the city shall comply with all of the provisions
and requirements of this or any other related ordinance.
(Ord. 269, eff. 7-27-1991)
ARTICLE VII. INTERPRETATION
Sec. 51-21. INTERPRETATION.
   A.   The provisions of these regulations shall be held to be the minimum
requirements adopted for the promotion and preservation of public health,
safety and general welfare of the city.
   B.   These regulations are not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul or, in
any manner, interfere with existing regulations or laws of the city, nor
conflict with any statutes of the state or county, except that these
regulations shall prevail in cases where these regulations impose a greater
restriction that is provided by existing statutes, laws or regulations.
(Ord. 269, eff. 7-27-1991)
ARTICLE VIII. FEES
Sec. 51-22. GENERALLY.
   Preliminary and final plat review fees, engineering fees, attorney fees,
water and connection charges and other municipal fees shall be paid by the
proprietor as follows.
(Ord. 269, eff. 7-27-1991)
Sec. 51-23. PLANNING REVIEW FEES.
   Fees shall be charged for the review of preliminary plats by the City
Planner on the basis or the following schedule. There shall be no additional
planner review fee charged for the preliminary or final plats which are in
substantial conformance to a previously approved preliminary plat (stage 1).
   A.   Conventional subdivisions plats: $150, plus $2 per lot;
   B.   Planned unit development plats: $200, plus $4 per lot;
   C.   Multiple-family residential plats: $150, plus $1 per dwelling unit; and
   D.    Special meeting: add $100.
(Ord. 269, eff. 7-27-1991)
Sec. 51-24. ENGINEERING REVIEW FEES.
   Fees shall be charged for the review of preliminary plats, final plats,
construction drawings and the construction of municipal improvements by the
City Engineer and the Department of Public Works on the basis of the following
schedule.
   A.   Plat review.
      1.   Single family subdivision, each submittal (tentative preliminary,
final preliminary and final plat): $100, plus $2 per lot;
      2.   Commercial or industrial subdivision each submittal (tentative
preliminary, final preliminary and final plat): $150, plus $3 per acre; and
      3.   Special meeting: add $100.
   B.   Construction drawing review.
      1.   Subdivision construction drawings, including streets, water mains
and drainage: $175, plus $10 per lot; and
      2.   Construction review (inspection) time and materials: minimum deposit
3% of construction.
(Ord. 269, eff. 7-27-1991)
ARTICLE IX. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
Sec. 51-25. GENERAL PENALTY.
   A person who violates any provision of this chapter is responsible for a
municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than
$500, plus costs and other sanctions, for each violation. Repeat offenses shall
be subject to increased fines as provided by code.
(Ord. 269, eff. 7-27-1991)
ARTICLE X. SEVERABILITY
Sec. 51-26. SEVERABILITY.
   If any section paragraph, clause, phrase or part of these subdivision
regulations is for any reason held invalid by any court of competent
jurisdiction, the decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
provisions of the regulations; and the application of those provisions to any
persons or circumstances shall not be affected.
(Ord. 269, eff. 7-27-1991)
ARTICLE XI. REPEAL
Sec. 51-27. REPEAL OF INCONSISTENT REGULATIONS.
   All ordinances and amendments thereto enacted and/or adopted by the City
Council inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter are repealed, as of
the effect date of this chapter. The repeal of the above chapter and its
amendments does not affect or impair any act done, offense committed or right
accruing, accrued or acquired or liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment
incurred prior to the time enforced, prosecuted or inflicted.
(Ord. 269, eff. 7-27-1991)
ARTICLE XII. VARIANCE
Sec. 51-28. VARIANCES.
   The City Council may authorize a variance from these regulations when, in
its opinion, undue hardship may result from strict compliance. In granting any
variance, the City Council shall prescribe only conditions that it deems
necessary to or desirable for the public interest. In making its findings, as
required herein below, the City Council shall take into account the nature of
the proposed use of land in the vicinity, the number of persons to reside or
work in the proposed conditions in the vicinity. No variance shall be granted
unless the City Council finds:
   A.   There are special circumstances or conditions affecting the property
such that the strict application of the provisions of this chapter would
deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his or her land;
   B.   The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a
substantial property right of the petitioner; and/or
   C.   The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public
welfare or injurious to other property in the territory in which the property
is situated.
(Ord. 269, eff. 7-27-1991)
CHAPTER 52: SIGNS
Section
   
52-1   Purpose and intent
   
52-2   Definitions and classifications
   
52-3   Signs exempt from permit requirements
   
52-4   Permits and fees
   
52-5   Measurement of sign area
   
52-6   Construction and maintenance
   
52-7   Prohibited signs
   
52-8   General provisions
   
52-9   Master signage plan
   
52-10   District sign regulations
   
52-11   Billboards
   
52-12   Flags and grand opening displays
   
52-13   Nonconforming signs
   
52-14   Repairs or removal; notice
   
52-15   Appeals
   
52-16   Violations and penalties
   
52-17   Table: Quick Reference Sign Type and Area Requirements by Zoning
District
Sec. 52-1. PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   A.   This chapter is intended to regulate the location, height and types of
signs permitted in the city in order to promote and protect public health,
safety and general well being. The regulations in this chapter are designed to
improve the visual quality of the street environment, reduce visual pollution,
encourage human scaled and pedestrian friendly development in the city and
promote compatibility among different sign styles in order to improve community
appearance.
   B.   Furthermore, this chapter seeks to prevent traffic hazards associated
with visual distractions to motorists and to reduce the risk of fire hazards,
personal injuries and property damage from signs.
   C.   Moreover, this chapter seeks to provide adequate identification and
directional signage for the commercial, industrial, office and residential
sectors of the community.
(Ord. 308, adopted 2-17-2000)
Sec. 52-2. DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Figure 1,
at the end of this section, provides an illustration of the sign definitions
provided below.
   ACCESSORY SIGN. A sign which pertains to the principal or accessory use of
the premises upon which the sign is located.
   BANNER SIGN. A sign on paper, cloth, fabric or other combustible material of
any kind, either with or without frames.
   BILLBOARD/POSTER BOARD SIGN. A nonaccessory freestanding sign upon which a
display can be posted, painted or otherwise affixed in a manner which is
readily changed.
   BUILDING FRONTAGE. The length of the portion of a building occupied by a
single business facing a street adjacent to the premises on which the business
is located.
   BUSINESS. Any legal use of a building other than a residence by a person,
firm or corporation. Although contained in the same building as another
business and owned by the same person, an activity may be treated as a separate
business if it is physically separated from, uses different personnel than and
provides different products or services than other related business.
   BUSINESS CENTER. Any group of six or more commercial establishments having a
development area of not less than two acres which:
      1.   Are under one common ownership or management;
      2.   Have a common arrangement for the maintenance of the grounds and are
connected by party walls, partitions, covered canopies or other structural
members to form one continuous structure;
      3.   Share a common parking area; or
      4.   Otherwise present the appearance of one continuous commercial area.
   CANOPY. A structure or frame covered with canvas, vinyl or other material
and extending from the wall of a building over a sidewalk, driveway, entry,
window or similar area which provides shelter from sunlight or the elements.
CANOPIES may be wholly supported by a building, columns, poles, braces or a
combination thereof. A CANOPY also includes an awning.
   CANOPY SIGN. A sign, displayed and affixed flat against the surface of a
canopy, which does not extend vertically or horizontally beyond the limits of
the canopy. CANOPY SIGNS shall conform to projecting sign requirements.
   CLEARANCE. The vertical distance from the lowest part of the face of a sign
to the average ground level at the base of the sign.
   CONSTRUCTION SIGN. A sign erected at a construction site, displayed only
during the construction period, identifying the architects, engineers,
contractors or other parties responsible for a project, and/or identifying the
intended purposes or uses of the building.
   DEVELOPMENT ENTRY SIGN. A permanent sign which identifies the name of a
residential development or developer or the type of residential structures
included in the development and which is harmonious in appearance with the
character or intended character of the area.
   DIRECTIONAL SIGN. A sign to facilitate the flow of vehicular and/or
pedestrian traffic to, from and within a site by identifying the exit(s) and
entrance(s) points of a premises. The signs contain only the name or logo of
the premises or information directional thereto.
   ELECTRONIC MESSAGE BOARD. A sign that uses lights to display messages, such
as, but not limited to, the current time, temperature and/or date of the
immediate environment.
   FREESTANDING SIGN. A sign which is supported by one or more columns,
uprights, poles or braces extending from the ground or from an object on the
ground or a sign which is erected on the ground; provided that, no part of the
sign is attached to any part of a building, structure or other sign.
FREESTANDING SIGNS include pole signs, pedestal signs, ground signs and vending
devices when located outside of a building and having more than two square feet
of advertising area.
   GROUND MOUNTED SIGN. A freestanding advertising structure supported by one
or more uprights, poles, pylons or braces located in or upon the ground and not
attached to any building or other structure. The bottom edge of the display or
advertising area of the sign shall be no more than 24 inches above the adjacent
grade.
   GROUP IDENTIFICATION SIGN. A sign or entrance way structure, listing the
names and addresses only of the establishments occupying a development or
subdivision. The erection of identification signs is so intended to assist the
public in locating establishments within the immediate area and shall be placed
upon property within the development or subdivision.
   ILLUMINATION, DIRECT. Lighting by means of an unshielded light source, which
is effectively visible as a part of the sign where light travels directly from
the source to the viewer’s eye.
   ILLUMINATION, INDIRECT. Lighting by means of a light source which is
directed at a reflecting surface in a way as to illuminate the sign from the
front or a light source which is primarily designed to illuminate the entire
building facade upon which a sign is displayed. INDIRECT ILLUMINATION does not
include lighting which is primarily used for purposes other than sign
illumination (e.g., parking lot lights or lights inside a building which may
silhouette a window sign), but which are primarily installed to provide inside
illumination.
   ILLUMINATION, INTERNAL. Lighting by means of a light source which is within
a sign having an opaque background or silhouetting opaque letters or designs or
within letters or designs which are themselves made of translucent material.
   INSTITUTIONAL SIGN. Signs displaying the name and address of religious
institutions, schools, libraries, government buildings, service groups,
charitable organizations or similar institutions and the announcement of its
services or activities.
   JOINT IDENTIFICATION SIGN. A sign which serves as common or collective
identification for two or more businesses or industrial uses on the same
parcel. The sign may contain a directory of uses as an integral part thereof;
or may serve as general identification only for the developments as shopping
centers, industrial parks and the like.
   MARQUEE SIGN. A sign attached to a canopy or other covered structure
projecting from and supported by the building.
   MOVING SIGN. A sign that has motion either constantly or at intervals that
gives the impression of movement through intermittent, flashing, scintillating
or varying intensities of illumination.
   OCCUPATIONAL SIGN. A sign denoting only the name and profession of an
occupant in a commercial building or public institutional building.
   OFF-PREMISES SIGN. Any sign displaying a commercial message which advertises
or attracts attention to a business, commodity, service or activity conducted,
sold or offered elsewhere than on the same lot upon which or within the same
building where the sign is located.
   ON-PREMISES SIGN. A sign which advertises only goods, services, facilities,
events or attractions available on the premises or identifies the owner or
occupant or directs traffic on the premises where a sign is located. All other
signs are considered off-premises signs.
   OUTLINE TUBING SIGN. A sign composed of arranged or exposed gaseous tubes
that outline and call attention to certain features of an advertising device
such as individual letters, figures, shapes or words. Also referred to as a
NEON SIGN.
   PARASITE SIGN. A sign that is intended to draw attention to anyone or more
of various services, items for sale, contests, etc. and is attached as an
appendage to an accessory sign, sign support or any part of a principal
building, accessory building or other structure located on a development site.
   POLE SIGN. A type of ground sign that is mounted above the ground on a pole.
   PORTABLE SIGN. A sign or sign board which is freestanding and not
permanently anchored or secured to either a building, structure or the ground;
such as, but not limited to, so-called “A” frame, “T”-shaped stand or any sign
attached to a trailer or other vehicle not accessory to the vehicle or its use,
but used with the express intent of advertising.
   PROJECTING SIGN. A sign erected and attached at one end to a building, pole
or other structure or any part thereof and extending beyond the attachment
surface by more than 12 inches.
   ROAD SIGN. A type of ground sign that is typically mounted close to the
ground on a three-dimensional base which is constructed of the same materials
and colors as the sign face itself.
   ROOF SIGN. A sign which is attached to a building and any part of which
extends more than 12 inches above either the top roof line of the building or
silhouette or any portion of the roof surface.
   SIGN. Any name, identification, description, display, illumination, surface
or device (including its structure and component parts) that conveys a message
which is affixed to, painted on or otherwise presented directly or indirectly
upon a building, structure or land; which bears any inscription, notice, motto
or design or which directs attention to an object, product, place, activity,
person, institution, organization or business and which is visible from the
public street, right-of-way, sidewalk, alley, park or other area open to the
public. Included in this definition are balloons or other inflatable devices,
mockups, banners, pennants, flags or other devices not necessarily displaying a
name or message but which are designed and intended to attract attention to an
enterprise or activity.
   SIGN AREA. The entire area within a circle, triangle, rectangle or other
geometric shape enclosing the extreme limits of writing, representation, emblem
or any figure of similar character, together with any frame or other material
or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate the
sign from the background against which it is placed; excluding the necessary
supports or uprights on which the sign is placed.
   TEMPORARY SIGN AND DEVICES. A sign which is not permanently anchored or
secured to either a building or the ground, such as, but not limited to:
balloons, real estate signs, political signs or similar objects or devices.
   WALL SIGN. A sign which is attached to or affixed to or painted upon the
face or wall of any building or structure or part thereof, which extends no
more than 12 inches from the building face.
   WINDOW SIGN. Signs which are affixed or otherwise inscribed on a window of a
building such that they are visible from the outside of the building. This does
not include merchandise displayed in a window, unless it is arranged in a
fashion to constitute a sign.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/2e5431c07ead2206b6572f578719c54e7c862c99/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2328.png]
 
(Ord. 308, adopted 2-17-2000)
Sec. 52-3. SIGNS EXEMPT FROM PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   The following types of signs are exempted from all of the provisions of this
section, except for the following requirements.
   A.   Common household signs. Examples of these signs include yard sale,
garage sale, rummage sale, for sale, no trespassing, beware of dog, etc. Yard,
garage, rummage and similar sale signs may only be displayed for a period of
three days. The signs may not be erected on utility poles or trees.
   B.   Directional signs. Signs directing traffic movement onto or off of a
premises; provided that, the signs shall not exceed three square feet in area,
nor three feet in height, be no closer than five feet from the road right-of-
way and have no more than 50% of the area of the sign bearing identification
copy. Horizontal directional signs on and flush with paved areas are exempt
from these standards.
   C.   Flags and banners. Flags and banners in residential areas may be no
larger than six feet by ten feet. These flags and banners may provide for high
school or college support or may be of a national or international nature. The
flags and banners must be mounted on poles or masts in the traditional manner
no higher than 35 feet. Flags and banners in residential areas are not to be
used in connection with a commercial promotion or as an advertising device.
   D.   House numbers and nameplates. House numbers and nameplates identifying
the occupant or address of a parcel of land are permitted provided they do not
exceed four square feet in surface display area.
   E.   Institutional signs. Signs setting forth the name of any public,
charitable, educational or religious institution, located entirely upon the
property of that institution or in an central area designated by the city, up
to an area of 32 square feet. The signs may be illuminated in accordance with
the regulations contained hereinafter. If building mounted, these signs shall
be flat wall signs and shall not project above the roof line.
   F.   Integral signs. Names of buildings, date of erection, monumental
citations, commemorative tablets and the like when carved into stone, concrete
or similar material and made an integral part of the structure.
   G.   Public signs. Signs of a noncommercial nature and in the public
interest, erected by or on the order of, a public officer in the performance of
his or her public duty, such as safety signs, trespassing signs, traffic signs,
memorial plaques, signs of historical interest and the like.
   H.   Temporary signs and devices. Temporary signs, not specifically
regulated in any other section of this chapter, including, but not limited to,
political signs, real estate signs, signs for special events or activities,
construction signs, inflatable devices and the like shall be permitted subject
to the following conditions.
      1.   No temporary sign or device shall be located in the public right-of-
way or attached to any utility pole.
      2.   All temporary signs must be removed within ten days of the
conclusion of the event, activity, election, sale, etc., for which the
temporary sign is displayed.
      3.   The total area and height of temporary signage shall not exceed the
following standards.
         a.   In residential districts, temporary signage shall be limited to
six square feet in area and six feet in height.
         b.   In all commercial and industrial districts, temporary signage
shall not exceed 32 square feet of total sign area per side or a height of
eight feet.
         c.   Temporary devices, including inflatable objects, shall not exceed
a height greater than is permissible for primary structures in the district in
which the device is located.
   I.   Traditional displays. Any traditional display in connection with the
celebration of a national holiday, religious holiday or a community celebration
is permitted.
   J.   Sidewalk signs. Portable, freestanding signs of A-frame or swinging-
style construction. Figure 1, at the end of this division, provides an
illustration of sidewalk signs. Sidewalk signs are subject to the following
requirements:
      1.   Signs are limited to one per building frontage and one at the rear
entrance of the same business if used for entry.
      2.   Signs shall pertain only to on-premises commercial activity.
      3.   Total area shall not exceed eight square feet, and the sign area per
a side may not exceed four feet.
      4.   Signs shall not exceed four feet in height including handles and
frame.
      5.   Signs shall be maintained in good repair and sound structural
condition at all times, constructed of durable, weather-proof material,
resulting in an independently sturdy structure able enough to withstand typical
winds, without flipping over or sliding.
      6.   Signs shall be located in such a manner that a pedestrian travel
area width of five feet is maintained uninterrupted between the road edge or
curb cut and the building frontage.
      7.   Signs shall not unreasonably interfere with the view, access to, or
use of adjacent property, or with pedestrian or vehicular circulation.
      8.   Signs are only permitted on public property during business hours.
      9.   No device, object, or material such as, but not limited to, lights,
balloons, streamers, or flags, shall be attached to the sign.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/2e5431c07ead2206b6572f578719c54e7c862c99/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2330.png]
 
(Ord. 308, adopted 2-17-2000; Ord. 394, passed 2-27-2023)
Sec. 52-4. PERMITS AND FEES.
   No person shall erect, place, structurally alter, paint or add to any sign
for which a license is required, nor attach any sign to an existing sign, which
shall either increase the area thereof or constitute a structural alteration
thereof or an addition thereto, without first obtaining a permit to do so and a
paying a permit fee in accordance with the schedule adopted by the City
Council. Any sign that makes use of electricity shall, in addition to a sign
permit, require an electrical permit, regardless of size.
   A.   Permits for the erection of signs shall only be issued to property
owners and/or assignees permitted and qualified to carry on the work.
   B.   A sign permit shall become null and void if the work for which the
permit was issued is not completed within six months of the date of issue.
   C.   Applications for sign permits shall be made upon forms provided by the
Zoning Administrator for this purpose. No permit shall be required for ordinary
servicing, repainting of an existing sign message or cleaning of a sign. No
permit is required for changing the message of a sign designed for periodic
message change, including a bulletin boards or billboards, but not including a
sign to which a new permanent face may be attached.
(Ord. 308, adopted 2-17-2000)
Sec. 52-5. MEASUREMENT OF SIGN AREA.
   A.   Single face sign. Single face sign total area shall be computed as the
number of square feet within lines drawn at the outer perimeter forming a
single and/or combination of not more than three contiguous non-overlapping
geometric shapes limited to squares, rectangles, triangles or circles,
parallelograms and combinations thereof, encompassing the extreme limits of an
individual letter(s), word(s), message(s), representation, emblem or any
similar figure, including open space(s), together with any frame or other
material forming an integral part of the display used to differentiate the sign
from the background against which it is placed.
   B.   Double face sign. Double face signs having two or more faces of equal
size arranged and/or positioned back to back and parallel or with the faces at
an included angle of not more than 30 degrees, the area of the sign shall be
taken as the area of one face if the two faces are of equal area.
(Ord. 308, adopted 2-17-2000)
Sec. 52-6. CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE.
   A.   Materials and design. All signs shall be designed, constructed and
maintained in conformity with the provisions for materials, loads and stresses
of the latest adopted edition of the city engineering standards and
requirements of this chapter.
   B.   Maintenance. Every sign, including those specifically exempt from this
chapter with respect to permits and permit fees, shall be maintained in good
repair and sound structural condition at all times. All signs shall be kept
neatly painted, including all metal parts and supports thereof that are not
galvanized or of rust resistant metals. The Zoning Administrator or his or her
authorized representative shall inspect and may order the painting, repair,
alteration or removal of a sign which constitutes a hazard to safety, health or
pubic welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation or
obsolescence.
   C.   Electric signs. No electrical equipment or apparatus of any kind which
causes interference with radio or television reception shall be used in the
operation of illuminated signs. Whenever interference is caused by an
unfiltered, improperly filtered or otherwise defective sign or by any other
electrical device or apparatus connected to the sign, the Zoning Administrator
shall order the sign disconnected until repairs are made.
   D.   Clearance. Signs shall not be located with less than three feet of
horizontal clearance or eight feet of vertical clearance from overhead
electrical conductors.
(Ord. 308, adopted 2-17-2000)
Sec. 52-7. PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   Unless otherwise permitted, no sign shall be constructed or erected:
   A.   Which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official
traffic sign or signal or which bears the words “stop”, “go slow”, “caution”,
“danger”, “warning” or similar words used in traffic control;
   B.   Which by reason of its size, location, context, coloring or manner of
illumination may be confused with or construed as a traffic control sign; or
which either hides from view any approved traffic or street sign or signal,
confuses or misleads traffic or obstructs vision necessary for traffic safety;
   C.   Which is structurally unsafe or constitutes a hazard to safety or
health by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation or abandonment or is
capable of causing electrical shocks to persons or vehicles likely to come into
contact with it;
   D.   Which obstructs the ingress or egress from a required door, window,
fire escape or other required exit way;
   E.   Which is unlawfully installed, erected or maintained;
   F.   Which projects into the public right-of-way, excluding signs projecting
eight or more feet above the public right-of-way surface;
   G.   Which is a roof sign erected after the effective date of this chapter;
   H.   Which is not expressly permitted by the chapter or which violates any
provision thereof;
   I.   Which is a portable sign, including “A” or “T” frame signs and signs
mounted on a licensed or unlicensed vehicle parked on private property or
within a public right-of-way, when the vehicle is parked for the purpose of
display;
   J.   Which is erected on a tree or utility pole, except signs of any
political division of this state erected on a utility pole or signs posted by
the utility which owns the pole;
   K.   Which is painted, tacked, posted or otherwise affixed to street
furniture, i.e., trash receptacles, benches, screen walls, lamp posts, etc.
This provision shall not be construed to include uniform municipal banners
attached to street lighting; and/or
   L.   Signs which are obscene or indecent.
(Ord. 308, adopted 2-17-2000)
Sec. 52-8. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   Signs and advertising structures may be permitted for the identification of
premises, for providing information relative to the functions of the premises
or for advertising, subject to the following general guidelines.
   A.   Illumination. Illuminated signs shall be designed, constructed and
installed to comply with the following standards in order to reduce glare and
the general overwash of light to public rights-of-way and residential uses and
to promote the protection of the dark sky.
      1.   Signs shall be illuminated only with a steady, contained, stationary
and shielded light source placed in a manner that the light source is not
exposed to public view from any point on the public street, way or property and
these light sources shall be directed onto or within a sign.
      2.   All illumination shall conform to the State Electrical Codes.
      3.   No colored lights shall be used at any location or in any manner so
as to be confused with or construed as traffic control devices.
      4.   No exposed reflective type bulbs, strobe lighting or incandescent
lamp which exceeds 15 watts shall be used on the exterior surface of any sign
so as to expose the face of the bulb, light or lamp to any public street or
adjacent property.
      5.   With the exception of conforming “enter” and “exit” and “no vacancy”
signs, no sign shall be illuminated between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m. unless the premises upon which the sign is located are open for business
during the hours.
   B.   Neon. Gas filled, side emitting fiber-optic, neon and other light tubes
shall be allowed for both direct and indirect message illumination and for sign
borders, subject to the size, height and location requirements described in
this chapter.
   C.   Interior commercial units. For interior commercial units lacking
building frontage exterior advertising shall be by joint identification only.
If a joint identification sign does not exist, one wall sign, not to exceed one
square foot for each tenant may be used immediately adjacent to, upon or within
the main access way to the interior commercial unit lacking the building
frontage.
   D.   Sign setback. In order to assure visibility to motorists,
notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no sign which exceeds
three feet in height, unless the bottom edge of the sign is at least eight feet
above grade, shall be placed within 20 feet of the edge of the road pavement.
   E.   Signs on fences and walls. Signs displayed upon fences or walls, which
are not an integral part of the building or which are used as fences, shall be
erected or mounted on a plane parallel to the fence or wall, shall not extend
above the top of the fence or wall and shall not project more than 12 inches
from the face of the fence or wall. The signs shall be subject to all
regulations of this chapter applicable to freestanding signs.
(Ord. 308, adopted 2-17-2000)
Sec. 52-9. MASTER SIGNAGE PLAN.
   A.   Plan required. No permit shall be issued for an individual sign unless
an Master Signage Plan (MSP) for the site upon which the sign is to be erected
has been submitted to and approved by the Zoning Administrator as conforming
with this chapter.
   B.   Plan requirements. A MSP submitted for approval shall include the
following elements:
      1.   An accurate site plan, at a scale approved by the Zoning
Administrator, showing the proposed location of every sign and the location of
all buildings, parking areas, driveways and landscape areas on the subject
site;
      2.   An accurate elevation of each building wall intended to accommodate
a sign showing the location, dimensions and height of each sign above grade
level;
      3.   A computation of the maximum permitted area of all signage and the
proposed area of all signs included in the MSP;
      4.   An illustration depicting each proposed sign, its height and
proportions, color scheme, letter style, construction material and type and
intensity of illuminations; and
      5.   The Zoning Administrator may, at his or her discretion, waive any or
all of the above requirements.
(Ord. 308, adopted 2-17-2000)
Sec. 52-10. DISTRICT SIGN REGULATIONS.
   Signs in the districts listed below shall be permitted as stated. Any sign
not expressly permitted is prohibited.
   A.   Signs in residential zoning districts (R-1A, R-1B, R-1C).
      1.   Development entry sign. A single indirectly illuminated wall or
ground mounted development entry sign is permitted for each entrance of a
subdivision. Ground mounted signs shall be setback so that the face of the sign
is not less than five feet from the property line. Development entry signs
shall not exceed five feet in height. The surface display area of the signs
shall not exceed 32 square feet.
      2.   Home occupation sign. Home occupation may have one non-projecting,
non-illuminated, attached walls sign, not exceeding four square feet in surface
display area.
   B.   Signs in multiple-family residential districts (R-2 and R-MH).
      1.   Development entry sign. A single indirectly illuminated wall or
ground mounted development entry sign is permitted for each entrance of a
subdivision. Ground mounted signs shall be setback so that the face of the sign
is not less than five feet from the property line. Development entry signs
shall not exceed five feet in height. The surface display area of the signs
shall not exceed 32 square feet.
      2.   Accessory signs. Accessory signs identifying community facilities or
special uses within the developments shall not exceed ten square feet for each
building or use. No sign shall be located closer than 30 feet to any property
line of adjacent single-family districts.
   C.   Signs in Local Commercial (C-1), Community Service (CS) and Central
Business District (CBD). Total signage shall not exceed a maximum of 30% per
frontage.
      1.   Wall signs. One attached wall sign of 20 square feet or less is
permitted for each business frontage; provided, the following standards are
met:
         a.   The sign pertains exclusively to the business carried on upon the
premises; and
         b.   The sign shall be affixed to the building and shall not project
outward from the wall to which it is attached by more than six inches or shall
not extend above the building facade.
      2.   Group identification sign. One group identification wall sign
identifying the occupants of a commercial building, including upper story
business uses is permitted; provided, the following standards are met:
         a.   The sign is located next to an entrance;
         b.   The sign shall not project outward from the wall to which it is
attached by more than six inches; and
         c.   The area of the sign shall not exceed one square feet for each
tenant.
      3.   Projecting signs. Projecting signs mounted perpendicular to the
building wall; provided, the following standards are met.
         a.   The sign shall not exceed 20 square feet in area.
         b.   The distance from the ground to the lower edge of the sign shall
be eight feet or greater.
         c.   The height of the top edge of the sign shall not exceed the
height of the wall from which the sign projects, if attached to a single story
building or the height of the sill or bottom of any second story window, if
attached to a multi-story building.
         d.   The distance from the building wall to the sign shall not exceed
six inches.
         e.   The width of the sign shall not exceed four feet.
         f.   Only one projecting sign is permitted per business. Projecting
signs are not permitted in conjunction with wall, ground or freestanding signs.
      4.   Window or door signs. Window and door signs are permitted; provided,
the following standards are met.
         a.   The signs shall not exceed 30% of the window or door area.
         b.   The signs shall be done in a professional manner.
         c.   May be in addition to only one of the following: wall sign,
ground sign, projecting sign or a canopy sign.
      5.   Canopy signs. Canopy signs are permitted for ground floor uses only;
provided that, the following standards are met.
         a.    If acting as the main business sign, it shall not exceed 20
square feet in area.
         b.   If acting as an accessory business sign, it shall be located on
the valence only and shall not exceed ten square feet in area.
         c.   Only one canopy sign is permitted for each business to be located
either on the canopy or valence, but not on both.
         d.   The clearance from the ground to the lower edge of the canopy
shall be eight feet or greater.
         e.   Canopy signs shall only include the name of the business.
      6.   Restaurant signage. In addition to other signage, restaurants and
cafés shall be permitted one wall display sign per entrance featuring the
actual menu as used at the dining table, to be contained within a shallow wood
or metal case and clearly visible through a glass front is permitted. The
display cases shall be attached to the building wall and shall not exceed a
total area of four square feet each and may be lighted.
      7.   Freestanding or ground mounted signs. One freestanding or ground
mounted sign shall be permitted on-premises per site in the C-1 and CS
Districts subject to the following.
         a.   The leading edge of the sign may be located no closer than five
feet from the property line.
         b.   The height of any sign shall not exceed 16 feet above adjacent
grade.
         c.   For sites having frontage on more than one street, the number of
freestanding or ground mounted signs permitted may be increased to one on-
premises sign per street frontage with a maximum of two signs.
         d.   Any ground mounted or freestanding sign may be no larger than 50
square feet in surface display area per side.
   D.   Signs in the General Commercial District (C-2). All permitted uses in
C-1 subject to the terms and conditions herein.
      1.   Gasoline service station signs.
         a.   There shall be no signs located on fuel pump islands, except
those constituting an integral part of the pump itself or those required by
state law or regulation. There shall be no signs attached to light standards.
         b.   Only one attached, non-projecting, sign is permitted on each fuel
pump canopy face which is visible from a public street. The signs may only
identify “self-service”, “full service” or the name of the station, in which
case the maximum size shall be 20 square foot in surface display area.
         c.   Gas stations shall also be permitted one gasoline price sign,
except that two price signs, one facing each street, shall be permitted for
stations located at the intersection of two major thoroughfares. The signs
shall not exceed 30 square feet in area. Additional freestanding, ground
mounted and wall signage shall conform to district requirements.
      2.   Business center signage. Business centers occupying a gross floor
area of more than 25,000 square feet shall be allowed signs with surface
display area per side in excess of 100 square feet at a ratio of two additional
square feet of surface display area per side for every additional 1,000 square
feet of building in excess of 25,000 square feet, up to a maximum of 150 square
feet of surface display area per side.
   E.   Signs in manufacturing districts (M-1 and M-2).
      1.   Wall signs. For premises containing only one occupant, one wall or
accessory sign or combination thereof, the total of which shall not exceed an
area of 50 square feet is permitted.
      2.   Group identification signs. Where any premises has more than one
occupant there shall be permitted one accessory ground sign, not to exceed 75
square feet, for group identification and/or to advertise the premises if the
name of the complex is distinct from that of any occupant. In addition, multi-
occupant complexes may identify individual tenants or uses with not more than
one wall sign in accordance with the provisions for the C-2 District.
      3.   Ground mounted signs. Ground mounted signs shall not be located
closer than 100 feet to any adjacent residential district and shall be limited
to one ground sign for any single premises, regardless of the number of
separate tenants or uses within the complex. The sign shall not exceed 50
square feet in display area per side.
      4.   Freestanding signs. Freestanding signs shall be limited to one on-
premises sign per site subject to the following provisions.
         a.   The leading edge of the sign may be located no closer than 20
feet from the street right-of-way. Freestanding signs with a bottom edge that
exceeds eight feet above grade may be located within ten feet of a street
right-of-way.
         b.   The height of any freestanding sign shall not exceed 24 feet
above adjacent grade.
         c.   For sites having frontage on more than one street, the number of
freestanding signs permitted may be increased to one on-premise sign per street
frontage with a maximum of two signs.
         d.   A maximum of 100 square feet of display area is permitted per
side of any freestanding sign.
      5.   Planned unit development (PUD) signs. A sign located in a PUD shall
conform to this chapter and to the requirement of the district in which the
planned unit development is located. Accessory commercial uses as a part of a
PUD must adhere to the C-1, CS and CBD commercial signage regulations.
(Ord. 308, adopted 2-17-2000; Ord. 394, passed 2-27-2023)
Sec. 52-11. BILLBOARDS.
   Off-premises, nonaccessory signs are permitted only in accordance with the
following regulations in the C-2, M-1 and M-2 Districts. All billboards must be
located along a freeway or primary highway (including interstates).
   A.   The signs shall conform to all the requirements of the Highway
Advertising Act of 1972, Public Act 106 of 1972, except where a more
restrictive standard is required by this chapter.
   B.   Given the size and scale of billboards and their potential impact on
adjacent properties, billboards may only be approved by special use permit in
accordance with the standards of hereof.
   C.   Any billboard shall be situated so as to maximize motor vehicle sight
distance, clear view and traffic safety in general, in relation to other
vehicles, pedestrians and signage. Billboard signs shall also be located in a
manner to minimize the destruction of trees, visibility of the billboard and
illumination from residences and any dangerous distraction and thus, hazard, to
motorists, as determined by the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 308, adopted 2-17-2000)
Sec. 52-12. FLAGS AND GRAND OPENING DISPLAYS.
   A.   Flags. Flags of an advertising and nonadvertising nature are permitted
in commercial districts provided the following general conditions are met.
      1.   A permit is approved for all proposed flags.
      2.   No flags may be mounted in the public right-of-way.
      3.   Flag location and size does not constitute a traffic hazard.
      4.   The combined area of all proposed flags will not exceed 20% of the
area of a single face of the principal building on-site.
      5.   Flags which exceed 20% of the area of a single face of the principal
building on-site are permitted by special use permit only subject to the
standards and restrictions of the zoning ordinance.
   B.   Grand opening displays. Temporary grand opening displays may be
permitted for a period not to exceed 30 days for those businesses which are new
to a particular location. The following additional regulations shall apply to
temporary grand opening signs.
      1.   One temporary or portable grand opening sign may be permitted on the
site of the business. The sign shall be no larger than 35 square feet in
surface display area per side.
      2.   Grand opening signs shall be located no closer than ten feet from
the street, right-of-way and in no case shall be closer than five feet to a
public sidewalk.
      3.   Wind-blown devices, such as pennants, flags, spinners and streamers
shall also be allowed on the site of the business advertising a grand opening
for the 30-day time period designated for the grand opening sign.
      4.   A permit is required for temporary grand opening displays. Permits
for this purpose will be issued by the Zoning Administrator.
(Ord. 308, adopted 2-17-2000)
Sec. 52-13. NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   A.   Intent. It is the intent of this section to encourage the eventual
elimination of signs that, as a result of the adoption of this chapter, became
legal nonconforming and to administer this chapter to realize the removal of
illegal nonconforming signs and to avoid any unreasonable invasion of
established private property rights.
      1.   No person shall be required to remove a sign which was erected in
compliance with previous regulations of this chapter if the sign becomes
nonconforming due to a change occurring after adoption of this chapter or in
the location of buildings, streets or other signs, which change, is beyond the
control of the owner of the sign and the premises on which it is located.
      2.   If the owner of a nonconforming sign changes the location of a
building, property line or sign or changes the use of a building so that any
sign on the premises is rendered nonconforming, the sign must be removed or
made to conform to this chapter.
   B.   Lawful existing signs. Any sign lawfully existing at the time of this
chapter which does not fully comply with all provisions shall be considered a
nonconforming sign and may be permitted to remain as long as the sign is
properly maintained and not detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of
the community, but it shall not be:
      1.   Expanded or altered so as to increase the degree of nonconformity of
the sign;
      2.   Re-established after is discontinuance for 90 days; or
      3.   Re-established after damage or destruction, ordinary wear or
obsolescence, if the estimated cost of the reconstruction or renovation exceeds
50% of the replacement sign cost without review by the Planning Commission.
   C.   Erection of additional signs where legal nonconforming signs exist. On
lots where an existing sign exceeds the sign area, sign height or encroaches
into the minimum required setback area allowed by this chapter and in that
respect is a legal nonconforming sign, no new sign, either freestanding or
attached to a building, shall be erected until the existing legal nonconforming
sign is brought into compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 308, adopted 2-17-2000)
Sec. 52-14. REPAIRS OR REMOVAL; NOTICE.
   A.   If the Zoning Administrator finds that any permanent sign is maintained
in violation of this chapter, he or she shall give written notice to the person
(s) entitled to possession of the sign or to the owner(s) of the property where
the sign is located.
   B.   If the person fails to alter or remove the sign so as to comply with
this chapter after receipt of the notice and within the time given in that
notice, the Zoning Administrator may alter or remove the sign at the expense of
the owner or person entitled to possession of the property or sign.
(Ord. 308, adopted 2-17-2000)
Sec. 52-15. APPEALS.
   A.   Any person aggrieved by a decision, ruling or order from the Zoning
Administrator may make an appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals.
   B.   The Board of Zoning Appeals may grant a variance as provided for in the
zoning ordinance.
(Ord. 308, adopted 2-17-2000)
Sec. 52-16. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   A.   Any person (including, but not limited to, any owner, agent-in-charge,
occupant, architect, contractor or builder) who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects or refuses to comply with any provision of this chapter or any
condition or requirement of any permit, certificate, plan, agreement, variance
or other approval or authorization granted under this chapter is responsible
for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not
less than $500, plus costs and other sanctions, for each violation. Repeat
offenses shall be subject to increased fines as provided by the code.
   B.   Any sign, sign structure or device erected, moved, altered, razed or
converted subsequent to the effective date of this chapter or its amendment,
that is in violation of any provision of this chapter or any condition or
requirement of any permit, certificate, plan, agreement, variance or other
approval or authorization granted under this chapter, is declared to be a
nuisance per se and shall be abated by any court of competent jurisdiction.
   C.   For purposes of chapter, the city officials authorized to issue
municipal civil infraction citations and notices include, but are not limited
to, the Building Inspector, the Zoning Administrator and their designated
representatives.
(Ord. 308, adopted 2-17-2000; Ord. 319, adopted 11-26-2001)
Sec. 52-17 TABLE: QUICK REFERENCE SIGN TYPE AND AREA REQUIREMENTS BY ZONING
DISTRICT.
 
Zoning                   Freestanding Ground                    Special
District    Wall Signs   Signs        Mounted      Billboards   Provisions
                                      Signs
            For home                                            See text for
            occupations                                         details about:
            only up to 4                                        development
R-1A, R-1B, square feet  Not          Not          Not          entry,
R-1C        in area not  permitted    permitted    permitted    temporary and
            permitted in                                        signs exempt
            subdivisions                                        from permit
                                                                requirements
                                                                See text for
            Not          Not          Not          Not          development
R-2, R-MH   permitted    permitted    permitted    permitted    entry sign and
                                                                accessory sign
                                                                provisions
            Signage      1 per        1 per
            shall not    business     business
            exceed 20%   road         road                      See text for
            of           frontage in  frontage in               details about:
            unobstructed the C-1 and  the C-l and               group
C-1, CS,    wall or a    CS only. Up  CS only. Up  Not          identification,
CBD         maximum of   to 50 square to 50 square permitted    window, canopy,
            200 square   feet in area feet in area              restaurant and
            feet of the  per side and per side and              sidewalk signs
            total        up to 16     up to 16
            signage per  feet in      feet in
            wall         height       height
            Signage      1 per        1 per
            shall not    business     business
            exceed 20%   road         road         Permitted by See text for
            of           frontage up  frontage up  special use  requirements
            unobstructed to 50 square to 50 square permit along for: gasoline
C-2         wall or a    feet in area feet in area a freeway or service station
            maximum of   per side and per side and primary      and business
            200 square   up to 16     up to 16     highway only center signs
            feet of the  feet in      feet in
            total        height       height
            signage
                                                   Permitted by See text for
            1 sign up to 1 sign per   1 sign per   special use  details about
M-1, M-2    50 square    site up to   site up to   permit along group
            feet in area 100 square   50 square    a freeway or identification
                         feet         feet         primary      signs
                                                   highway only
 
(Ord. 308, adopted 2-17-2000)
CHAPTER 53: ZONING
Section
Preamble
Article I. Title
   
53-1   Short title
Article II. Definitions
   
53-2   Usage
   
53-3   Terms and words defined
Article III. Mapped Districts
   
53-4   Districts
   
53-5   Map
Article IV. R-1A, R-1B, Single-Family Residence District
   
53-6   Statement of purpose
   
53-7   Principal permitted uses
   
53-8   Permitted uses after special approval
   
53-9   Area, height, bulk and placement requirements
Article V. R-1C, Single- and Two-Family Residence District
   
53-10   Statement of purpose
   
53-11   Principal and permitted uses
   
53-12   Permitted uses after special approval
   
53-13   Area, height, bulk and placement requirements
Article VI. R-2, Multiple-Family Residence District
   
53-14   Statement of purpose
   
53-15   Principal permitted uses
   
53-16   Permitted uses after special approval
   
53-17   Screening requirement
   
53-18   Site plan review
   
53-19   Area, height, bulk and placement requirements
Article VII. RMH Residential Mobile Home District
   
53-20   Statement of purpose
   
53-21   Principal uses permitted
   
53-22   Standards and requirements for mobile home parks
   
53-23   Site plan approval
   
53-24   Area, height, bulk and placement requirements
Article VIII. C-1, Local Commercial District
   
53-25   Statement of purpose
   
53-26   Principal permitted uses
   
53-27   Permitted uses after special approval
   
53-28   Required conditions
   
53-29   Site plan review
   
53-30   Area, height, bulk and placement requirements
Article VIII-A. SB, Service Business District
   
53-31   Statement of purpose
   
53-32   Principal permitted uses
   
53-33   Permitted uses after special approval
   
53-34   Buffering and screening requirements
   
53-35   Outside trash containers
   
53-36   Site plan review
   
53-37   Area, height, bulk and placement requirements
Article IX. C-2, General Commercial District
   
53-38   Statement of purpose
   
53-39   Principal permitted uses
   
53-40   Permitted uses after special approval
   
53-41   Site plan review
   
53-42   Area, height, bulk and placement requirements
Article X. CBD, Central Business District
   
53-43   Statement of purpose
   
53-44   Principal permitted uses
   
53-45   Permitted uses after special approval
   
53-46   Site plan review
   
53-47   Area, height, bulk and placement requirements
Article XI. CS, Community Service District
   
53-48   Statement of purpose
   
53-49   Principal permitted uses
   
53-50   Site plan review
   
53-51   Area, height, bulk and placement requirements
Article XII. I, Industrial District
   
53-52   Statement of purpose
   
53-53   Principal permitted uses
   
53-54   Permitted uses after special approval
   
53-55   Industrial performance standards
   
53-56   Compliance with county and state regulations
   
53-57   Site plan review
   
53-58   Area, height, bulk and placement requirements
Article XIII. Reserved
Article XIII-A. P-1, Off-Street Parking District
   
53-66   Intent
   
53-67   Principal uses permitted
   
53-68   Required conditions
   
53-69   Minimum distances and setbacks
   
53-70   Site plan review
Article XIV. Flood Hazard Areas
   
53-71   Statement of purpose
   
53-72   Supplementary definitions
   
53-73   Delineation of the flood hazard area overlay zone; designation of
regulated flood hazard areas
   
53-74   Use and principal structure regulations
   
53-75   Filling and dumping
   
53-76   General standards for flood hazard reduction
   
53-77   Flood hazard area application information
   
53-78   Site plan review
   
53-79   Area, height, bulk and placement requirements
   
53-80   Disclaimer of liability
Article XIV-A. Wellhead Protection Overlay District
   
53-81   Statement of purpose
   
53-82   Supplementary definitions
   
53-83   Principal uses permitted
   
53-84   Permitted uses after special approval
   
53-85   Ground water protection standards
   
53-86   Information required for site plan review
   
53-87   Site plan review
Article XV. Area, Height, Bulk and Placement Requirements
   
53-88   Area, height, bulk and placement requirements
   
53-89   Footnotes to schedule of regulations
   
53-90   Supplementary definitions
Article XVI. General Provisions
   
53-91   Conflicting regulations
   
53-92   Scope
   
53-93   Streets, alleys and railroad rights-of-way
   
53-94   Permitted uses
   
53-95   Permitted area
   
53-96   Permitted height
   
53-97   Zoning lot
   
53-98   Lot area, yards and open space requirements
   
53-99   Projections into yards
   
53-100   Use of yard spaces and other open areas for junk storage
   
53-101   Street access
   
53-102   Visibility
   
53-103   Dwellings in nonresidential districts
   
53-104   One single-family structure per lot
   
53-105   Accessory buildings
   
53-106   Accessory antennas; dish antennas; satellite receiving stations
   
53-107   Parking and storage of campers, trailers and boats
   
53-108   Automobile service stations and public garages
   
53-109   Maintenance of vacant or abandoned buildings
   
53-110   Restoring unsafe buildings
   
53-111   Drive-in establishments
   
53-112   Building grades
   
53-113   Buildings to be moved
   
53-114   Excavations or holes
   
53-115   Excavation, removal and filling of land
   
53-116   Construction begun prior to adoption of ordinance
   
53-117   Voting place
   
53-118   Approval of plats
   
53-119   Essential services
   
53-120   Signs
   
53-121   Radio, television towers
   
53-122   Open air business uses
   
53-123   Historical designation
   
53-124   Minimum landscaping regulations and standards
   
53-125   Fences, walls and other protective barriers
   
53-126   Incinerators and trash containers
   
53-127   Dwelling unit conversions
   
53-128   Site plan review
   
53-129   Bed and breakfast facilities
   
53-130   Special approval use procedure, special approval use permits
   
53-131   Outdoor display of merchandise
   
53-132   Outdoor cafés
   
53-132A   Home occupations
   
53-132B   Animal boarding facilities
   
53-132C   Similar uses
   
53-132D   Keeping of backyard chickens
Article XVII. Planned Unit Development
   
53-133   Objectives for planned unit developments
   
53-134   Provisions governing planned unit developments
   
53-135   Application and procedure
   
53-136   Reserved
   
53-137   Uses permitted
   
53-138   Minimum project area
   
53-139   Project ownership
   
53-140   Common open space
   
53-141   Disposition of open space
   
53-142   Utility requirements
   
53-143   Building site area per single-family dwelling
   
53-144   Buildings sites to abut upon common open space
   
53-145   Height requirements
   
53-146   Parking
   
53-147   Perimeter setbacks
   
53-149   Procedure for approval of PUD District
   
53-150   Pre-application meeting
   
53-151   Contents of application for approval of preliminary development plan
   
53-152   Public hearing by Planning Commission
   
53-153   Notice of public hearing by Planning Commission in newspaper
   
53-154   Notice to property owners by Planning Commission
   
53-155   Approval in principle by Planning Commission
   
53-156   Final development plan
   
53-157   Contents of application for approval of final development plan
   
53-158   Public hearing by Planning Commission
   
53-159   Recommendation by Planning Commission
   
53-160   Criteria for recommendations by Planning Commission
   
53-161   Action by City Council
   
53-162   Supplementary conditions and safeguards
   
53-163   Expiration and extension of approval period
   
53-164   Cluster housing provision for small parcels
Article XVIII. Nonconforming Uses and Buildings
   
53-165   Nonconformance regulated
   
53-166   Nonconforming uses of land
   
53-167   Nonconforming uses of structure
   
53-168   Nonconforming structures
   
53-169   Nonconforming lots of record
   
53-170   Repairs and maintenance; unsafe conditions; nuisance per se
   
53-171   Reconstruction of damaged nonconforming buildings and structures
   
53-172   Moving
   
53-173   Certificate of occupancy
   
53-174   Plans already filed
Article XIX. Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements
   
53-175   Required off-street parking, general
   
53-176   Table of parking requirements
   
53-177   Off-street parking lot layout, construction and maintenance
   
53-178   Off-street waiting area for drive-through facilities
   
53-179   Off-street loading and unloading
Article XX. Board of Zoning Appeals
   
53-180   Intent and purpose
   
53-181   Appointment
   
53-182   Creation and membership
   
53-183   Organization
   
53-184   Jurisdiction
   
53-185   Authorized appeals
   
53-186   Appeal procedures
   
53-187   Administrative variance
   
53-188   Flood hazard area variances
   
53-189   Mapping disputes
   
53-190   Review by Circuit Court
Article XXI. Amendments
   
53-191   Procedure
   
53-192   Protests
   
53-193   Fee
Article XXII. Administration
   
53-194   Building Inspector
   
53-195   Building permit, plat
   
53-196   Certificate of occupancy
   
53-197   Application for certificate
   
53-198   Permit, license applications
   
53-200   Enforcement
   
53-201   Correction order
   
53-202   Floodplain management administrative duties
Article XXIII. Violations and Penalties
   
53-203   Violations and penalties
Article XXIV. Interpretation and Application
   
53-204   Interpretation and application
Article XXV. Severability
   
53-205   Severability
Article XXVI. Enactment and Effective Date
   
53-206   Enactment and effective date
PREAMBLE
   In accordance with the authority and intent of Public Act 207 of 1921, as
amended, the city desires to provide for the orderly development of the city,
which is essential to the well being of the community and which will place no
undue burden upon developers, commerce or residents. The city further desires
to assure the provision of adequate sites for commerce and residences; to
provide for the free movement of vehicles upon the proper streets and highways
of the city; to protect commerce and residences against incongruous and
incompatible uses of land and to promote the proper use of land and natural
resources for the economic well being of the city as a whole; to assure the
provision of adequate space for the parking of vehicles of customers using
commercial and retail areas; and that all uses of land and buildings within the
city be so related as to provide for economy in government and mutual support.
The result of the purposes of this chapter, which relates to the city’s
Comprehensive Development Plan, will promote and protect the public health,
safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare of the residents, shoppers and
workers in the city.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
ARTICLE I. TITLE
Sec. 53-1. SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Zoning Chapter of the
City of Plainwell”.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS
Sec. 53-2. USAGE.
   A.   For the purpose of this chapter, certain numbers, abbreviations, terms
and words used herein shall be used, interpreted and defined as set forth in
this section.
   B.   Unless the context clearly indicated to the contrary, words used in the
present tense include the future tense; words used in the singular number
include the plural; and words used in the plural number include the singular;
the word “herein” means this chapter; and the word “this chapter” shall mean
“the chapter text, tables and maps included herein, as enacted or subsequently
amended”.
   C.   A “person” includes a corporation, a partnership and an unincorporated
association of persons such as a club; “shall” is always mandatory; a building
site includes a plot, lot, footprint or parcel, a “building” includes a
structure; a “building” or “structure” includes any part thereof; “used” or
“occupied” as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the
words “intended, arranged or designed to be used for or occupied”.
   D.   The “City” is the City of Plainwell in the County of Allegan, State of
Michigan; and “City Council,” “Board of Appeals,” and “Planning Commission” are
respectively the City Council, Board of Appeals and Planning Commission of the
City of Plainwell.
   E.   Any words not defined in this chapter shall be construed as defined in
the Housing Law of Michigan, Public Act 167 of 1917, as amended.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-3. TERMS AND WORDS DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING. A detached subordinate building or structure on the same
premises with a main building occupied or devoted to an accessory use which is
appropriate, supplemental and customarily related to that use at the main
building or premises. Where an ACCESSORY BUILDING is attached to a main
building in a substantial manner by a wall or roof, such ACCESSORY BUILDING
shall be considered part of the main building, including a carport, covered
porch or other roofed structure, with the exception that a non-flammable
carport may be abutted or attached to the main building and still be considered
an ACCESSORY BUILDING.
   ACCESSORY USE or ACCESSORY. A use which is clearly incidental to,
customarily found in connection with, and (except in the case of accessory off-
street parking spaces or loading) located on the same zoning lot as, the
principal use to which it is related. When ACCESSORY is used in this text, it
shall have the same meaning as ACCESSORY USE.
      1.   An ACCESSORY USE to a residential principal use includes, but is not
limited to the following:
         a.   Residential accommodations for guests, servants and/or
caretakers;
         b.   Swimming pools for the use of the occupants of a residence, or
their guests;
         c.   Domestic or agricultural storage in a barn, shed, tool room, or
similar accessory building or other structure; and
         d.   HOME OCCUPATIONS as defined herein.
      2.   An ACCESSORY USE to a nonresidential principal use includes, but is
not limited to the following:
         a.   Storage of merchandise normally carried in stock in connection
with a business or industrial use, unless such storage is excluded in the
applicable district regulations;
         b.   Storage of goods used in or produced by industrial uses or
related activities, unless such storage is excluded in the applicable district
regulations;
         c.   Accessory off-street parking spaces, open or enclosed, subject to
the accessory off-street parking regulations for the district in which the
zoning lot is located;
         d.   Uses clearly incidental to a main use such as, but not limited
to: offices of an industrial or commercial complex located on the site of the
commercial or industrial complex; and
         e.   Accessory off-street loading, subject to the off-street loading
regulations for the district in which the zoning lot is located.
   ADULT CARE FACILITIES. A facility for the care of adults, over 18 years of
age, as licensed and regulated by the State under Michigan Public Act 218 of
1979, and rules promulgated by the Michigan Department of Social Services. Such
organizations shall be defined as follows:
      1.   ADULT FOSTER CARE FACILITY. A governmental or non-governmental
establishment  that provides foster care to adults. It includes facilities and
foster care homes for adults who are aged, mentally ill, developmentally
disabled, or physically handicapped who require supervision on an ongoing
basis, but who do not require continuous nursing care. An ADULT FOSTER CARE
FACILITY does not include nursing homes, homes for the aged, hospitals, alcohol
or substance abuse rehabilitation center(s), or a residential center for
persons released from or assigned to a correctional facility.
      2.   ADULT FOSTER CARE SMALL GROUP HOME. A private home with the approved
capacity to receive seven to 12 adults who are provided supervision, personal
care, and protection in addition to room and board, for 24 hours a day, five or
more days a week, and for two or more consecutive weeks for compensation.
      3.   ADULT FOSTER CARE LARGE GROUP HOME. A private home with the approved
capacity to receive at least 13, but not more than 20 adults to be provided
supervision, personal care, and protection in addition to room and board, for
24 hours a day, five or more days a week, and for more than two consecutive
weeks for compensation.
      4.   ADULT FOSTER CARE FAMILY HOME. A private home with the approved
capacity to  receive six or fewer adults to be provided with foster care for
five or more days a week, and for more than two consecutive weeks. The ADULT
FOSTER CARE FAMILY home licensee must be a member of the household and an
occupant of the residence.
   ALLEY. A strip of land over which there is a right-of-way, public or
private, on which generally no dwelling or land uses front, serving as a rear
entrance to one or more properties.
   ALTERATIONS. Any change, addition, or modification in construction of type
of occupancy; and any change in the roof or supporting members of the building
or structure, such as bearing walls, partitions, columns, beams, girders, or
any change which may be referred to herein as “altered” or “reconstructed.”
   ANIMAL. Dog, cat, bird, reptile, mammal, fish or any other living organism,
excluding plants and bacteria.
   ANIMAL SERVICES, ANIMAL CLINIC / HOSPITAL. An establishment used by a
veterinarian where animals are treated. This use may include boarding and
grooming as accessory uses. Also referred to as VETERINARY CLINICS, OFFICES AND
HOSPITALS.
   ANIMAL SERVICES, KENNEL. A commercial facility for the boarding, breeding,
and/or maintaining of animals for a fee that are not owned by the operator.
This use includes pet day care facilities, animal training facilities, and may
include grooming as an accessory use. This use includes the breeding of animals
in outdoor structures, cages or pens for sale, but does not include animals for
sale in pet shops.
   ANIMAL SERVICES, RESCUE OR SHELTER. A facility that keeps four or more
impounded stray, homeless, abandoned, or unwanted animals.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO zone on a community’s Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet where a
clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable, and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. The land in the floodplain within a community
subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
   AUTOMOBILE OR TRAILER SALES AREA. An area used for the display, sale or
rental of new and used recreation vehicles, motor vehicles, boats or trailers,
(including mobile homes) in operable condition and where no repair work is
done.
   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR-MAJOR. Any activity involving the general repair,
rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles, engines, or trailers; collision
services, such as body, frame, or fender straightening and repair, overall
painting and vehicles rustproofing.
   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR-MINOR. Any activity involving minor repairs to motor
vehicles and the incidental replacement of parts of such vehicles. A place
where either gasoline or any other fuel or lubricating oil or grease for
operating motor vehicles is offered for sale to the public and applied directly
into motor vehicles, including sale of accessories, greasing, oiling and minor
automotive repair on the premises.
   AUTOMOBILE WASH ESTABLISHMENT. A building, or portion thereof, the primary
purpose of which is that of washing motor vehicles.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
   BASEMENT or CELLAR. A portion of a building having more than one-half of its
height below grade.
   BED AND BREAKFAST FACILITY. A building, other than a hotel, where lodgings
and light breakfasts for persons, other than family, are regularly served for
compensation.
   BEDROOM. A room or area within a dwelling unit designed and intended to
provide sleeping accommodations for one or more human beings.
   BLOCK. The property abutting one side of a street and lying between the two
nearest intersecting streets (crossing or terminating) or between the nearest
such street and railroad right-of-way, unsubdivided acreage, lake, river or
live stream; or between any of the foregoing and other barrier to the
continuity of development, or corporated boundary lines of the city.
   BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS. The City of Plainwell Board of Zoning Appeals, the
members of which have been duly appointed by the City Council and which is
authorized as a body to interpret, hear appeals, and grant variances only in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   BUILDING. An edifice, framed or constructed and designed to stand more or
less permanently and covering a space of land, for use as a dwelling, store,
storehouse, factory, sign, shelter or for some other useful purpose. BUILDING
in this sense includes a trailer, tent, or vehicle used as a dwelling.
   BUILDING, EXISTING. Any building actually constructed or the construction of
which is started previous to the effective date of this section; provided, that
the construction of any such building continues uninterruptedly and is
completed within six months from such date. Any building damaged by fire,
collapse, or decay to the extent of its full assessed value as of record at the
time of damage shall not be considered an EXISTING BUILDING.
   BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance from the average elevation of the
adjoining grade paralleling the front, or if on a street corner, the front and
side, of the building, to the highest point of the roof surface if the roof is
flat; to the deck line, if the roof is the mansard type; or the average height
between the eaves and the ridge if the roof is gable, hip or gambrel type as is
depicted in the building height requirements illustration provided below.
   BUILDING INSPECTOR. The officer charged with the administration and
enforcement of the building code, or his/her duly authorized representative.
   BUILDING LINE. A line parallel to the front lot line, and which marks the
location of the building.
   BUILDING PERMIT. A permit signifying compliance with the provisions of this
chapter as to use, activity, bulk and density, and with the requirements of all
other development codes and ordinances currently in effect in the city.
   BUILDING SITE. A lot, or a two dimensional condominium unit of land (i.e.
envelope, footprint) with or without limited common element designed for
construction of a principal structure or a series of principal structures plus
accessory building. All BUILDING SITES shall have access to public or private
roads.
   CHURCH. A building used principally for religious worship, but the word
CHURCH shall not include or mean an undertaker’s chapel or funeral building.
   CLINIC. A building or group of buildings where human or animal patients are
admitted, but not lodged overnight, for examination and treatment by more than
one professional, such as a physician, dentist or the like.
   COMMERCIAL USE. The use of property in connection with the purchase, sale,
barter, display, or exchange of goods, wares, merchandise or personal services
or the maintenance of offices or recreational or amusement enterprises. Garage,
rummage, basement, porch, lawn sales and similar sales conducted on residential
premises are deemed a COMMERCIAL USE, if such sales are conducted on more than
two occasions during any consecutive 12 month period or if either of said two
sales lasts for more than three days.
   COMMERCIAL VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle other than a motorcycle or passenger
automobile designed or used primarily for transportation of persons or property
and in excess of 6,000 pounds gross vehicle weight.
   COMMON ELEMENTS. Portions of the condominium project other than the
condominium unit including natural areas, club houses, roads, trails and the
like.
   COMMUNITY PUBLIC SAFETY FACILITY. A public safety facility operated by a
public agency including administrative offices; fire stations; other fire
preventive and fire fighting facilities; and police and sheriff substations and
headquarters, including interim holding facilities. May include ambulance
dispatch on the same site.
   CONDOMINIUM UNIT. That portion of the condominium project designed and
intended for separate ownership and use, as described in the master deed,
regardless of whether it is intended for  residential, office, industrial,
business, recreational, or any other type of use approved by the Michigan
Department of Commerce.
   CONSTRUCTION. The building, erection, alteration, repair, renovation (or
demolition or removal) of any building, structure or structural foundation; or
the physical excavation, filling and grading of any lot other than normal
maintenance shall constitute CONSTRUCTION.
   CONVALESCENT OR NURSING HOME. A home for the care of children or the aged or
infirm, or a place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders wherein seven
or more persons are cared for. Said home shall conform and qualify for license
under state law.
   CREMATORIUM. A facility consisting of one or more cremator furnaces or
cremation retorts for the ashes.
   CURB LEVEL (GRADE). The mean level of the established curb in front of the
building. Where no curb has been established the City Engineer shall determine
the CURB LEVEL after review of topographic information submitted by an
applicant for site plan review.
   DAY CARE FACILITY.
      1.   CHILD CARE CENTER. A facility, other than a private residence,
receiving one or more preschool or school aged children for care for a period
of less than 24 hours a day, and where the parents or guardians are not
immediately available to the child. CHILD CARE CENTER or DAY CARE CENTER
includes a facility which provides care for not less than two consecutive weeks
regardless of the number of hours of care per day. The facility includes child
care center, day care center, day nursery, nursery school, parent cooperative
preschool, play group, or drop in center. Said facilities shall conform and
qualify for license under state law.
      2.   FAMILY DAY CARE HOME. A private home in which one to six minor
children are received for care and supervision for periods of less than 24
hours a day, unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except children related
to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage or adoption. FAMILY DAY
CARE HOME includes a home that gives care to an unrelated minor child for more
than four weeks during a calendar year. Said homes shall conform and qualify
for license under state law.
      3.   GROUP DAY CARE HOME. A private home in which more than six but not
more than 12 minor children are given care and supervision for periods of less
than 24 hours a day unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except children
related to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage, or adoption. GROUP
DAY CARE HOME includes a home that gives care to an unrelated minor child for
more than four weeks during a calendar year. Said homes shall conform and
qualify for license under state law.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.
   DRY CLEANING PLANT. A facility which performs the cleaning or washing of
garments and textiles through use of volatile chemical solvents, agitation,
and/or immersions. Such solvents may include, but are not limited to, solvents
of the petroleum distillate type, the chlorinated hydrocarbon type, and/or
liquid carbon dioxide.
   DWELLING. A house or building, or portion thereof, which is occupied wholly
as the home, residence, or sleeping place by one or more human beings, either
permanently or transiently, but in no case shall a trailer coach, automobile
chassis, tent, or portable building be considered as a DWELLING.
      1.   DWELLING, MULTIPLE. A building used for and as a residence for three
or more families living independently of each other and each having their own
cooking facilities therein, including apartment houses, townhouses, and
apartment hotels, but not including single-family homes.
      2.   DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY. A detached building occupied by one family and
so designed and arranged as to provide living, cooking, and kitchen
accommodations for one family only. Every ONE-FAMILY DWELLING shall have a
minimum width throughout the entire length of the dwelling of 24 feet measured
between the exterior part of the walls having the greatest length.
      3.   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A detached two-family dwelling that is
occupied by two families, each provided with separate facilities for each
family for living accommodations. Also known as a DUPLEX DWELLING.
      4.   DWELLING UNIT. Any building or portion thereof having cooking
facilities, which is occupied wholly as the home, residence, or sleeping place
of one family, either permanently or transiently, but in no case shall a travel
trailer, motor home, automobile chassis, tent, or other portable building be
considered a dwelling in single-family, two-family, or multiple-family
residential areas. In cases of mixed occupancy where a building is occupied in
part as a DWELLING UNIT, the part so occupied shall be deemed a DWELLING UNIT
for the purpose of this chapter and shall comply with the provisions thereof
relative to dwellings.
   EFFICIENCY UNIT. A dwelling unit consisting of one room, exclusive of
bathroom, kitchen, hallway, closets, or dining alcove directly off the
principal room providing not less than 350 square feet of floor area.
   ERECTED. Includes built, constructed, reconstructed, moved upon, and
ERECTING includes any physical operations required for the building on the
premises where the building is being constructed, reconstructed, or moved.
Excavating, filling, draining, and the like, shall be considered a part of
ERECTING.
   ESSENTIAL SERVICE. The erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance by
a public utility, or municipal department, of underground, surface or overhead
gas, communication, telephone, electrical, steam, fuel or water, transmission,
distribution collection, supply, disposal systems, and waste treatment plants.
This includes related poles, wires, pipes, conduit, cables, public safety alarm
and communication equipment, traffic signals, hydrants and similar accessories
that are necessary to furnish adequate service, addressing general public
health, safety, convenience, or welfare. These do not include wireless
telecommunication towers (unless located on public property and used as part of
a municipal emergency communications network); wind energy conversion systems
(WECS); offices, utility buildings, or structures that are enclosures or
shelters for service equipment; or maintenance depots.
   EXCAVATION. Any breaking of ground, except common household gardening and
ground care.
   FAMILY.
      1.   FAMILY, DOMESTIC. One or more persons living together and related by
the bonds of consanguinity, marriage, or adoption, together with servants of
the principal occupants and not more than one additional unrelated person, with
all of such individuals being domiciled together as a single, domestic
housekeeping unit in the dwelling.
      2.   FAMILY, FUNCTIONAL. Persons living together in a dwelling unit whose
relationship is of a permanent and distinct character and is the functional
equivalent of a domestic family with a demonstrable and recognizable bond which
constitutes the functional equivalent of the bonds which render the domestic
family a cohesive unit. All persons of the functional equivalent of the
domestic family must be cooking and otherwise housekeeping as a single
nonprofit unit. This definition shall not include any society, club,
fraternity, sorority, association, lodge, coterie, organization, or group where
the common living arrangements and/or the basis for the establishment of the
functional equivalency of the domestic family is likely or contemplated to
exist for a limited or temporary duration. There shall be a rebuttable
presumption enforced by the building inspector in the first instance that the
number of persons who may reside as a functional equivalent family shall be
limited to six.
   FARM. A plot of land, under one description, having a minimum area of five
acres, used for the raising of livestock and poultry, dairying, horticulture,
sod, forestry, truck gardening and similar bonafide agricultural enterprises or
uses of land and structures.
   FIRST STORY. A first story is the lowest story of a building the ceiling of
which is more than six feet above the average surface elevation of the ground,
or sidewalk adjacent to its exterior walls as is depicted in the structural
terminology illustration provided herein.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/2e5431c07ead2206b6572f578719c54e7c862c99/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2332.png]
 
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      1.   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and
      2.   The unusual and rapid accumulation or run off of surface waters from
any source.
   FLOOD HAZARD AREA. Land which on the basis of available flood plain
information is subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given area.
   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM). An official map of a community, issued by
the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of the areas of
special flood hazards have been designated as Zone A.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community, on which
the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The official report provided by the Federal Insurance
Administration. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the Flood Hazard
Boundary-Floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
   FLOODPLAIN. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any
source (see definition of FLOOD).
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas designated in the FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY which must be reserved in order
to discharge the base flood.
   FLOOR AREA.
      1.   GROSS FLOOR AREA. The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the
several floors of the building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior
walls or from the center line of walls separating two buildings. The FLOOR AREA
of a building which is what this normally is referred to as, shall include the
basement floor area when more than one half of the basement height is above the
established curb level or finished lot grade, whichever is higher (see BASEMENT
definition). Any space devoted to off-street parking or loading shall not be
included in FLOOR AREA. Areas of basements, utility rooms (i.e. where water
heater and furnace are located), breezeways, unfinished attics, porches
(enclosed or unenclosed) or attached garages are not included.
      2.   MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL. For the purpose of computing the
minimum allowable floor area in a multiple-family residential dwelling unit,
the floor area shall be the net floor area exclusive of hallways. NET FLOOR
AREA is the sum of the horizontal areas of the several rooms measured from the
interior faces of the walls of each room. The floor area measurement shall be
exclusive of any common hallways, utility and storage areas, basements,
garages, patios, porches, and balconies.
      3.   ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL. For the purpose of computing the minimum
allowable floor area in a residential dwelling unit the sum of the horizontal
areas of each story of the building shall be measured from the exterior faces
of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two dwellings.
The floor area measurement is exclusive of areas of basements, unfinished
attics, attached garages, breezeways, and enclosed and unenclosed porches.
      4.   USABLE. That area used for or intended to be used for the sale of
merchandise or services, or used to serve patrons, clients, or customers. Such
floor area which is used or intended to be used principally for the storage or
processing of merchandise, hallways, or for utilities or sanitary facilities,
shall be excluded from this computation of USABLE FLOOR AREA. Measurement of
USABLE FLOOR AREA shall be the sum of the horizontal areas of the several
floors of the building, measured from the interior faces of the exterior walls.
   FRONTAGE. The total length along which a parcel of land fronts on a street,
measured along the line where the property abuts the street right-of-way. For
corner lots, this will include two property lines.
   FUNERAL PARLORS OR MORTUARIES. An establishment which provides internment
and funeral services for the dead and their families. Services rendered may
include a prepared wake and funeral and the provision of a chapel for the
funeral. However, this does not include CREMATORIUMS.
   GARAGE, AUTOMOTIVE COMMERCIAL. Any premises available to the public and used
solely for the storage of automobile or motor-driven vehicles, for
remuneration, hire, or sale, where any such vehicles or engines may also be
serviced for operation, or repaired, rebuilt or reconstructed.
   GARAGE, PRIVATE. A building or other structure designed for the housing of
automobiles and having capacity for not more than three automobiles.
   GARAGE, PUBLIC. Any building or premises, other than a gasoline filling
station, used for the housing or care of more than three automobiles, or where
any such automobiles are equipped for operation, repaired or kept for
remuneration, hire, or sale.
   GASOLINE FILLING STATION. A space, structure, building or part of a
building, used for the retail sale, service or supply of motor vehicle fuels,
lubricants, air, water, batteries, tires, other accessories, motor vehicle
washing or lubricating; or customary facilities for the installation of such
commodities in or on such motor vehicles, including special facilities for
minor repair or similar servicing thereof.
   GENERAL OFFICES AND SERVICES.
      1.   BANK/FINANCIAL SERVICES. Includes establishments such as financial
institutions, including, but not limited to: banks, credit agencies, investment
companies, security and commodity exchanges, and ATM facilities.
      2.   BUSINESS SERVICES. Establishments providing direct services to
consumers, including, but not limited to: employment agencies, insurance agent
offices, real estate offices, and travel agencies.
      3.   BUSINESS SUPPORT SERVICES. Establishments providing services to
other businesses, including, but not limited to: computer rental and repair,
copying, quick printing, mailing and mailbox services.
      4.   CONTRACTORS SERVICES. Establishments providing services to other
businesses or consumers where services rendered are typically performed off-
site, including, but not limited to: landscaping and tree removal companies,
plumbing, exterminators, carpet cleaners, and general contractor’s offices
without exterior storage.
      5.   PERSONAL SERVICES. Establishments providing non-medical services to
individuals, including, but not limited to: barber and beauty shops, dry
cleaners, small appliance repair, laundromats, massage therapists, pet grooming
with no boarding, shoe repair shops, tanning salons and funeral homes  (not
including crematory services). These uses may include incidental retails sales
related to the services they provide.
      6.   PROFESSIONAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES. Office-type facilities
occupied by businesses or agencies that provide professional or government
services, or are engaged in the production of intellectual property.
   GOVERNMENT BUILDINGS AND FACILITIES. Buildings, structures and facilities
that may include administrative offices, public works services, libraries,
museums, cemeteries, recreational centers and storage areas for public
equipment and materials for local, county, state  and federal public
adjacencies.
   HALFWAY HOUSE.
      1.   RECOVERY HALFWAY HOUSE. A facility licensed by the Michigan
Department of Public Health to provide substance abuse treatment and support
services in addition to room and board to recovering alcoholics and drug
abusers.
      2.   REHABILITATION HALFWAY HOUSE. A facility licensed by the Michigan
Department  of Corrections or the Federal Bureau of Prisons which provides
supervision and rehabilitation support services in addition to room and board
to criminal offenders.
   HARMFUL INCREASE. An unnaturally high stage on a river, stream or lake which
causes, or, may cause damage to property, threat to life, personal injury, or
damage to land or water resources.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any of the following:
      1.   HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES. As defined in the Comprehensive Environmental
Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980, Pub. Law No. 96-510, 94
State, 2767, as amended; or as defined in Part 201 of Act No. 451 of the
Michigan Public Acts of 1994, as amended; or as defined under other local,
state or Federal laws, rules or regulations.
      2.   HAZARDOUS WASTE. As defined under 40 CFR part 261; or as defined
under Part 111 of Act. No. 451 of the Michigan Public Acts of 1994, as amended;
or as defined under other local, state or Federal laws, rules or regulations.
      3.   PETROLEUM. As described in Part 213 of Act. No. 451 of the Michigan
Public Acts of 1994, as amended.
      4.   TOXIC WASTE or POLLUTANT. Any material defined or listed as a TOXIC
WASTE or POLLUTANT in 40 CFR 401.15; in the Critical Materials Register
promulgated by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality: or under other
local, state or Federal laws, rules or regulations.
      5.   Any substance or material in quantity or form which, in the
determination of the city, poses a substantial present or potential hazard to
human life, health and safety, welfare, property, or the environment, and shall
include, but shall not be limited to, such substances as chemicals, explosives,
oxidizers, peroxides, poisons, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum
products, gases, poisons, etiologic (biologic) agents, flammables and
corrosives.
      6.   Any materials which have otherwise been declared hazardous by any
state or Federal agency.
   HOME OCCUPATION AND BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS.
      1.   HOME BUSINESS. The rendering of a service or the assembling of a
product conducted entirely within the home (not including accessory structures)
by one or more members of the family residing on the premises plus up to a
maximum of two on-premise(s) employees at one time; provided that not more than
25% of the home’s total floor area is used for the HOME BUSINESS (including the
basement), there is no outdoor storage or display of goods, materials, or
finished products, there is no external advertising, and the nature of the
business will not alter the general character of the immediate area and
neighborhood.
      2.   HOME OCCUPATION. Any occupation or profession carried entirely
within the home (not including accessory structures) by one or more members of
the family residing on the premises; provided that no commodity or service
other than those customarily associated with the business is sold or provided
on the premises; provided further that not more than one on-premise(s) person
other than a member of the immediate family residing on the premises is
employed at one time; no mechanical equipment is installed except such as is
normally used for purely domestic or household purposes; not more than 20% of
the home’s total floor area (not including basement area) is used for the
occupation or the profession; the HOME OCCUPATION does not detract from the
residential character of the immediate neighborhood. Beauty shops, nursery
schools, private schools, and photography studios are not considered to be HOME
OCCUPATIONS.
   INSTITUTIONAL USES. Churches, schools, hospitals, and other similar public
or semipublic uses. This excludes nursing homes, convalescent homes, adult
foster care facilities.
   LABORATORY. A place devoted to experimental, routine study or basic study
such as testing and analytical operations, and which manufacturing of product
or products, except prototypes for testing market, is not performed.
   LAND USE PLAN, OFFICIAL. The plan so designated by the Planning Commission.
   LIMITED COMMON ELEMENTS. A portion of the common elements reserved in the
master deed for the exclusive use of less than all of the co-owners.
   LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS (LPG) SALES. An establishment providing LPG
dispensing and bulk containers for sale.
   LOADING BERTH. An off-street space on the same lot with a building or group
of buildings, for temporary parking for a commercial vehicle while loading or
unloading merchandise or materials. Off-street loading space is not to be
included as off-street parking space in computation of required off-street
parking. A loading space is 528 square feet in area.
   LODGING HOUSE. A building or part thereof, other than a hotel, including so
called tourist homes, where lodgings are provided for hire, more or less
transiently, and with or without provision for meals. A LODGING HOUSE does not
include a bed and breakfast facility.
   LOT. A measured portion of a parcel or tract of land which is described and
fixed in a recorded plat and having frontage on a public street or road either
dedicated to the public or designated on a recorded subdivision.
      1.   LOT AREA. Area of a lot bounded by lot lines.
      2.   LOT, CORNER. A lot located at the intersection of two roadways that
has frontage on each roadway. A CORNER LOT, the side yard of which is
substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the lot to its rear shall
be regarded as having two front yards.
      3.   LOT COVERAGE. The amount of a lot, stated in terms of percentage,
that is covered by all roofed buildings and/or structures located thereon. This
shall be deemed to include all buildings, porches, arbors, breezeways, patio
roofs, and the like, whether open box-type and/or lathe roofs, or fully roofed
but shall not be deemed to include fences, walls, or hedges used as fences, or
swimming pools.
      4.   LOT LINE. A boundary line of a lot.
      5.   LOT LINE, FRONT. The exterior line or right-of-way of a road on
which a lot fronts or abuts.
      6.   LOT LINE, REAR. Any lot line, other than a front lot line, which is
parallel or nearly parallel to the front lot line.
      7.   LOT LINE, SIDE. Any lot line not a front or rear lot line.
      8.   LOT OF RECORD. A lot which actually exists in a subdivision plat as
shown on the records of the County Register of Deeds, or a lot or parcel
described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded.
      9.   LOT, ZONING. A single tract of land, located within a single block,
which at the time of filing for a building permit, is designated by its owner
or control. A ZONING LOT shall satisfy this chapter with respect to area, size,
dimensions, and frontage as required in the district in which the zoning lot is
located. A ZONING LOT therefore, may not coincide with a lot of record as filed
with the County Register of Deeds, but may include one or more lots of record.
      10.   LOT WIDTH. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines
measured at right angles (90 degrees). Where the front lot line is not a
straight line, or when the side lot lines are not parallel, the lot frontage
shall be measured by a line equal to the front yard setback from and parallel
to the chord of the lot frontage. (The chord of the lot frontage is a straight
line joining the two points where the side lot lines intersect the front lot
line).
   MANUFACTURING, PROCESSING, AND PACKAGING - LIGHT. A facility accommodating
manufacturing processes involving less intense levels of fabrication and/or
production such as the assembly, fabrication, and conversion of already
processed raw materials into products, where the operational characteristics of
the manufacturing processes and the materials used are unlikely to cause
significant impacts on surrounding land uses or the community. The premises may
include secondary retail or wholesale sales. Examples of light manufacturing
uses include: artisan/craft product manufacturing; clothing and fabric product
manufacturing; electrical equipment, instrument, and appliances, food
preparation and packaging; furniture and fixtures manufacturing, cabinet shop,
media production, pharmaceutical drugs; photo/film processing lab not accessory
to a retail business; and printing and publishing. Also includes associated
office and administrative space and services.
   MANUFACTURING, PROCESSING, AND PACKAGING - HEAVY. A facility accommodating
manufacturing processes that involve and/or produce basic metals, building
materials, chemicals, fabricated metals, paper products, machinery, textiles,
and/or transportation equipment, where the intensity and/or scale of operations
may cause significant impacts on surrounding land uses or the community.
Examples of heavy manufacturing uses include the following: chemical product
manufacturing; concrete, gypsum, and plaster product manufacturing; glass
product manufacturing; paving and roofing materials manufacturing; petroleum
refining and related industries; plastics, other synthetics, and rubber product
manufacturing; primary metal industries; pulp and pulp product manufacturing;
textile and leather product manufacturing, wineries, distilleries, and
breweries. Also includes associated offices and administrative space and
services.
   MEZZANINE. An intermediate floor in any story not to exceed 50% percent of
the floor area of such story.
   MINI-WAREHOUSE/SELF-STORAGE. A building or group of buildings in a
controlled access and/or fenced compound that contains varying sizes of
individualized, compartmentalized and controlled access rooms, stalls or
lockers for the storage of customer’s goods or wares.
   MINING OPERATION. The mining, removal, loading, filling, processing and/or
transporting of topsoil, sand, stones, rocks, clay, gravel, or other earth
minerals on, to, or from a lot, tract or parcel, and including the incidental
maintenance of machinery or equipment used in connection with such mining or
fill operation. Minor alterations of the grade elevation by cutting or filling
earth (not to exceed 300 cubic yards of material) for noncommercial purposes,
such as preparing land for construction, shall not constitute a mining or fill
operation.
   MINOR OR LOCAL STREET. A street of limited continuity used primarily for
access to abutting residential properties.
   MOBILE HOME. A factory assembled portable structure designed or used for
year-round living, designed and built to be towed on its own chassis, connected
to utilities, and installed on a home site with or without a permanent
foundation. A MOBILE HOME may also be two or more separately towable components
designed to be joined into one integral structure capable of being separated
into components for repeated towing. (For MODULAR HOME DEFINITION, see below).
   MOBILE HOME PARK. Any lot, site, parcel, or tract of land under the control
or management of any person, upon which two or more mobile homes are parked, or
which is offered to the public for that purpose, regardless of whether the
charge is made for the use of the housing site, and including any building,
structure, tent, vehicle, or enclosure used for or intended to be used as part
of the equipment of such mobile home park.
   MODULAR. A structure which meets the requirements of the Plainwell Building
Code, and which is transported in one or more sections on a removable chassis,
and is designed to be used on a permanent foundation, when connected to the
required utilities, such as plumbing, heating, and electrical systems.
   MOTEL or MOTOR HOTEL. A building or a series of attached, semi-detached, or
detached rental units providing long term or transient lodging with motor
vehicle parking in an area contiguous to the building. No kitchen or cooking
facilities are to be provided without the approval by the City Council with the
exception of units for use of the manager and/or caretaker.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction commenced
on or after the effective date of this chapter.
   NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD (SUBSTANDARD LOT). A lot lawfully existing at
the effective date of this chapter, or affecting amendment, and which fails to
meet the minimum area requirements of the zoning district in which it is
located.
   NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE. A structure, or portion thereof, lawfully existing
at the effective date of this chapter, or affecting amendment, and which fails
to meet the minimum yard setback requirements of the zoning district in which
it is located.
   NONCONFORMING USE. A use lawfully existing in a building or on land at the
effective date of this chapter, or affecting amendment, and which fails to
conform to the use regulations of the zoning district in which it is located.
   NUISANCE. Embraces public nuisance as known at common law or in equity
jurisprudence; and whatever is dangerous to human life or detrimental to the
public health, safety, welfare, or the environment; and any dwelling or
building which is overcrowded with occupants or is not provided with adequate
ingress or egress to or from the same, or is not sufficiently supported,
ventilated, sewer-aged, drained, cleaned or lighted in reference to its
intended or actual use; and the presence of hazardous materials in a quantity
which is or may become injurious to the public health, safety, or welfare, or
the environment; and whatever renders the land, water, air or human food or
drink unwholesome, are also severally, in contemplation of this chapter,
nuisances and all such nuisances are declared illegal.
   OFF-STREET PARKING LOT. A facility providing vehicular parking spaces along
with adequate drives and aisles, for maneuvering, so as to provide access for
entrance and exit for the parking of more than three vehicles.
   OPEN AIR BUSINESS. Includes the following:
      1.   Retail sale of trees, shrubbery, plants, flowers, seed, topsoil,
humus, fertilizer, trellises, lawn furniture, playground equipment, and other
home garden supplies and equipment;
      2.   Sidewalk cafes;
      3.   Retail sale of fruits and vegetables;
      4.   Tennis courts, archery courts, shuffleboard, horseshoe courts,
miniature golf, golf driving range, children’s amusement park and/or similar
recreation uses;
      5.   Bicycle, utility truck or trailer, motor vehicles, boats or home
equipment sale; rental or repair services; and
      6.   Outdoor display and sale of garages, swimming pools, motor homes,
mobile homes, snowmobiles, farm implements, and similar products.
   OPEN FRONT STORE. A business establishment so developed that service to the
patron may be extended beyond the walls of the structure, not requiring the
patron to enter the structure. The term OPEN FRONT STORE shall not include
automobile repair stations or automobile service stations.
   ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK. The line between upland and lake or stream bottom
land which persists through successive changes in water levels, and below which
the presence and action of the water is so common or recurrent as to mark upon
the soil a character, distinct from that which occurs on the upland.
   OUTDOOR DISPLAY, SALES. The outdoor placement, storage or keeping, for
display purposes, of equipment, vehicles, trailers and other similar goods for
sale on premises.
   OUTDOOR STORAGE. The outdoor placement of goods such as, building or
construction materials, equipment, vehicles, trailers and other supplies, for
future use,  production, assembly, preservation or disposal.
   PARCEL. A tract or continuous area or acreage of land which is occupied or
intended to be occupied by a building, series of buildings, accessory building
(s), condominium units, or by any other use or activity permitted thereon and
including open spaces and setbacks required under this chapter, and having its
frontage on a public or private street.
   PARKING FACILITY, PUBLIC OR COMMERCIAL. A public or commercial parking lot
or structure providing parking either for free or for a fee. Does not include
towing impound and storage facilities.
   PARKING SPACE. An area of definite length and width, said area shall be
exclusive of drives, aisles or entrances giving access thereto, and shall be
fully accessible for the parking of permitted vehicles. Perpendicular and angle
parking spaces shall have a minimum dimension of nine by 20 feet. Parallel
parking shall be a minimum of eight by 20 feet in dimension.
   PAVED ROAD OR STREET, PRIVATE. A private right-of-way reserved for the use
of the occupants of the abutting structures. Said PRIVATE STREET shall not be
accepted by the city for maintenance in any form and shall have a minimum 22
foot paved width.
   PLANNING COMMISSION. The City of Plainwell Planning Commission and shall
have all powers granted under authority of Act 33 of the Public Acts of 2008,
as amended, and as provided in this chapter.
   PUBLIC UTILITY BUILDINGS AND USES. See ESSENTL4L SERVICE.
   RECREATION FACILITY: COMMERCIAL INDOOR. An establishment providing indoor
amusement and entertainment services, often for a fee or admission charge,
including, but not limited to: bowling alleys, commercial health and fitness
facilities, coin-operated amusement arcades, movie theaters, electronic game
arcades (video games, pinball, and the like), indoor ice skating and roller
skating rinks, pool and billiard rooms as primary uses. Does not include adult-
oriented businesses. May include bars and restaurants as accessory uses. Any
establishment with four or more electronic games or amusement devices (e.g.,
pool or billiard tables, pinball machines, and the like) or a premise where 50%
or more of the floor area is occupied by electronic games or amusement devices
is considered an indoor recreation facility; three or fewer machines or devices
are not considered a use separate from the primary use of the site.
   RECREATION FACILITY: COMMERCIAL OUTDOOR. A facility for outdoor recreational
activities where a fee is often charged for use. Examples include, but are not
limited to, amusement and theme parks; go-cart tracks; golf driving ranges;
miniature golf courses; watercraft rentals; and water parks. May also include
commercial facilities customarily associated with the above outdoor commercial
recreational uses, including bars and restaurants, video game arcades, and the
like. This use does not include golf courses or campgrounds.
   RECREATION VEHICLES. A vehicle primarily designed as temporary living
quarters or recreational, camping, or travel purposes, including a vehicle
having its own motor power or a vehicle mounted on or drawn by another vehicle
(Act 419, Michigan P.A. of 1976, as amended).
   REPAIRS. The rebuilding or renewal of a part of an existing building for the
purpose of maintaining its original type and classification.
   RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT FACILITY. Any facility that is involved in the
inquiry, examination, investigation or experimentation aimed at the discovery
and/or interpretation of facts, revision of accepted theories or laws in the
light of new facts, or practical application of such new or  revised theories
of laws and the development thereof. DEVELOPMENT may include a limited number
of test units of a given product resulting from such research and shall include
limited production while a product is being test-marketed which is the interim
step between full research and development and ultimate full scale production.
   RESTAURANT. A business establishment whose method of operation involves
either the delivery of prepared food by servers to customers seated at indoor
or outdoor areas, or prepared food is acquired by customers at a counter or
cafeteria line and consumed at tables within a completely enclosed building,
but does not include drive-through services, which are separately defined and
regulated. Service of alcoholic beverages by the drink is incidental to the
service of food and food receipts exceed 50% of sales.
      1.   BAR/LOUNGE/TAVERN. A structure or part of a structure designed,
maintained, and operated primarily for the dispensing of alcoholic beverages.
The selling of food and snacks may also be permitted. If the BAR/LOUNGE/TAVERN
is part of a larger dining facility, it shall be defined as that part of the
structure so designated and/or operated.
      2.   RESTAURANT WITH DRIVE-THROUGH. A business establishment whose method
of operation involves the delivery of prepared food to the customer in a motor
vehicle, typically through a drive-through window, for consumption off the
premises. A drive-through restaurant may also have indoor or outdoor seating.
      3.   RESTAURANT WITH OUTDOOR DINING. A restaurant with seating on a
sidewalk, patio, deck or other on-site outdoor location.
   ROAD OR STREET, PUBLIC. A public right-of-way of 66 feet or more in width
which has been dedicated for the purposes of providing access to abutting
private lots of land including the space for pavement and sidewalks.
   SALVAGE OR IMPOUND OPERATIONS. Any land or structure used for storing,
dismantling, reconditioning, collecting, purchasing or selling of scrap metal
or other discarded goods and materials, including the collection, dismantlement
and salvage of two or more inoperative vehicles, boats, trucks, or other types
of machinery or equipment, or the impounding of any operable or inoperable
vehicle associated with towing or wrecker services.
   SCHOOL, SPECIALIZED TRAINING. Small-scale facilities that provide individual
and group instruction, education and/or training, including tutoring and
vocational training in. limited subjects, including, but not limited to: the
arts, dance, photography, martial arts training, gymnastics instruction,
production studios for individual musicians, painters, sculptors,
photographers, and other artists, business and vocational schools, and driver
education schools.
   SETBACK. The minimum horizontal distance a foundation or wall of a building
or structure or any portion thereof is required to be located from the
boundaries of a lot, parcel, building site of land, building, or road upon
which the same is situated.
   SHED. A lightly constructed one or two story building for temporary use
during the erection of a permanent building; or a light one story structure
attached to, or auxiliary to another building and intended for storage only.
   SHOPPING CENTER. A retail commercial establishment or a group of retail
establishments which is planned, developed, owned and managed as a unit, with
off-street parking provided on the property and related in its location, size
and type of shops to the trade area.
   SIGN. Any announcement, declaration, display, illustration or insignia used
to advertise or promote the interests of any person or product when the same is
placed out-of-doors in view of the general public.
   SITE CONDOMINIUM PROJECT. A plan or project consisting of not less than two
single family units established in conformance with the Michigan Condominium
Act P.A. 59 of 1978, as amended.
   SPECIAL USE PERMIT. A use permitted only where specified facts and
conditions, detailed in this chapter, are found to exist. The facts and
conditions set forth in this chapter for the exception must be met without
modification or alteration, unless a variance, as hereinafter defined, is
obtained pursuant to the provisions of § 
53-130.
   STRUCTURAL CHANGES OR ALTERATIONS. Any change in the supporting members of a
building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders, or any substantial
change in the roof.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building that is principally above ground,
including gas or liquid storage facilities and mobile homes.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. 
      1.   Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost
of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure either:
         a.   Before the improvement or repair is started; or
         b.   If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before
the damage occurred.
      2.   For the purposes of this definition, SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however,
include either:
         a.   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with
existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
         b.   Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places.
   SWIMMING POOL. Any structure or container, either above or below grade,
located either in part or wholly outside a permanently enclosed and roofed
building, designed to hold water to a depth of greater than 12 inches when
filled to capacity, intended for immersion of the human body, whether for
swimming or wading or both. Outdoor hot tubs would be included in this
definition.
   TEMPORARY BUILDING OR USE. A structure or use permitted by the Building
Inspector to exist during periods of construction of the main use or for
special events, not to exceed six months. Two extension periods of six months
each are allowed.
   TOWNHOUSES. A row of three or more attached one-family dwellings, not more
than two and one-half stories in height and for which there is an entrance to
each dwelling. TOWNHOUSE shall not be used as a synonym for the term
CONDOMINIUM UNIT which refers to how property or space is owned rather than for
a particular housing style.
   TRAILER. Includes any trailer coach, motor home, tent camper, demountable
camper, or unit designed as a vacation unit for short-term seasonal occupancy,
which measures nine feet or less in width, and 35 feet or less in length, which
is designed to be operated on highways, which is in good running condition and
which complies with all requirements of state law for licensing of such
vehicles.
   USE. The principal purpose for which land or a building is arranged,
designed or intended, or for which land or a building is or may be occupied.
   VARIANCE. A varying or relaxation of the standards of the zoning chapter by
the Board of Zoning Appeals; and where such VARIANCES will not be contrary to
the public interest; and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property
and not the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of
the chapter would result in practical difficulty.
   VEHICLE SALES AND RENTAL: AUTOMOBILES, LIGHT TRUCKS, BOATS. A retail or
wholesale establishment selling and/or renting automobiles, light trucks (less
than two-ton load capacity), vans, trailers, boats, and/or any other motorized
or non-motorized vehicles (e.g. scooters, jet skis, golf carts, motorcycles)
that includes outdoor display. May also include repair shops and the sales of
parts and accessories incidental to vehicle dealerships. Does not include
businesses dealing exclusively in selling used parts, auto wrecking and/or
salvage (see SALVAGE OR IMPOUND OPERATIONS); the sale of auto parts/accessories
separate from a vehicle dealership; or service stations (see GASOLINE FILLING
STATIONS).
   VEHICLE SALES AND RENTAL: HEAVY EQUIPMENT, HEAVY TRUCKS, RVS, MANUFACTURED
HOMES. A retail or wholesale establishment selling and/or renting heavy
equipment and/or trucks, RVs, or mobile homes. May also include accessory
repair shops.
   VEHICLE WASH. A building or portion of a building with machine or hand-
operated facilities used principally for the cleaning, washing, polishing or
waxing of motor vehicles.
   VEHICLE WASH, TRUCKS AND HEAVY EQUIPMENT. A building or portion of a
building with machine or hand-operated facilities used principally for the
cleaning, washing, polishing or waxing of trucks and heavy equipment.
   VETERINARY CLINICS, OFFICES AND HOSPITALS. See ANIMAL SERVICES, ANIMAL
CLINIC /HOSPITAL.
   WALL, OBSCURING. A structure of definite height and location to serve as an
obscuring screen in carrying out the requirements of this chapter.
   WAREHOUSING. Facilities for the storage of furniture, household goods, or
other commercial goods of any nature. May include an outdoor storage component,
provided that the outdoor storage is not the primary use. Does not include
mini-storage facilities offered for rent or lease to the general public (see
MINI-WAREHOUSE/SELF-STORAGE) or warehouse facilities primarily used for
wholesaling and distribution (see WHOLESALING AND DISTRIBUTION).
   WASTE MANAGEMENT FACILITY. A site used for collecting waste and recyclables,
sorting and transferring materials.
   WHOLESALING AND DISTRIBUTION. An establishment engaged in selling
merchandise in bulk quantities to retailers; to contractors, industrial,
commercial, agricultural, institutional, or professional business users; to
other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers in buying merchandise for or
selling merchandise to such persons or companies.
   WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY. All structural facilities, attached or
accessory, related to the radio frequency spectrum for the purpose of
transmitting or receiving radio signals, including radio and television towers;
cellular telephone and paging devices; telephone devices and exchanges;
microwave relay towers; telephone transmission equipment buildings; and
commercial mobile radio service facilities. (Not included are facilities for
citizen band radio; short wave radio; ham and amateur radio; television
reception antennae; satellite dishes; and government facilities which are
subject to state and Federal law.) WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES shall be
specifically excluded from the definitions of ESSENTIAL SERVICES and PUBLIC
UTILITIES.
   WIRELESS COMMUNICATION SUPPORT STRUCTURE. Any structure used to support
attached  wireless communication facilities, or other antennae or facilities,
including support lines, cables, wires, braces, and masts intended primarily
for the purpose of mounting an attached wireless communication facility or
similar apparatus above grade, including any ground or roof-mounted pole,
monopole, or similar structure which support wireless communication facilities.
   YARD. A yard is an open space, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground
upwards, except as otherwise provided herein, and on the same lot with a
building. The measurement of a YARD shall be the minimum horizontal distance
between the lot line and the building or structure.
      1.   FRONT YARD. A yard on the same lot with a building between the front
line of the building and the front lot line and extending from one side lot
line to the other side lot line.
      2.   REAR YARD. The same lot with a building between the rear line of the
building and the rear lot line and extending from one side lot line to the
other side lot line.
      3.   REQUIRED YARD. The portion of any lot on which the erection of a
main building is prohibited.
      4.   SIDE YARD. The same lot with a building between the side lot line
and the nearest side line of the building and extending from the rear yard to
the front yard.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981; Ord. 350, adopted 6-22-2009; Ord. 358, adopted 4-11-
2011; Ord. 361, adopted 9-12-2011; Ord. 373, passed 10-26-2015; Ord. 379,
passed 3-7-2018; Ord. 389, passed 12-28-2020)
ARTICLE III. MAPPED DISTRICTS
Sec. 53-4. DISTRICTS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the city is divided into the following
districts:
   A.   R-1A, R-1B: Single-Family Residence District;
   B.   R-1C: Single- and Two-Family Residence District;
   C.   R-2: Multiple-Family Residential District;
   D.   R-MH: Planned Mobile Home District;
   E.   C-1: Local Commercial District;
   F.   C-2: General Commercial District;
   G.   CBD: Central Business District;
   H.   CS: Community Service District;
   I.   I: Industrial District;
   J.   FP: Floodplain District.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981; Ord. 379, passed 4-9-2018)
Sec. 53-5. MAP.
   A.   The boundaries of these districts are shown upon the map attached
hereto and made a part of this chapter, which map is designated as the Zoning
Map of the city. The Zoning Map attached hereto and on file in the office of
the Clerk of the city and all notations, references and other information shown
thereon are a part of this chapter and have the same force and effect as if the
Zoning Map and all notations, references and other information shown thereon
were fully set forth or described herein.
   B.   Except where reference on the map to a street or other designated line
by the dimensions shown on the map, the district boundary lines follow lot
lines or the centerlines of the streets or alleys or the lines extended and the
corporate limits of the city, as they existed at the time of the adoption of
this chapter.
   C.   Where a district boundary line, as established in this section or as
shown on the Zoning Map, divides a lot which was in a single ownership and of
record at the time of enactment of this chapter, the use authorized thereon and
the other district requirements applying to the least restricted portion of the
lot, under this chapter shall be considered as extending to the entire lot;
provided that, the more restricted portion of the lot is entirely within 25
feet of the dividing district boundary line. The use so extended shall be
deemed to be conforming.
   D.   Questions concerning the exact location of district boundary lines
shall be determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals after recommendation from
the City Planning Commission, according to rules and regulations which may be
adopted by it.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Editor’s note:
   To view the map, please see the copy on file in the Clerk’s office.
ARTICLE IV. R-1A, R-1B, SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
Sec. 53-6. STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   The Single-Family Residence District is established as a district in which
the principal use of land is for single-family dwellings. For the Single-Family
Residential District, in promoting the general purpose of this chapter, the
specific intent of this section is:
   A.   To encourage the construction of and the continued use of the land for
single-family dwellings;
   B.   To prohibit business, commercial or industrial use of the land and to
prohibit any other use which would substantially interfere with development or
continuation of single-family dwellings in the district;
   C.   To encourage the discontinuance of existing uses that would not be
permitted as new uses under the provisions of this chapter; and
   D.   To discourage any land use which would generate traffic on minor or
local streets other than normal traffic generated by the residences on those
streets.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-7. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   In the R-1A and R-1B Districts, no uses shall be permitted unless otherwise
provided in this chapter, except the following:
   A.   Single-family detached dwellings;
   B.   Publicly owned and operated parks, playfields, museums, libraries and
other recreation facilities; provided that, any building shall be located not
less than 20 feet from any other lot in any residence district;
   C.   Public, parochial or private elementary, intermediate and/or high
schools offering courses in general education, not operated for profit;
provided that, the building shall be located not less than 20 feet from any
other lot in any residence district;
   D.   Municipal, state or federal administrative or service buildings;
provided that, the buildings shall be located not less than 20 feet from any
other lot in a residence district;
   E.   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above
principal permitted uses;
   F.   Off-street parking in accordance with the requirements of Article XIX;
   G.   Family day care homes; and
   H.   Home occupations as defined in § 53-3 and in accordance with the
requirements of § 53-132A of this chapter.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981; Ord. 359, adopted 5-9-2011)
Sec. 53-8. PERMITTED USES AFTER SPECIAL APPROVAL.
   The following uses shall be permitted subject to the conditions hereinafter
imposed and subject further to the approval of the City Council after
recommendation from the City Planning Commission:
   A.   Private parks, country clubs, golf courses and golf driving ranges,
when located on a parcel of five acres or more in area; any structure on the
parcel shall be located at least 200 feet from the lot line of any adjacent
residential district;
   B.   Public utility buildings, telephone exchange buildings, electric
transformer stations and substations and gas regulator stations, but not
including storage yards, when operating requirements necessitate location
within the District to serve the immediate vicinity and the use is not
injurious to the surrounding neighborhood;
   C.   Day care facilities, including child care centers, family day care
homes and group day care homes (not including dormitories); provided that, for
each child so cared for, there shall be provided and maintained a minimum of
200 square feet of outdoor play area. The play area shall have a total minimum
area of at least 1,000 square feet. Outdoor advertising shall not exceed three
square feet in area;
   D.   Cemeteries adjacent to or an extension of existing cemeteries, subject
to the following conditions:
      1.   The site shall be so located as to have at least one property line
abutting a major thoroughfare. All ingress and egress to the site shall be
directly onto a major thoroughfare; and
      2.   Any structure located on the site shall be at least 100 feet from
any lot line.
   E.   Temporary buildings for use incidental to construction work for a
period not to exceed one year;
   F.   Dwelling unit conversions subject to the requirements of this section
and to the requirements of § 
53-127;
   G.   Churches and other facilities normally incidental thereto, subject to
the following conditions.
      1.   Minimum lot width shall be 150 feet.
      2.   Minimum lot area shall be two acres.
      3.   The lot location shall be such that at least one property line abuts
a collector street, secondary thoroughfare or major thoroughfare.
      4.   No building shall be located less than 20 feet from any other
residentially zoned district.
      5.   For every foot of height by which the building, exclusive of spire,
exceeds the maximum height limitation for the district, an additional foot of
front, side and rear yard setback shall be provided.
      6.   A suitable buffer (masonry wall or planting strip) shall be provided
whenever parking lots abut a residentially zoned district. The buffer shall be
approved by the City Council.
   H.   Bed and breakfast facilities subject to the requirements of this code;
   I.   Medical offices, dental offices, chiropractic offices, (not including
immediate health care facilities), veterinary clinics, including a dwelling
unit suitable for a caretaker, when located on a site of a single-family
dwelling, subject to the following conditions.
      1.   Minimum lot size shall be three acres.
      2.   Minimum lot frontage shall be 200 feet.
      3.   The lot shall have frontage on a collector street, secondary
thoroughfare or major thoroughfare.
      4.   There shall be a minimum setback of 60 feet between the building and
any adjacent residentially zoned property.
      5.   Off-street parking requirements shall be in accordance with Article
XIX.
      6.   Any clinic or office must be architecturally compatible with the
design of the dwelling unit.
      7.   One sign, not exceeding six square feet in area, may be permitted.
      8.   Landscaped buffers or areas may be required on certain locations on
the site in order to reduce any anticipated negative impacts on adjacent
properties.
      9.   Maximum lot coverage of all buildings and structures on the site,
excluding swimming pools, shall not exceed 30%.
      10.   Upon the sale or transfer of the business on the property, the new
proprietor must apply for re-issuance of the special exception use permit.
During the permitting process, the new proprietor shall be made aware of the
necessity for compliance with all of the conditions of this section.
   J.   Group day care home, subject to the following conditions:
      1.   A group day care home shall not be located closer than 1,500 feet to
any of the following facilities, as measured along a street, road or other
public thoroughfare, excluding an alley:
         a.   Another licensed group day care home;
         b.   An adult care large group home licensed by the state;
         c.   A state-licensed facility offering substance abuse treatment and
rehabilitation services to seven or more people; and
         d.   A community correction center, resident home, halfway house or
other similar facility which houses an inmate population under the jurisdiction
of the Department of Corrections.
      2.   All outdoor play areas shall be enclosed by a fence that is at least
48 inches high.
      3.   The property (building and grounds) shall be maintained in a manner
that is consistent with the character of the neighborhood. No play equipment,
except on corner lots, shall be placed in the front yard.
      4.   One identification sign shall be permitted. The sign shall not
exceed two square feet, shall be mounted flush to a wall, and shall not be
illuminated.
      5.   In addition to the parking normally required for the residence, one
off-street parking space shall be provided for each non-family employee of the
group day care home.
      6.   Hours of operation shall not exceed 16 hours a day in a 24-hour
period, and activity shall be prohibited between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 6:
00 a.m.
   K.   Adult foster care small group home, subject to the following
conditions:
      1.   An adult foster care small group home shall not be located closer
than 1,500 feet to any of the following facilities, as measured along a street,
road or other public thoroughfare, excluding an alley:
         a.   A licensed group day care home;
         b.   Another foster care facility;
         c.   A state-licensed facility offering substance abuse treatment and
rehabilitation services to seven or more people; and
         d.   A community correction center, resident home, halfway house or
other similar facility which houses an inmate population under the jurisdiction
of the Department of Corrections.
      2.   It shall have all licenses required by and be operated in compliance
with the laws, rules, regulations and license requirements of the state of
Michigan.
      3.   The property (building and grounds) shall be maintained in a manner
that is consistent with the character of the neighborhood.
      4.   One identification sign shall be permitted. The sign shall not
exceed two square feet, shall be mounted flush to a wall, and shall not be
illuminated.
      5.   In addition to the parking normally required for the residence, one
off-street parking space shall be provided for each employee of the facility.
      6.   An adult foster care small group home site that was licensed by the
state of Michigan and operating on January 1, 2013, and that was given approval
by the city prior to July 1, 2000, whether by action of the Zoning Board of
Appeals or another officer or body, shall be considered a legally pre-existing,
specially approved use for that site.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981; Ord. 359, adopted 5-9-2011; Ord. 364, adopted 1-13-
2014)
Sec. 53-9. AREA, HEIGHT, BULK AND PLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   Area, height, bulk and placement requirements unless otherwise specified are
as provided in Article XV.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
ARTICLE V. R-1C, SINGLE- AND TWO-FAMILY
RESIDENCE DISTRICT
Sec. 53-10. STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   The Single- and Two-Family Residence District is established as a district
in which the principal use of land is for single- and two-family dwellings. For
the Single- and Two-Family Residence District, in promoting the general purpose
of this chapter, the specific intent of this section is:
   A.   To encourage the construction of and the continued use of the land for
single- and two-family dwellings;
   B.   To prohibit business, commercial or industrial use of land and to
prohibit any other use which would substantially interfere with development or
continuation of single- and two-family dwellings in the district;
   C.   To encourage the discontinuance of existing uses that would not be
permitted as new uses under the provisions of this chapter;
   D.   To discourage any land use which would generate traffic on minor or
local streets other than normal traffic generated by the residences on those
streets; and
   E.   To prohibit new subdivisions with lots less than 70 feet in width.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-11. PRINCIPAL AND PERMITTED USES.
   In the R-1C District, no uses shall be permitted unless otherwise provided
in this chapter, except the following:
   A.   All principal permitted uses in the R-1A and R-1B Districts;
   B.   Two-family dwellings;
   C.   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above
principal permitted uses; and
   D.   Off-street parking in accordance with the requirements of Article XIX.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-12. PERMITTED USES AFTER SPECIAL APPROVAL.
   The following uses shall be permitted subject to the conditions hereinafter
imposed and subject further to the approval of the City Council after
recommendation from the City Planning Commission:
   A.   All permitted uses after special approval in the R-1A and R-1B
Districts, subject to the terms and conditions therein;
   B.   The intent of these regulations is to permit, where feasible, owners
fronting on major thoroughfares, to carry on a commercial enterprise within
their dwellings and still retain the appearance of a single-family area.
Commercial uses should be limited to or similar in nature to the following:
antique shops, art galleries, photography studios, dress making or tailoring
shops, real estate, accounting, tax or legal offices or specialty shops;
   C.   Dwelling unit conversions subject to the requirements of this section
and to the requirements of § 
53-127;
   D.   Conversions of vacant lodge, fraternal or assembly halls to
nonresidential uses when it is determined that the current condition of the
vacant facility is a blighting influence on the neighborhood and furthermore
that the following standards be met.
      1.   A site and landscape plan shall be submitted emphasizing how the
conversion will aesthetically blend with the adjacent land uses and immediate
neighborhood.
      2.   All parking requirements shall be met in accordance with this code;
lacking sufficient off-street parking space an alternative plan may be
considered, such as lease agreements for parking on nearby properties.
      3.   Outdoor storage shall have buffering so as to effectively screen the
storage area from view of adjacent properties. All outdoor storage shall be
kept in suitable containers.
      4.   Outdoor advertising shall be limited to one sign not exceeding eight
square feet in area and having no internal or external lighting.
      5.   Light, noise, dust, glare, odors generated by the nonresidential use
shall be Judged not to have a negative impact on the adjacent properties and
immediate neighborhood.
      6.   Electrical interference generated by the use and detectable to the
residents of adjacent properties shall be prohibited.
      7.   The use will not create traffic congestion, parking shortages or
otherwise adversely affect the pedestrian or vehicular circulation of the area.
      8.   The use is Judged to be consistent and compatible with the character
of the immediate area.
   E.   Bed and breakfast facilities subject to the requirements of this code;
   F.   Adult foster care small group home, subject to the following:
      1.   A state licensed adult foster care small group home shall not be
located within 1,500 feet of another similar state licensed facility.
      2.   One on-site parking space shall be provided for each employee in
addition to the parking required for the dwelling unit. The driveway may be
used for this purpose.
      3.   The property (buildings and grounds) shall be maintained in a manner
that is consistent with the character of the neighborhood.
   G.   Three-family or four-family residential dwelling, subject to the
following requirements:
      1.   A minimum lot size of 7,200 square feet for the first unit and an
additional 3,500 square feet for each additional unit shall be provided.
      2.   Two on-site parking stalls shall be provided for each dwelling unit.
      3.   A minimum lot width of 70 feet shall be required for all new
multiple dwelling unit parcels.
      4.   A site plan in accordance with this code shall be provided.
      5.   The use is determined by the Planning Commission to be consistent
and compatible with the general character of the immediate area and otherwise
meet the requirements of special land use approval as outlined in this code.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-13. AREA, HEIGHT, BULK AND PLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   Area, height, bulk and placement requirements unless otherwise specified are
as provided in Article XV.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
ARTICLE VI. R-2, MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
Sec. 53-14. STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   The Multiple-Family Residence District is designed primarily for two- or
three-story apartments, dwelling groups and duplexes. It is designed to promote
a harmonious mixture of residential types and related educational, cultural and
religious land uses in a basically residential environment.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-15. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   In the R-2 District, no uses shall be permitted unless otherwise provided in
this chapter, except the following:
   A.   All permitted uses after special approval in the R-1A, R-1B and R-1C
Districts, subject to the terms and conditions therein;
   B.   Two-family dwellings;
   C.   Multiple-family dwellings, including apartments, townhouses, row houses
and dwelling groups;
   D.   New churches and other facilities normally incidental thereto, provided
ingress and egress from the site is onto a major thoroughfare. The minimum site
size shall be two acres and no building shall be located less than 20 feet from
any other lot in any residential district;
   E.   Publicly owned and operated parks, playfields, museums, libraries and
other recreational facilities; provided that, any building shall be located not
less than 20 feet from any other lot in any residential district;
   F.   Public, parochial or private elementary, intermediate and/or high
schools offering courses in general education, not operated for profit;
provided that, the buildings shall be located not less than 20 feet from any
other lot in any residential district;
   G.   Municipal, state or federal administrative or service buildings;
provided that, the buildings shall be located not less than 20 feet from any
other lot in a residential district;
   H.   Private schools and educational institutions;
   I.   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above
principal permitted uses;
   J.   Off-street parking in accordance with the requirements of Article XIX;
and
   K.   Home occupations as defined in § 
53-3 and in accordance with the requirements of § 
53-132A of this chapter. The site plan requirements of § 
53-18 below shall not apply to a home occupation.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981; Ord. 359, adopted 5-9-2011)
Sec. 53-16. PERMITTED USES AFTER SPECIAL APPROVAL.
   Adult foster care large group home or a recovery or rehabilitation halfway
house and subject to the following.
   A.   A state licensed adult foster care large group home or a recovery or
rehabilitation halfway house shall not be located within 1,500 feet of another
similar state facility.
   B.   One on-site parking space shall be provided for each employee in
addition to the parking required for the dwelling unit.
   C.   A designated passenger loading/unloading area shall be provided near a
barrier free entrance.
   D.   A loading/unloading area shall be provided for delivery vehicles.
   E.   A landscaped buffer shall be provided along all property lines that
abut a R-1A, R-1B, R-1C District and around the visible perimeters of all
parking and loading/unloading areas.
   F.   All exterior lighting of entryways, parking spaces or loading/unloading
areas shall not reflect onto adjacent properties.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-17. SCREENING REQUIREMENT.
   Where required parking lots of any use permitted in an R-2 District are
erected so that the headlights of the cars in the parking lot will face into a
single-family residential district, a solid masonry wall or planting strip, as
determined by the Planning Commission, which shall be a minimum of three feet
in height, shall be required along that parking lot boundary line facing the
single-family residential district. The city may require a guarantee or bond to
insure adequate maintenance of the screen.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-18. SITE PLAN REVIEW.
   For all uses permitted in an R-2 District, a site plan for a special land
use shall be subject to review and approval by the City Council after receiving
recommendation from the City Planning Commission in accordance with the
provisions of this section. A site plan for a use permitted by right shall be
approved administratively by the City Manager or designee or by the Planning
Commission, consistent with the regulation and standards set forth in this
section. In addition to the criteria set forth herein, a multiple-family
dwelling site plan shall not be approved unless it meets the following
criteria.
   A.   All site plans shall show two means of ingress and egress to the
project to permit adequate circulation for safety equipment; except that, for
projects under ten acres, one boulevard entranceway may be sufficient.
   B.   In all multiple projects over 25 dwelling units, parking shall not be
allowed along the main circulation drive.
   C.   All townhouse units must include an individual outdoor paved patio area
not less than 100 square feet in area.
   D.   There shall be no more than seven townhouses in any one attached row.
   E.   An apartment house shall not exceed 200 feet in length.
   F.   Townhouse units with attached garages may not include the space in
front of the garage door as part of the parking requirement. Townhouse units
with attached garages may reduce their parking requirements to one and one-half
spaces per dwelling unit.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981; Ord 397, eff. 12-31-2023)
Sec. 53-19. AREA, HEIGHT, BULK AND PLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   Area, height, bulk and placement requirements unless otherwise specified are
as provided in Article XV.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
ARTICLE VII. RMH RESIDENTIAL MOBILE HOME DISTRICT
Sec. 53-20. STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   The RMH Residential Mobile Home District is designed for those who prefer
mobile home living. Although an assembly of single-family units, mobile home
developments typically have a higher density impact than conventional single-
family development. In order to not adversely impact other areas of the city,
certain land areas are recognized as appropriate for continued mobile home use;
provided that, proper site design standards and requirements are met.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-21. PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED.
   In the RMH District, no building or use shall be permitted unless otherwise
provided in this chapter, except for the following:
   A.   Mobile homes located in a mobile home park;
   B.   Mobile home parks;
   C.   Publicly owned and operated parks, playfields, museums, libraries and
other recreation facilities;
   D.   Municipal uses except DPW yards or garages;
   E.   Home occupations;
   F.   Public, parochial and other private elementary schools offering courses
in general education and not operated for profit;
   G.   Essential services; and
   H.   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above
principal permitted uses.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-22. STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR MOBILE HOME PARKS.
   Mobile home parks shall conform to the requirements as promulgated by the
State Mobile Home Commission Rules, as amended.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-23. SITE PLAN APPROVAL.
   For permitted uses, a site plan shall be submitted in accordance with this
code.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-24. AREA, HEIGHT, BULK AND PLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   A.   The minimum lot area for a mobile home park shall be 20 acres.
   B.   The minimum width of any part of the lot, which contains dwellings and
buildings open to occupants of the mobile home park shall be 200 feet.
   C.   1.   A mobile home and its accessory buildings (i.e., sheds) shall not
occupy more than 35% of the area of the site on which it is located. Where a
roofed area, such as a carport or outdoor recreation shelter is open for 40% or
more of it perimeter, its lot coverage shall be computed as one-half the area
covered by the roof.
      2.   When the site is adjacent to an approved common open space, not less
than ten feet in minimum width, other than vehicular access, an additional 5%
of the site may be occupied by the dwelling unit.
   D.   The following minimum distances shall be provided and maintained from a
mobile home unit and shall be measured from the face of the mobile home unit.
If the mobile home unit has an attached or add-on structure, which is enclosed
for more than 50% of its perimeter, the applicable difference shall be measured
from the face of the attached structure:
      1.   Twenty feet between mobile home units;
      2.   Ten feet from an on-site parking space on an adjacent site;
      3.   Ten feet from a detached accessory structure;
      4.   Fifty feet from any principal building which is not a mobile home;
      5.   Twenty feet from the right-of-way line of a street within the mobile
home park;
      6.   Seven and one-half feet from any parking bay; and
      7.   Seven feet from a common pedestrian walkway.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
ARTICLE VIII. C-1, LOCAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
Sec. 53-25. STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   The C-1, Local Commercial District, is intended to permit retail business
and service uses which are needed to serve the nearby residential areas. In
order to promote the business developments so far as is possible and
appropriate in each area, uses are prohibited which would create hazards,
offensive and loud noises, vibration, smoke, glare or heavy truck traffic. The
intent of this District is also to encourage the concentration of local
business areas to the mutual advantage of both the consumers and merchants and
to promote the best use of land at certain strategic locations and to avoid the
continuance of encouraging marginal strip, business development along major
thoroughfares.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-26. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   In the C-1 District, no uses shall be permitted unless otherwise provided in
this chapter, except the following:
   A.   Grocery store, including beer, wine and liquor, fruit, vegetable, meat,
dairy products and baked goods;
   B.   Drug stores;
   C.   Confectioneries, delicatessens and restaurants. Establishments with a
character of a drive-in or open front store are prohibited;
   D.   Dress, tailor, pressing and dry cleaning shops employing not more than
two assistants; provided that, the cleaning fluid used has a base which is of
nonexplosive and nonflammable materials;
   E.   Hand laundry;
   F.   Wearing apparel shop;
   G.   Hardware, paint and wallpaper, furniture and household appliance
stores;
   H.   Financial institutions, not including drive-in facilities;
   I.   Variety and dry goods stores;
   J.   Laundromat;
   K.   Offices for plumbing, roofing, heating contractors, taxidermists,
decorators, upholsterers and similar establishments;
   L.   Flower shop;
   M.   Gift shop;
   N.   Shoe repair shop;
   O.   Watch, television and radio repair shops;
   P.   Barber and beauty shops;
   Q.   Professional offices;
   R.   Mixed uses (i.e., commercial and residential uses combined in one
building);
   S.   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above
permitted principal uses; and
   T.   Off-street parking in accordance with the requirements of this code.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-27. PERMITTED USES AFTER SPECIAL APPROVAL.
   The following uses may be permitted subject to the conditions hereinafter
imposed and subject further to the approval of the City Council after
recommendation from the City Planning Commission:
   A.   Public utility buildings and uses, but not including storage yards,
when operating requirements necessitate locating within the District to serve
the immediate vicinity;
   B.   Day care facilities; provided that:
      1.   Lot area of not less than 100 square feet shall be provided for
every child enrolled;
      2.   For each child care enrolled, there shall be provided, equipped and
maintained, on the premises a minimum of 2,000 square feet or a minimum of 200
square feet per child whichever is greater; and/or
      3.   The outdoor play area shall be fenced or screened by a landscaped
buffer from any abutting residentially zoned area.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-28. REQUIRED CONDITIONS.
   The following conditions are required for all uses in the C-1 District.
   A.   All business, servicing or processing shall be conducted wholly within
a completely enclosed building; provided further that, all lighting in
connection with permitted uses shall be so arranged as to reflect the light
away from all adjacent residential buildings or residentially zoned property.
Outdoor play areas associated with day care facilities shall be exempt from
this requirement.
   B.   All business or service establishments shall be for the purpose of
dealing directly with consumers. All goods produced or processed on the
premises shall be sold at retail on the premises where produced and/or
processed.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-29. SITE PLAN REVIEW.
   For all uses permitted in the C-1 District, a site plan shall be submitted
and no building permit shall be issued until the City Council has approved the
site plan after recommendation from the City Planning Commission in accordance
with this code.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-30. AREA, HEIGHT, BULK AND PLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   Area, height, bulk and placement requirements unless otherwise specified are
as provided in Article XV.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
ARTICLE VIII-A. SB, SERVICE BUSINESS DISTRICT
Sec. 53-31. STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   The Service Business District is designed to accommodate various types of
office uses performing administrative, professional and personal services.
These are typically small office or limited commercial facilities which have
the appearance of residential structures and which can serve as transitional
uses between more intensive uses of land such as that along M-89 and less
intensive uses of land such as single-family residential development. The
district is intended to promote alternatives to residential development along
major thoroughfares while protecting the integrity of the abutting residential
development. This district is specifically intended to prohibit commercial
establishments which have extended hours, high rates of customer turnover and
require short-term parking.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-32. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   In the SB Service Business District, no building or land shall be used and
no building shall be erected, except for one or more of the following specified
uses:
   A.   Executive, administrative, insurance, real estate, dental and
professional offices, but excluding medical offices and clinics;
   B.   Banks and similar financial institutions, but excluding drive-in or
drive-through facilities;
   C.   Libraries, government office buildings (excluding offices which
generate significant traffic) and public utility offices, but excluding outdoor
storage yards;
   D.   Child care center with less than 12 children;
   E.   Photographic studios and interior decorating studios;
   F.   Establishments which perform personal services on the premises such as
beauty parlors and barber shops, but excluding sun tan salons and physical
culture facilities;
   G.   Art galleries, including artist supply sales and book shops;
   H.   Dwelling units when incorporated into the same building which contains
a permitted use of this district; provided that, stairways leading to the
second floor shall be located within the walls of the building wherever
practical and off-street parking shall be approved by the City Council as part
of the site plan;
   I.   Gift shops, craft shops, dress shops, antique shops and retail shops
(excluding pet shops) of similar character;
   J.   Off-street parking lots which are accessory to the respective business;
   K.   Accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to any of the above
permitted uses; and
   L.   Single-family dwellings.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-33. PERMITTED USES AFTER SPECIAL APPROVAL.
   The following uses may be permitted subject to the conditions hereinafter
imposed and subject further to the approval of the City Council after
recommendation from the Planning Commission:
   A.   Veterinary offices and clinics, subject to the following conditions:
      1.   The practice shall be limited to small animals (including exotic
animals) and birds;
      2.   All facilities associated with the office or clinic shall be within
a completely enclosed building;
      3.   Minimum lot size shall be 20,000 square feet;
      4.   Boarding of animals is not permitted, except for overnight surgical
cases; and
      5.   Outdoor storage of cadavers is not permitted.
   B.   Medical and chiropractic offices, subject to the following conditions:
      1.   The facility shall not contain more than two physicians or
chiropractors; and
      2.   Minimum lot size shall be 20,000 square feet.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-34. BUFFERING AND SCREENING REQUIREMENTS.
   In addition to the minimum landscaping requirements contained in this code,
the City Council with recommendation from the Planning Commission shall have
the authority to require additional, but reasonable, landscaping and screening
to protect the integrity of adjacent residential development. Specific emphasis
shall be placed on buffering and screening when a use permitted in the SB
District abuts a residentially used or zoned parcel or lot.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-35. OUTSIDE TRASH CONTAINERS.
   Outdoor trash containers (dumpsters) shall be in accordance with this code.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-36. SITE PLAN REVIEW.
   For all uses permitted in the SB Service Business District, a site plan
shall be submitted and no building permit shall be issued until the City
Council has approved the site plan after recommendation from the City Planning
Commission in accordance with this code.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-37. AREA, HEIGHT, BULK AND PLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   Unless otherwise specified are as provided in Article XV.
Minimum lot width       100 feet
Minimum lot area        12,000 square feet
Maximum lot coverage    35%
Maximum building height 35 feet
Minimum front yard      20 feet
Minimum side yard       10 feet for one-way traffic
                        18 feet for two-way traffic
Minimum rear yard       35 feet
 
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
ARTICLE IX. C-2, GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
Sec. 53-38. STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   The C-2, General Commercial District, is intended to permit a wider range of
business and entertainment activities than those permitted in the local
district. The permitted uses are intended to provide businesses and services
usually found in major shopping centers and business areas at the juncture of
major streets. These uses generate large volumes of vehicular traffic, require
substantial access for off-street parking and loading and require detailed
planning particularly as to relationships with adjacent residential areas.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-39. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   In the C-2 District, no uses shall be permitted, unless otherwise provided
in this chapter, except the following:
   A.   All principal permitted uses in the C-1 District;
   B.   Any retail business whose principal activity is the sale or rental of
merchandise within a completely enclosed building;
   C.   Business service establishments performing services on the premises
such as office machine and typewriter repair, printing and blueprinting;
   D.   Any service establishment of an office, showroom or workshop nature
within a completely enclosed building such as that of a taxidermist, decorator,
upholsterer, caterer, exterminator, building contractor (including electrical,
glazing, heating, painting, paper hanging, plumbing, roofing, ventilating and
plastering) and similar establishments that require a retail adjunct. No
outside storage yards shall be permitted;
   E.   Photographic film developing and processing;
   F.   Physical culture establishments, including gymnasiums, reducing salons
and steam baths;
   G.   Bowling alleys, skating rinks, sports arenas and other indoor
recreational facilities, when conducted within a completely enclosed building
and when located at least 150 feet from any property zoned in a residential
classification;
   H.   Hotels and motels;
   I.   Eating and drinking establishments;
   J.   Assembly halls;
   K.   Funeral parlors or mortuaries;
   L.   Television and radio studios and towers subject to the requirements of
this code;
   M.   Mixed uses (i.e., commercial and residential uses combined in one
structure);
   N.   Other uses similar to the above, subject to the following restrictions:
      1.   All goods produced on the premises shall be sold at retail on the
premises where produced; and
      2.   All business or servicing, except for off-street parking and
loading, shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building.
   O.   Indoor theaters;
   P.   Off-street parking in accordance with the requirements of this code;
   Q.   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above
principal permitted uses; and
   R.   Animal boarding facilities subject to the requirements of § 53-132B
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981; Ord. 361, adopted 9-12-2011)
Sec. 53-40. PERMITTED USES AFTER SPECIAL APPROVAL.
   The following uses may be permitted subject to the conditions hereinafter
imposed and subject further to the approval of the City Council after
recommendations from the Planning Commission:
   A.   Veterinary hospitals and clinics;
   B.   Automobile car wash establishments including steam-cleaning, but not
rust-proofing; provided, off-street waiting space is provided in accordance
with this code;
   C.   Drive-in restaurants or other drive-in establishments serving food and/
or beverage; provided that, the entrance to or exit from any such use is
located at least 35 feet from the intersection of any two streets; that all
such uses shall have direct access to a major thoroughfare; that all lighting
or illuminated display shall not reflect onto any adjacent residential zone;
and that consideration is given to proximity of existing traffic safety and
sanitation;
   D.   Drive-in windows for financial institutions;
   E.   Automobile gasoline and automobile service stations subject to the
requirements of this code;
   F.   Wholesale store, storage facilities, buildings, warehouses,
distributing plants and freezers and lockers;
   G.   Open air business uses as follows, in conformance with this code:
      1.   Retail sale of trees, shrubbery, plants, flowers, seed, topsoil,
humus, fertilizer, trellises, lawn furniture, playground equipment and other
home garden supplies and equipment;
      2.   Retail sale of fruit and vegetables;
      3.   Tennis courts, archery courts, shuffleboard, horseshoe courts,
miniature golf, golf driving range, children’s amusement park or similar
recreation uses;
      4.   Bicycle, trailer, motor vehicle, boat or home equipment rental
services;
      5.   Outdoor display and sale of garages, swimming pools and similar
uses;
      6.   New and used car sales rooms, including outdoor sales space;
      7.   Salesrooms, including outdoor sales space, for recreation vehicles,
including boats, snowmobiles, travel trailers, campers, tents and accessory
equipment;
      8.   Planned community shopping centers; provided, the following criteria
are met:
         a.   The center shall consist of a group of establishments engaging
exclusively in retail business or service, arranged as a functionally coherent
unit, together with appurtenant features, such as parking areas and storage
facilities;
         b.   The center shall occupy a site of not less than 20 acres;
         c.   A minimum building setback from the property line of 75 feet each
for the front and rear of the building and 50 feet each for the sides of the
building;
         d.   No building or structure shall exceed three stories or 40 feet in
height unless approved by the Planning Commission;
         e.   A planting strip of at least 20 feet wide shall be provided
around the entire perimeter of the site, except for driveways onto the public
street system. A wall or barrier of suitable material not less than five feet
high shall be constructed along those property lines which abut a residential
district;
         f.   The proposed site shall have at least one property line abutting
a major thoroughfare. All ingress and egress to the site shall be directly from
the thoroughfare. Turning and approach lanes shall be provided when determined
necessary by the City Engineer;
         g.   A landscape plan which includes the entire site shall be
submitted for approval with the site plan to determine compliance with
screening and planting strips;
         h.   All signs shall be affixed to the face of the building and shall
be a uniform design throughout; except that, one ground pole sign advertising
the name of the shopping center is allowed;
         i.   All off-street parking shall be within its own area, as specified
in this code, and an internal system of roads and walks which will effectively
separate pedestrian and vehicular traffic is required;
         j.   Outdoor trash containers shall be provided and maintained in
accordance with this code;
         k.   All areas accessible to vehicles shall be paved and maintained so
as to provide a durable, smooth and well-drained surface and to ensure that
run-off does not negatively impact adjacent property; and
         l.   All vehicle and pedestrian areas shall be illuminated during
business hours of darkness. All lighting fixtures shall be installed so as to
reflect light away from adjacent residential properties.
   H.   Day care facilities; provided that:
      1.   Lot area of not less than 100 square feet shall be provided for
every child enrolled;
      2.   For each child care enrolled, there shall be provided, equipped and
maintained, on the premises a minimum of 2,000 square feet or a minimum of 200
square feet per child whichever is greater; and
      3.   The outdoor play area shall be fenced or screened by a landscaped
buffer from any abutting residentially zoned area.
   I.   Adult-oriented establishments, as listed and defined in the adult-
oriented establishments ordinance; provided, however, that, it shall be illegal
to operate or cause to be operated any adult-oriented establishment at any
location in the city, except as provided in this chapter and subject to the
following conditions.
      1.   No sexually-oriented business shall be permitted in a location in
which any main building or accessory structure, including signs, is within
1,000 feet of any main building or accessory structure of another sexually-
oriented business.
      2.   No sexually-oriented business shall be established on a parcel
within 300 feet of any residential district or any parcel used for a single- or
multiple-family residence, public park, school, child care facility, church or
place of worship, public library, hospital, city hall, Police Department or
Fire Department, youth center or commercially operated school attended by
children such as, for example, dance schools, gymnastic centers, etc.
         a.   The distance between a proposed sexually-oriented business and
any such zoned area or existing use shall be measured in a straight line from
the nearest property line upon which the proposed sexually-oriented business is
to be located to the nearest property line of that zoned area or existing use.
         b.   A sexually-oriented business lawfully operating is not rendered a
nonconforming use by the subsequent location of one or more of the uses listed
in this division I.2.b.; provided, however, that, if the sexually-oriented
business ceases operation for a period of 90 days or more regardless of any
intent to resume operation, it may not recommence operation at that location.
            (1)   It shall be unlawful to cause or to permit the operation of
more than one sexually-oriented business in the same building, structure or
portion thereof.
            (2)   Any sign or advertising for the sexually-oriented business
must comply with the provisions of this chapter. Any sign or advertising may
not include photographs, silhouettes or drawings of any specified anatomical
areas or specified sexual activities or obscene representations of the human
form and may not include animated or flashing illumination.
            (3)   The entrances to the proposed sexually-oriented business at
both the exterior and interior walls, in a location visible to those entering
and exiting the business, must be clearly marked with lettering at least two
inches in height stating: “Persons under the age of eighteen (18) are not
permitted to enter the premises” and “No alcoholic beverages of any type are
permitted within the premises”; unless specifically allowed pursuant to a
license duly issued by the Liquor Control Commission.
      3.   No product or service for sale or rental or any picture or other
representation of any product or service for sale or rental, shall be displayed
so as to be visible to a person outside the building whether through a window
or doorway or otherwise.
      4.   All off-street and on-site parking areas shall comply with this
chapter and shall additionally be illuminated at all times as follows.
         a.   All off-street parking areas and entries of sexually-oriented
businesses shall be illuminated from dusk to closing hours of operation with a
lighting system which provides an average maintained horizontal illumination of
one foot-candle of light on all parking surfaces and/or walkways.
         b.   The premises of all sexually-oriented businesses shall be
equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate
every place to which the public is permitted access to provide an illumination
of not less than one foot-candle of light as measured at the floor level.
      5.   All exterior refuse, trash and garbage receptacles shall be screened
by solid fencing not less than six feet in height or fully enclosed within an
accessory structure. The requirements set forth in this chapter shall be in
addition to any other applicable requirements found in the general and zoning
ordinances of the city. Any special approval granted pursuant to this chapter
shall be subject to compliance with all applicable ordinance provisions and all
applicable laws, rules and regulations of authorities with competent
jurisdiction.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-41. SITE PLAN REVIEW.
   For all uses permitted in a C-2 District, a site plan shall be submitted and
no building permit shall be issued until the City Council has approved the site
plan after recommendation from the City Planning Commission in accordance with
this code.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-42. AREA, HEIGHT, BULK AND PLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   Area, height, bulk and placement requirements unless otherwise specified are
as provided in Article XV.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
ARTICLE X. CBD, CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
Sec. 53-43. STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   The CBD, Central Business District, is intended to permit a variety of
commercial, administrative, financial, civic, cultural, residential,
entertainment and recreational uses in an effort to provide the harmonious mix
of activities necessary to further enhance the Central Business District as a
commercial and service center.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-44. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   In the CBD District, no uses shall be permitted unless otherwise provided in
this chapter, except the following:
   A.   All principal permitted uses in the C-2 District, excluding bowling
alleys and animal boarding facilities; except that off-street parking shall not
be required as specified in this code;
   B.   Hotels and motels;
   C.   Theaters, assembly halls, concert halls or similar places of assembly
when conducted completely within enclosed buildings;
   D.   Arcades, billiard parlors and other indoor recreational facilities;
   E.   Business and professional offices;
   F.   Mixed uses (i.e., commercial and residential uses combined in one
structure);
   G.   Government buildings and facilities;
   H.   Sidewalk and outdoor cafés;
   I.   Other uses similar to the above and subject to the following
restrictions.
      1.   All business establishments shall be retail or service
establishments dealing directly with consumers. All goods produced on the
premises shall be sold at retail from premises where produced.
      2.   All business, servicing or processing, except for off-street parking
or loading, shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings.
      3.   Storage of commodities shall be within buildings and shall not be
visible to the public from a street or thoroughfare.
   J.   Housing for the elderly;
   K.   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above
principal permitted uses; and
   L.   Single-family dwellings.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981; Ord. 361, adopted 9-12-2011)
Sec. 53-45. PERMITTED USES AFTER SPECIAL APPROVAL.
   Off-street parking lots and structures the requirements of which shall be in
accordance with the requirements of this code.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-46. SITE PLAN REVIEW.
   For all uses permitted in the CBD District, a site plan for a special land
use shall be subject to review and approval by the City Council after receiving
a recommendation from the City Planning Commission in accordance with the
provisions of this section. A site plan for a use permitted by right shall be
approved administratively by the City Manager or designee or by the Planning
Commission, consistent with the regulation and standards set forth in this
section.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981; Ord. 397, eff. 12-31-2023)
Sec. 53-47. AREA, HEIGHT, BULK AND PLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   Area, height, bulk and placement requirements unless otherwise specified are
as provided in Article XV.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
ARTICLE XI. CS, COMMUNITY SERVICE DISTRICT
Sec. 53-48. STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   This district is intended to set aside land for major medical, educational
and institutional uses within the city. The district is established to promote
well-designed medical and educational complexes without the intrusion of
intense commercial activity and low key residential uses.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-49. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   In the CS District, no uses shall be permitted unless otherwise provided in
this chapter, except the following:
   A.   Hospitals, subject to the following conditions:
      1.   The proposed site shall have at least one property line abutting a
major thoroughfare. All ingress and egress to the off-street parking area, for
guests, employees, staff as well as any other uses of facilities, shall be
directly onto the major thoroughfare;
      2.   Any building shall be located not less than 50 feet from any lot in
a residential district; and
      3.   Ambulance and delivery areas shall be obscured from all residential
view with a wall or barrier of suitable material at least six feet in height
and the wall or barrier shall be further subject to the requirements of this
code.
   B.   Convalescent and/or nursing home, not to exceed a height of two and
one-half stories, when the following conditions are met:
      1.   The proposed site shall have at least one property line abutting a
major thoroughfare. All ingress and egress to the off-street parking area, for
guests, employees and staff, as well as any other uses of the facilities, shall
be directly onto the major thoroughfare; and
      2.   No building shall be closer than 25 feet from any property line.
   C.   Medical buildings and facilities, including medical offices, clinics
and associated laboratories;
   D.   Museums, libraries and other cultural institutions; and
   E.   Housing for the elderly.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-50. SITE PLAN REVIEW.
   For all uses permitted in the CS District, a site plan shall be submitted
and no building permit shall be issued until the City Council has approved the
site plan after a recommendation from the City Planning Commission.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-51. AREA, HEIGHT, BULK AND PLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   Area, height, bulk and placement requirements unless otherwise specified are
as provided in Article XV.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
ARTICLE XII. I, INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
Sec. 53-52. STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   In the I District, the intent is to permit industries such as manufacturing
or processing of previously refined materials and other uses that support the
permitted industries or are of an intense nature due to truck traffic, building
size, hours of operation and similar characteristics that make them
incompatible within traditional business or residential districts. The district
also allows certain commercial uses that are complementary to the industrial
nature of the district by way of serving the industries and/or the workers
employed there. It is intended that the district provide jobs for citizens of
the community and surrounding areas, contribute to a sustainable tax base and
create value for property owners and the City of Plainwell.
(Ord. 379, passed 4-9-2018)
Sec. 53-53. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   Any of the following uses when the manufacturing, compounding or processing
is conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building. The portion of the
land used for open storage facilities for materials or equipment used in the
manufacturing, compounding, final product storage or processing shall be
totally obscured by a fence and/or landscaping six feet in height so as to
screen the storage area from the public streets and adjoining properties:
   A.   Community public safety;
   B.   Dry cleaning plants;
   C.   Essential services;
   D.   Laboratories;
   E.   Liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) sales;
   F.   Manufacturing, processing and packaging — light;
   G.   Mini-warehouse/self-storage;
   H.   Parking facility, public or commercial;
   I.   Research and development facility;
   J.   Warehousing;
   K.   Wholesale and distribution;
   L.   Wireless communications (under 75 feet in height); and
   M.   Wireless communications, collocations and state-authorized increases;
   N.   Vehicle wash, trucks and heavy equipment; and
   O.   Accessory buildings and uses.
   P.   Any other uses similar to any of the above permitted uses as determined
by the Zoning Administrator in accordance with Sec. 53-132.C. of this chapter.
(Ord. 379, passed 4-9-2018)
Sec. 53-54. PERMITTED USES AFTER SPECIAL APPROVAL.
   The following uses may be permitted subject to the conditions hereinafter
imposed and subject further to the approval of the City Council after
recommendation from the City Planning Commission:
   A.   Animal services, animal clinic/hospital, kennel, rescue, or shelter;
   B.   Automobile repair, minor or major;
   C.   Automobile wash establishment;
   D.   Crematorium;
   E.   General offices and services, including: business support services,
contractor services, and professional offices; but not including: bank/
financial services, business services, and personal services;
   F.   Manufacturing, processing and packaging — heavy;
   G.   Mining operations within the Industrial zoning district, subject to the
following standards:
      1.   Additional site plan requirements. In addition to the regular
application materials and site plan as required for any special approval use,
an application submittal for a mining or fill operation shall be accompanied by
all of the following additional information:
         a.   Name and address of the owner(s) of the land on which mining or
fill will take place.
         b.   Name, address and telephone number of the person or entity which
will be conducting the actual mining or fill operation.
         c.   Location, size and legal description of the subject property, and
total site area to be mined or filled.
         d.   A reclamation plan for extraction or fill and reclamation for the
total project, which shall include:
            (1)   Surface overburden and topsoil stripping and stockpiling
plans.
            (2)   Provisions for grading, re-vegetation, and stabilization that
will prevent soil erosion, blowing dust, sedimentation problems and public
safety concerns.
            (3)   A feasible and detailed plan for the re-use of the reclaimed
site, consistent with the zoning district(s) in which the land is located and
consistent with the intent and vision of the City Master Plan.
            (4)   Surface water drainage provisions and outlets.
            (5)   The location and size of any existing or proposed structures
and any proposed vehicle or equipment staging and parking areas.
            (6)   Approved soil erosion permits. If such permit has not been
issued, a copy of the permit application may be appended to the special
approval use application and any approval shall be conditioned upon issuance of
such soil erosion permit.
            (7)   Proposed haul routes.
            (8)   Proposed noise and dust minimization plans.
      2.   Reclamation. All extraction or fill areas shall be reclaimed
progressively as they are worked out. The Planning Commission shall determine
the amount of the site that may be open at any time; however, at no time shall
more than 20 acres be used for active mining or fill. Reclaimed sites shall be
reasonably natural and inconspicuous and shall be reasonably lacking in hazard.
All slopes and banks remaining above water level and below water level to a
depth of six feet shall be graded to angles which do not exceed one foot in
elevation for each three feet of horizontal surface and they shall be treated
to prevent erosion and any other potential deterioration. Topsoil of a quality
equal to that occurring naturally in the area shall be placed or replaced on
excavated areas not covered by water, except where streets, beaches, or other
planned improvements are to be completed within a one year period. Where
reclaimed, topsoil shall be applied to a minimum depth of four inches and
sufficient to support vegetation. Vegetation shall be restored by the
appropriate seeding of grasses and/or the planting of trees and shrubs to
establish a permanent vegetative cover on the land surface and to minimize
erosion. Upon cessation of mining operations, the operating company or
landowner, within a reasonable time period (not to exceed 12 months), shall
remove all plant structures, foundations, buildings, stockpiles and equipment;
provided that buildings and structures which have a function under the
reclamation plan and which can be lawfully used under the requirements of the
zoning district in which they will be located under such plan, may be retained.
Substantial completion of reclamation and rehabilitation shall be completed
within one year after termination of the fill, mining or excavation activity.
      3.   Site development requirements.
         a.   Setbacks, in which no part of the mining of fill operation may
take place, except for ingress and egress, shall be as follows:
            (1)   Excavation below the existing grade of adjacent roads or
property lines shall not take place within 100 feet from any adjacent property
line or road right-of-way.
            (2)   No structures or machinery will be stored, erected or
maintained within 100 feet of any property line or road right-of-way.
         b.   If fencing, landscaping, and/or berming is deemed a reasonably
necessary requirement, the Planning Commission shall specify the type, size,
characteristics, and location of the required fencing, landscaping, and/or
berming.
         c.   Interior access roads, parking lots, haul roads, crushing and
processing operations, loading and unloading areas, and stockpiled materials
shall be maintained and operated so as to limit the nuisance caused by any
wind-blown dust.
         d.   Hours and days of operation for the mining or fill operation
shall be established by the Planning Commission as part of the special approval
use.
         e.   The application shall provide for measures acceptable to the
Planning Commission to prevent any noise in excess of 60 decibels at any
property line.
         f.   All mining operations shall be located on or near a primary road,
as defined by the Allegan County Road Commission, for ingress and egress
thereto; and on a road which if used as the access to the proposed operation
will not result in significant increase in truck traffic through an area
developed primarily for residential purposes. Where necessary as determined by
the Planning Commission, the Planning Commission may require the applicant to
construct and/or improve a road to accommodate the truck traffic created by the
operations as a condition of the permit, and for the purpose of routing traffic
around residential areas and preventing the breaking up of existing roads, that
may not be constructed to accommodate a large volume of heavy vehicles. The
operation shall be managed and controlled so that truck and heavy equipment
traffic generated by the use is controlled by the permit holder and haul routes
to and from the site shall be approved by the Planning Commission.
         g.   No crushing or processing shall occur unless expressly approved
by the Planning Commission.
      4.   Failure to maintain all required county, state or federal licenses
and/or to develop and maintain a surface mining of fill operation in accord
with the terms of the special approval use may result in the immediate
revocation of a special approval use permit and any and all other sanctions
and/or penalties available to the city, county, and/or state.
      5.   Continuing use. A special approval use permit for a mining or fill
operation shall not last for over two years unless extended by the Planning
Commission. When the Zoning Administrator determines a mining or fill operation
or portion thereof to be abandoned, he/she shall give the landowner written
notice of the intention to declare the mining of fill operation or portion
thereof abandoned. Within 30 days following receipt of said notice, the
landowner shall have the opportunity to rebut the Zoning Administrator's
evidence and submit other relevant evidence to the contrary. If the Zoning
Administrator finds the operator's evidence of continued use satisfactory, he/
she shall not declare abandonment.
      6.   Financial guarantees. A monetary performance guarantee shall be
filed with the City Treasurer. The performance guarantee shall be in the form
of a letter of credit, cash or surety bond acceptable to the city and with the
city named as the beneficiary. The security shall be returned when all
conditions stipulated in the special approval use permit have been met and the
special approval use permit deemed ended prior to the security's release. There
shall be no partial release of the security. The city shall determine the
amount of the monetary security guarantee.
      7.   Inspection and amendments. Permits granted for a period exceeding
one year shall be inspected a minimum of once a year by the Zoning
Administrator to ensure compliance with the permit and ordinance. Special
approval use permits for mining or fill operations may be amended by the
Planning Commission in accordance with the following procedures:
         a.   A request for amendment of a special approval use permit must be
made at least 30 days prior to the expiration of the existing permit.
         b.   The written request shall provide information concerning the
mining or fill operation/activities conducted during the current year and also
show that such operation/activities are in compliance with the special approval
use approval and the permit requirements.
         c.   Any financial guarantee shall also be established or revised in
accordance with Section
53-54, G, 6 above, for the duration of the extension of the special approval
use permit.
      8.   Modification of the site plan. The site plan may be modified at any
time by mutual consent of the operator and the Planning Commission to adjust to
changed conditions, technology, or to correct an oversight. The Planning
Commission may require the modification of the site plan when:
         a.   Modification of the plan is necessary so that it will conform to
existing laws;
         b.   It is found that the previously approved plan is clearly
impractical to implement and maintain; and/or
         c.   The approved plan is obviously not accomplishing the intent of
the ordinance.
      9.   No mining or fill operation shall be approved if it would cause very
serious consequences.
   H.   Parks, playgrounds, outdoor recreation;
   I.   Recreation facility, commercial indoor;
   J.   Recreation facility, commercial outdoor;
   K.   Salvage and impound operations;
   L.   School, specialized/training;
   M.   Vehicle sales and rental: automobiles, light trucks, boats, heavy
equipment/tools, heavy trucks, RVs, manufactured homes;
   N.   Waste management facility;
   O.   Wireless communications 75 feet in height or greater, subject to the
following provisions:
      1.   The structure shall be located on a site not less than 20,000 square
feet in area and 100 lineal feet of road frontage.
      2.   The structure shall only be located in industrial zoned areas.
However, in the event that agriculturally zoned land may be annexed to the
city, wireless communication facilities may be permitted in agriculturally
zoned areas; provided that, they comply with the provisions of this section.
      3.   The structure shall be constructed so as to hold not less than three
wireless communication facilities.
      4.   The maximum height of the tower shall be the minimum height
demonstrated to be necessary by the radio frequency engineer of the applicant.
      5.   The site plan for the structure shall be accompanied by a signed
certification by a registered civil engineer regarding the integrity of the
structure and the manner in which the structure may fall. This will enable the
city to determine appropriate setbacks on the site plan.
      6.   The structure shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by
the FAA. If the lighting is required, it shall be the flip-over type and shall
be directed away from residential property while causing the least disturbance
to surrounding properties.
      7.   Whenever possible, proposed wireless communication facilities shall
co-locate on existing buildings, structures and existing wireless communication
structures. If a provider fails to or refuses to permit co-location, such a
structure shall be a nonconforming structure and shall not be altered or
expanded in any way.
      8.   When a wireless communication structure has not been used for a
period of 90 consecutive days or 90 days after new technology is available
which permits the operation of the facility without the necessity of a wireless
communication structure, all parts of the structure shall be removed within 180
days. The removal of antennae or other equipment from the structure or the
cessation of reception or transmission of radio signals shall be considered the
beginning of non-use. The city may secure the removal of the structure if it is
still standing 30 days after the city has notified the operator that the tower
must be removed, the city may charge up to 125% of the removal cost to the
operator and or the land owner. The city may also require a form of financial
guarantee acceptable to the city to ensure that a tower will be removed in a
timely manner.
      9.   Accessory buildings and structures shall not exceed 600 square feet
in area or have an area shown to be necessary to house related technical
equipment.
      10.   Where the property line of a site containing a wireless
communication structure abuts a residentially or commercially used or zoned
area, the operator shall provide a planting screen sufficient in density and
height so as to have an immediate buffering impact on the adjacent site. In
addition, there shall be no interference with reception of any kind on any
adjacent sites.
      11.   There shall be no advertising of any kind visible from the ground
or other structures, other than required for emergency purposes.
      12.   Minimum spacing between tower locations shall be one mile, as
measured by a straight line.
      13.   The base of the tower shall not exceed 500 square feet in area.
      14.   The base of the tower and wire cable supports shall be enclosed
with a minimum six-foot high security fence.
      15.   Communication towers in excess of 100 feet in height above grade
level shall be prohibited within a one-mile radius of a public airport or one-
half mile radius of a helipad.
      16.   All signals and remote-control conductors of low energy extending
horizontally above the ground between structure or towers shall be at least
eight feet above the ground, unless buried underground.
      17.   Support structures shall comply with all applicable state, federal
and local regulations and codes. All towers shall be equipped with an anti-
climbing device so as to prevent unauthorized access.
   P.   Accessory buildings and uses; including:
      1.   General offices related to a principal use;
      2.   Outdoor display and sales, not including vehicle and equipment
sales; and
      3.   Outdoor storage related to a principal use.
   Q.   Any other uses similar to any of the above special uses as determined
by the Zoning Administrator in accordance with Sec.
53-132C. of this chapter.
(Ord. 379, passed 4-9-2018; Ord. 389, passed 12-28-2020)
Sec. 53-55. INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   A.   Application. After the effective date of this chapter:
      1.   Any use established or changed to and any building, structure or
tract of land developed, constructed or used for, any permitted or permissible
principal or accessory use shall comply with all of the performance standards
herein set forth for the district involved;
      2.   If any existing use or building or other structure is extended,
enlarged, moved, structurally altered or reconstructed or any existing use of
land is enlarged or moved, the performance standards for the district involved
shall apply with respect to the extended, enlarged, moved, structurally altered
or reconstructed building or other structure or portion thereof and with
respect to land use which is enlarged or moved;
      3.   No main or accessory building shall be situated less than 50 feet
from any residential property line;
      4.   No parking, access and/or service area may be located less than 25
feet from any residential property line;
      5.   All lot areas not used for buildings or parking, loading and storage
areas shall be landscaped. It shall be done attractively with lawn, trees,
shrubs, and the like and be properly maintained thereafter in a well-kept
condition;
      6.   A wall or barrier of suitable material not less than eight feet high
shall be constructed along those property lines which abut a residential
district;
      7.   Lighting facilities shall be required where deemed necessary for the
safety and convenience of employees and visitors. These facilities will be
arranged in a manner as to protect abutting streets and adjacent properties
from unreasonable glare or hazardous interference of any kind;
      8.   No operation or activity shall be carried out in the I District
which causes or creates measurable noise levels exceeding the maximum sound
levels prescribed below in
Table 12A., as measured on or beyond the boundary lines of the lot on which the
operation or activity is located. A. sound level meter and an octave band
analyzer shall be used to measure the intensity and frequency of the sound or
noise levels encountered. Sounds of very short duration, which cannot be
measured accurately with the sound level meter, shall be measured by an impact
noise analyzer; and the measurements so obtained may be permitted to exceed the
maximum levels as set forth in
Table 12A. by no more than six decibels in each octave band. For purposes of
this chapter, impact noises shall be considered to be those noises whose peak
values are more than six decibels higher than the values indicated on the sound
level meter. In addition, sounds of an intermittent nature or characterized by
high frequencies, which the Building Inspector deems to be objectionable in
adjacent districts, shall be controlled so as not to generate a nuisance in
adjacent districts, even if the decibel measurement does not exceed that
specified in the table.
Table 12A
Maximum Permitted Sound Intensity Levels in Decibels
(Post-1960 Preferred Frequencies)
Center Frequency    I District
(Cycles per Second)
Table 12A
Maximum Permitted Sound Intensity Levels in Decibels
(Post-1960 Preferred Frequencies)
Center Frequency    I District
(Cycles per Second)
34.5                76
63.0                74
125.0               68
250.0               63
500.0               57
1,000.0             52
2,000.0             45
4,000.0             38
8,000.0             32
 
      9.   The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the noise
level regulations:
         a.   Noises not directly under the control of the property user;
         b.   Noises emanating from construction and maintenance activities
between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.;
         c.   The noises of safety signals, warning devices and emergency
pressure relief valves; and
         d.   Transient noises of moving sources such as automobiles, trucks,
airplanes and railroads.
   B.   Smoke and particulate matter. The emission of smoke, dust, dirt, fly
ash or other particulate matter shall, in no manner, be unclean, destructive,
unhealthful, hazardous or deleterious to the general welfare. The emission
shall be in strict conformance with all applicable state and county health laws
pertaining to air pollution and smoke abatement. In addition, the following
requirements shall apply.
      1.   In the I District, the emission of smoke from any chimney, stack,
vent, opening or combustion process shall not exceed a density or equivalent
opacity of No.1 on the Ringelmann Chart as published by the United States
Bureau of Mines.
      2.   In the I District, the rate of emission of particulate matter, such
as dust, soot and fly ash, from all sources within the boundaries of any lot
shall not exceed a net figure of one pound per acre of lot area during any one-
hour period, after deducting from the gross hourly emission per acre.
Table 12B.
ALLOWANCE FOR HEIGHT OF EMISSION
Height of Emission Above Grade (Feet) Correction Pounds Per Hour
                                      Per Acre
Table 12B.
ALLOWANCE FOR HEIGHT OF EMISSION
Height of Emission Above Grade (Feet) Correction Pounds Per Hour
                                      Per Acre
50                                    0.01
100                                   0.06
150                                   0.10
200                                   0.16
300                                   0.30
400                                   0.50
NOTES TO TABLE:
*Interpolate for intermediate values not shown in table.
 
      3.   Determination of the total net rate of emission of particulate
matter within the boundaries of any lot shall be made as follows:
         a.   Determine the maximum emission in pounds per hour from each
source of emission and divide this figure by the number of acres of lot area,
thereby obtaining the gross hourly rate of emission in pounds per acre.
         b.   From each gross hourly rate of emission derived in division 13.3
.a. above, deduct the correction factor (interpolating as required) for height
of emission set forth in the table, thereby obtaining the net rate of emission
in pounds per acre per hour from each source of emission.
         c.   Add together the individual net rates of emission derived in
division 13.3.b. above, to obtain the total net rate of emission from all
sources of emission within the boundaries of the lot. The total shall not
exceed one pound per acre of lot area during any one-hour period.
   C.   Vibration.
      1.   In the I District, no activity or operation shall cause or create
earth borne vibrations in excess of the displacement values set forth in Table
12C. Vibration displacements shall be measured with a seismograph or
accelerometer, preferably the former. For purposes of this chapter, steady
state vibrations are vibrations which are continuous or vibrations in discrete
impulses more frequent than 60 per minute. Discrete impulses which do not
exceed 60 per minute shall be considered impact vibrations.
Table 12C.
MAXIMUM PERMITTED VIBRATION, I DISTRICT
Frequency           Maximum Displacementa  Maximum Displacementb (inches)
(Cycles per Second) (inches)
Table 12C.
MAXIMUM PERMITTED VIBRATION, I DISTRICT
Frequency           Maximum Displacementa  Maximum Displacementb (inches)
(Cycles per Second) (inches)
0 to 9              .0008                  .0004
10 to 19            .0005                  .0002
20 to 29            .0002                  .0001
   30 to 39      .0002                  .0001
40 to 49            .0001                  .0001
50 and over         .0001                  .0001
NOTES TO TABLE:
a As measured along the nearest adjacent lot line.
b As measured on or beyond a Residential District boundary line.
 
      2.   Between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 p.m., all of the above
maximum vibration levels, as measured on or beyond a residential district
boundary line, shall be reduced to one-half of the indicated values.
   D.   Noxious and odorous matter. In the I District, no activity or operation
shall cause, at any time, the discharge of matter across the lot lines in
concentrations as to be noxious. The emission of odorous matter in quantities
as to be readily detectable without the use of instruments at any point along
lot lines is prohibited.
   E.   Glare and heat. In the I District, any operation or activity producing
intense glare or heat shall be performed within a completely enclosed building
in a manner as to not create a public nuisance or hazard along the lot lines of
the lot upon which the source of the glare or heat is located. Exposed sources
of light shall be shielded so as not to create a nuisance beyond the lot lines
of the lot upon which the source of the light is located. Direct or indirect
illumination from the source of light shall not cause illumination in excess of
0.5 foot-candles in any residential district, as measured with a foot-candle
meter or sensitive photometer on or beyond a residential district boundary
line.
   F.   Fire and explosive hazards.
      1.   In an I District, the storage, utilization or manufacture of solid
materials ranging from incombustible to moderate burning is permitted.
      2.   Storage, utilization or manufacture of solid materials or products
ranging from free or active burning to intense burning is permitted; provided
that, the materials or products shall be stored, utilized or manufactured
within completely enclosed buildings having incombustible exterior walls and
protected through-out by an automatic fire extinguishing system.
      3.   The storage or utilization of flammable liquids or materials which
produce flammable or explosive vapors or gases shall be permitted provided the
storage and handling of the flammable liquids or materials shall comply with
all state rules and regulations as established by the Fire Prevention Act,
Public Act 207 of 1941, as amended and with all other applicable city codes and
regulations.
   G.   Gases. The escape or emission of any gas which is injurious,
destructive or explosive shall be unlawful and shall be summarily caused to be
abated. Sulphur dioxide gas, as measured at the property line at ground
elevation, shall not exceed an average of 0.3 p.p.m.; hydrogen sulfide likewise
shall not exceed 1 p.p.m.; fluorine shall not exceed 0.1 p.p.m.; nitrous fumes
shall not exceed 5 p.p.m.; and carbon monoxide shall not exceed 15 p.p.m.; all
measured as the average during any 24-hour sampling period.
   H.   Electromagnetic radiation. Applicable rules and regulations of the
Federal Communications Commission in regard to propagation of electromagnetic
radiation are made a part of this chapter.
      1.   Drifting and airborne matter, general. The drifting or airborne
transmission beyond the lot line of dust, particles or debris from any open
stockpile shall be unlawful and shall be summarily caused to be abated.
(Ord. 379, passed 4-9-2018)
Sec. 53-56. COMPLIANCE WITH COUNTY AND STATE REGULATIONS.
   Any use permitted in the I District must also comply with all applicable
county and state health and pollution laws and regulations.
(Ord. 379, passed 4-9-2018)
Sec. 53-57. SITE PLAN REVIEW.
   For all uses permitted in an I District, a site plan shall be submitted and
no building permit shall be issued until the City Council has approved the site
plan after recommendation from the City Planning Commission in accordance with
this code.
(Ord. 379, passed 4-9-2018)
Sec. 53-58. AREA, HEIGHT, BULK AND PLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS.
Area, height, bulk and placement requirements unless otherwise specified are as
provided in Article XV.
(Ord. 379, passed 4-9-2018)
ARTICLE XIII. RESERVED
ARTICLE XIII-A. P-1, OFF-STREET PARKING DISTRICT
Sec. 53-66. INTENT.
   The P-1 Vehicular Parking District is intended to permit the establishment
of areas to be used solely for off-street parking of private passenger vehicles
as a use incidental to a principal use. This district will generally be
provided by petition or request to serve a use district which has developed
without adequate off-street parking facilities.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-67. PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED.
   Premises in the districts shall be used only for an off-street vehicular
parking area and shall be developed and maintained subject to regulations as
are hereinafter provided.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-68. REQUIRED CONDITIONS.
   A.   The parking area shall be accessory to and for use in connection with
one or more businesses or industrial establishments, located in adjoining
business or industrial districts or in connection with one or more existing
professional or institutional office buildings or institutions.
   B.   Parking areas shall be used solely for parking of private passenger
vehicles, for periods of less than 48 hours and shall not be used as an off-
street loading area.
   C.   No commercial repair work or service of any kind or sale or display
thereof shall be conducted in the parking area.
   D.   No signs of any kind, other than signs designated entrances, exits and
conditions of use, shall be maintained on the parking area.
   E.   No building other than those for shelter or attendants shall be erected
upon the premises and they shall not exceed 15 feet in height and 50 square
feet in area.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-69. MINIMUM DISTANCES AND SETBACKS.
   A.   Side and rear yards. Where the P-1 District is contiguous to the side
and/or rear lot lines of premises within a residentially zoned district,
screening shall be provided in accordance with this chapter.
   B.   Front yards. Where the P-1 District is contiguous to a residentially
zoned district which has a common frontage on the same block with residential
structures or wherein no residential structures have been yet erected, there
shall be a setback equal to the required residential setback for the
residential district or a minimum of 25 feet or whichever is greater. Screening
shall be provided in accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-70. SITE PLAN REVIEW.
   For all proposed parking lots permitted in this district, a dimensional
layout shall be submitted in accordance with this code.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
ARTICLE XIV. FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
Sec. 53-71. STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   A.   Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to significantly reduce
hazards to persons and damage to property as a result of flood conditions in
the city and to comply with the provisions and requirements of the National
Flood Insurance Program, as constituted in accord with the National Flood
Insurance Act of 1968, and subsequent enactments and the rules and regulations
promulgated in furtherance of this program by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency.
   B.   Objectives. The objectives of this section include:
      1.   The protection of human life, health and property from the dangerous
and damaging effects of flood conditions;
      2.   The minimization of public expenditures for flood control projects,
rescue and relief efforts in the aftermath of flooding, repair of flood damaged
public facilities and utilities and the redevelopment of flood damaged homes,
neighborhoods, commercial and industrial areas;
      3.   The prevention of private and public economic loss and social
disruption as a result of flood conditions;
      4.   The maintenance of stable development patterns not subject to the
blighting influence of flood damage;
      5.   To ensure that the public has access to information indicating the
location of land areas subject to periodic flooding; and
      6.   To preserve the ability of floodplains to carry and discharge a base
flood.
   C.   Agency designated. In addition to the duties expressed in § 53-202,
pursuant to the provisions of the state construction code, in accordance with
§ 8b(6) of Act 230 of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, the Building
Inspector of the city is hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge
the responsibility of the city under Act 230 of the Public Acts of 1972, as
amended, State of Michigan. The city assumes responsibility for the
administration and enforcement of said act throughout the corporate limits of
the community adopting this section.
   D.   Code appendix enforced. Pursuant to the provisions of the state
construction code, in accordance with § 8b(6) of Act 230 of the Public Acts of
1972, as amended, Appendix G of the Michigan Building Code shall be enforced by
the enforcing agency within the jurisdiction of the community adopting this
section.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981; Ord. 395, passed 5-22-2023)
Sec. 53-72. SUPPLEMENTARY DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      1.   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and
      2.   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   FLOOD HAZARD AREA. Land which on the basis of available floodplain
information is subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community, on which
the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
   FLOODPLAIN. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any
source (see definition of FLOOD).
   HARMFUL INCREASE. An unnaturally high stage on a river, stream or lake which
causes or may cause damage to property, threat to life, personal injury or
damage to land or water resources.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981; Ord. 395, passed 5-22-2023)
Sec. 53-73. DELINEATION OF THE FLOOD HAZARD AREA OVERLAY ZONE; DESIGNATION OF
REGULATED FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.
   A.   Delineation of the flood hazard area overlay zone. The flood hazard
area overlay zone shall overlay existing zoning districts delineated on the
official city Zoning Map. The boundaries of the flood hazard area zone shall
coincide with the boundaries of the areas indicated as within the limits of the
100-year flood. The term FLOOD HAZARD AREA OVERLAY ZONE, as used in this
chapter, shall mean the flood hazard area as designated in division (B).
   B.   Designation of regulated flood hazard areas. The FEMA Flood Insurance
Study entitled “Flood Insurance Study for Allegan County, All Jurisdictions”
and dated June 21, 2023 and the Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) panel numbers
included on Index Panel 26005CIND0A, effective June 21, 2023 are adopted by
reference for the purposes of administration of the Michigan Construction Code,
and declared to be a part of § 1612.3 of the Michigan Building Code, and to
provide the content of the “Flood Hazards” section of Table R301.2(1) of the
Michigan Residential Code.
   C.   Disputes. Where there are disputes as to the location of a flood hazard
area zone boundary, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall resolve the dispute in
accord with this code.
   D.   Compliance required. In addition to other requirements of this chapter
applicable to development in the underlying zoning districts, compliance with
the requirements of this section shall be necessary for all development
occurring within the flood hazard area zone. Land uses permitted in the flood
hazard overlay zone outlined in this chapter may only be permitted if such land
use is permitted in the underlying zoning district, or if the land use is
accessory to a permitted principal use within the underlying zone. Conflicts
between the requirements of this section and other requirements of this chapter
or any other chapter shall be resolved in favor of this section, except where
the conflicting requirement is more stringent and would further the objectives
of this section to a greater extent than the requirements of this section. In
these cases, the more stringent requirement shall be applied.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981; Ord. 387, passed 11-9-2020; Ord. 395, passed 5-22-
2023)
Sec. 53-74. USE AND PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE REGULATIONS.
   Within the flood hazard area overlay zone, no land shall be used, except for
one or more of the following uses:
   A.   Grading and agriculture, pastureland and animal grazing;
   B.   Harvesting of a native or wild crop permitted by law such as wild rice,
marsh hay, berries and seeds;
   C.   Harvesting of trees;
   D.   Parks, picnic areas, playgrounds, playfields, athletic fields, golf
courses, bridle paths, nature paths and trails;
   E.   Wildlife preserves;
   F.   Fishing, trapping and hunting in compliance with current laws and
regulations;
   G.   Hunting and conservation club, noncommercial archery, rifle and
shooting ranges;
   H.   Historic sites and structures;
   I.   Swimming beaches, fishing and boating docks in accord with the
provisions of the Inland Lakes and Streams Act of 1972;
   J.   Sand and gravel extraction;
   K.   Required open space or lot area for structural uses that are landward
of the overlay zone; and
   L.   Accessory structures and uses, including the following: off-street
parking, streets, roads, bridges, outdoor play equipment, sheds and garages,
boathouses, boat hoists, utility lines, pumphouses, bleachers, bank protection
structures, signs, fences, gazebos and similar outdoor equipment and
appurtenances; provided, each of the following requirements are met.
      1.   The structure would not cause an increase in water surface
elevation, obstruct flow or reduce the impoundment capacity of the floodplain.
      2.   All equipment and structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation
and lateral movement.
      3.   Compliance with these requirements is certified by an engineering
finding by a registered engineer.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981; Ord. 395, passed 5-22-2023)
Sec. 53-75. FILLING AND DUMPING.
   Dredging and filling and/or dumping or backfilling with any material in any
manner is prohibited unless through compensating excavation and shaping of the
floodplain, the flow and impoundment capacity of the floodplain will be
maintained or improved and unless all applicable state regulations are met
including, but not limited to, approvals pursuant to: Public Act 245 of 1929,
as amended by Public Act 167 of 1968; Public Act 347 of 1912, as amended;
Public Act 346 of 1912, as amended; and Public Act 203 of 1919, as amended.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981; Ord. 395, passed 5-22-2023)
Sec. 53-76. GENERAL STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION.
   A.   No building or structure shall be erected, converted or substantially
improved or placed and no land filled or structure used in a floodplain
district unless a zoning compliance permit or variance from the Zoning Board of
Appeals is obtained, which approval shall not be granted until a permit from
the Department of Environment Great Lakes and Energy under authority of the
state’s Floodplain Regulatory Authority found in Part 31, Water Resources
Protection, of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, 1994 PA
451, as amended, has been obtained. Where a development permit cannot be issued
prior to the issuance of a zoning compliance permit, a letter from the issuing
agency indicating intent to issue contingent only upon proof of zoning
compliance shall be acceptable.
   B.   All public utilities and facilities shall be designed, constructed and
located to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
   C.   The Building Inspector or his or her representative shall review
development proposals to determine compliance with the standards in this
section and shall transmit his or her determination to the Zoning
Administrator.
   D.   Land shall not be divided in a manner creating parcels or lots which
cannot be used in conformance with the requirements of this section.
   E.   The flood-carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse not
subject to state or federal regulations designed to ensure flood carrying
capacity shall be maintained.
   F.   Available flood hazard data from federal, state or other sources shall
be reasonably utilized in meeting the standards of this section. Data furnished
by the Federal Insurance Administration shall take precedence over data from
other sources.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981; Ord. 395, passed 5-22-2023)
Sec. 53-77. FLOOD HAZARD AREA APPLICATION INFORMATION.
   In addition to the information required with an application for a zoning
compliance permit, special use permit, variance or any other type of
development permission required under this chapter, the following information
shall be submitted as a part of an application for permission to commence any
type of development within a flood hazard area zone:
   A.   The elevation in relation to mean sea level of the floor, including
basement, of all structures;
   B.   A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development;
   C.   Proof of development permission from appropriate local, state and
federal agencies including a floodplain permit, approval or letter of no
authority from the State Department of Environment Great Lakes and Energy under
authority of the State's Floodplain Regulatory Authority found in Part 31,
Water Resources Protection, of the Natural Resources and Environmental
Protection Act, 1994 PA 451, as amended;
   D.   Base flood elevation data where the proposed development is subject to
Public Act 288 of 1967, the Land Division Act or greater than five acres in
size; and
   E.   Additional information which may be reasonably necessary to determine
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981; Ord. 395, passed 5-22-2023)
Sec. 53-78. SITE PLAN REVIEW.
   For all uses permitted in a FP District, a site plan shall be submitted and
no building permit shall be issued until the City Council has approved the site
plan after recommendation from the Planning Commission in accordance with this
code.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981; Ord. 395, passed 5-22-2023)
Sec. 53-79. AREA, HEIGHT, BULK AND PLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   Area, height, bulk, and placement requirements unless otherwise specified
are as provided in Article XV.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981; Ord. 395, passed 5-22-2023)
Sec. 53-80. DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   A.   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based upon engineering and scientific
methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may
be increased by human-made or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge
openings restricted by debris. Approval of the use of land under this section
shall not be considered a guarantee or warranty of safety from flood damage.
   B.   This chapter does not imply that areas outside the flood hazard area
will be free from flood damage. This chapter does not create liability on the
part of the city or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully
made thereunder.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981; Ord. 395, passed 5-22-2023)
ARTICLE XIV-A. WELLHEAD PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT
Sec. 53-81. STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   The Wellhead Protection Overlay District is designed to safeguard the public
health, safety and welfare of users of the city’s water system by regulating
the land use and the storage, handling, use and/or production of regulated
substances within the wellhead capture zone described as the land adjacent to
and up gradient from existing and proposed municipal water well fields. The
intent of this designation is to protect the area’s potable water supply
against contamination.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-82. SUPPLEMENTARY DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AQUIFER. The glacial formation, group of glacial formations or part of a
glacial formation that contains enough saturated permeable material to yield
significant quantities of water.
   DIRECT RECHARGE AREA. The portion of a drainage basin in which water
infiltrating vertically from the surface will intercept the water table.
   GROUND WATER GRADIENT. The slope (gradient) of the ground water surface
defining the direction of ground water movement.
   POTABLE WATER. Water that is satisfactory for drinking, culinary and
domestic purposes, meeting current drinking water standards.
   RECHARGE POND/LAGOON. A natural or human-made recharge area or pond designed
and maintained to recharge storm water, cooling and/or treated water to the
ground water and a rate greater than that occurring naturally.
   REGULATED SUBSTANCES. Substances to be regulated and consist of chemicals
and mixtures of chemicals which are health hazards. REGULATED SUBSTANCES
include those listed by MIOSHA and as currently reported on MIOSHA material
safety data sheets and petroleum and non-solid petroleum derivatives (except
non-PCB dielectric fluids).
   TEN-YEAR CAPTURE AREA. The area around and up gradient from the public water
supply well fields delineated by the ten-year travel time contour capture zone
boundary.
   TRAVEL TIME CONTOUR. A locus of points from which water takes an equal
amount of time to reach a given destination such as a well or well field.
   UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANK. Any one or combination of tanks (including
underground pipes connected thereto) which is used to contain an accumulation
of regulated substances and the volume of which (including the underground
piping connected thereto) is 10% or more beneath the surface of the ground.
Flow through process tanks are excluded from the definition of UNDERGROUND
STORAGE TANK.
   UNDERLYING ZONE. The present zoning classification as it exists under the
overlay zone.
   WELL FIELD. A tract of land that contains a number of wells for supplying
water.
   WELLHEAD PROTECTION ZONE. The area outlined on the zoning map as determined
to be a well field capture zone by computation and in consideration of natural
surface runoff boundaries.
   ZONE OF INFLUENCE. A zone delineated by iso-travel time contours around well
fields. The ZONE is calculated on the rate of movement of ground water in the
vicinity of the wells with an allowance for the dispersion of a pollutant
entering into and moving with the ground water.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-83. PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED.
   The uses permitted in the Wellhead Protection Overlay Zone shall include all
of the uses as allowed in the underlying zoning district, except for the
following:
   A.   The processing or compounding of chemicals or drugs or bulk storage;
   B.   Foundries; and
   C.   Heavy equipment repair.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-84. PERMITTED USES AFTER SPECIAL APPROVAL.
   Any of the uses subject to special approval in the underlying zone may be
permitted subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed and subject further to
the approval of the City Council after a recommendation from the Planning
Commission, with the exception of the following:
   A.   Sanitary landfills of any type;
   B.   Mining, extraction, excavation or processing of sand, gravel or
limestone;
   C.   Gasoline stations or convenience stores selling gasoline or farm fuels;
   D.   Bus or truck terminals;
   E.   Junk or salvage yards;
   F.   Automobile and truck body shops;
   G.   Concrete or asphalt plants;
   H.   Metal processing plants and/or electroplating plants; and
   I.   Painting and coating manufacturing plants.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-85. GROUND WATER PROTECTION STANDARDS.
   A.   Use of regulated substances in conjunction with the permitted and
special approval uses in this zone shall be limited to:
      1.   The aggregate of regulated substances in use may not exceed 20
gallons or 160 pounds at any one time; and
      2.   The total use of regulated substances may not exceed 50 gallons or
400 pounds in any 12-month period.
   B.   A limited exclusion from the provisions of permitted uses after special
approval, is authorized for non-routine maintenance of repair of property in
the Wellhead Protection Overlay Zone; provided, the uses are limited as
follows:
      1.   The aggregate of regulated substances in use may not exceed 50
gallons or 400 pounds at any time; and
      2.   The total use of regulated substances may not exceed 100 gallons or
800 pounds at any time.
   C.   A limited exclusion authorized for regulated substances which are
cleaning agents; provided, however, that, the cleaning agents are packaged for
personal or household use or are present in the same form and concentration as
a product packaged for use by the general public and shall not exceed 100
gallons or 800 pounds at any time. In no case shall regulated substances
claimed under the exclusion include hydrocarbon or halogenated hydrocarbon
solvents.
   D.   A limited exclusion from the provisions hereof is authorized for
medical research laboratory uses in the Wellhead Protection Overlay Zone;
provided that, regulated substances shall be stored, handled or used in
containers not to exceed five gallons or 40 pounds of each substance and the
aggregate inventory of regulated substances shall not exceed 250 gallons or
2,000 pounds.
   E.   Storage of fuel or lubricants for vehicle operations and fuel for
building and/or processing or heating in conjunction with permitted and
conditional uses in this zone shall be in aboveground storage tanks.
   F.   Notwithstanding other provisions of this article, nonconforming uses in
this zone presently using underground storage tanks for fuel and lubricants for
vehicle operations and fuel for building and/or processing heating shall be
permitted to replace existing tanks with those constructed pursuant to
specifications of Public Act 423 of 1984 and all regulations enacted pursuant
thereto and not exceeding the capacity of existing tanks. Replacement of
underground tanks for regulated substances other than the above-noted fuels and
lubricants not permitted.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-86. INFORMATION REQUIRED FOR SITE PLAN REVIEW.
   All buildings and structures conducted or remodeled requiring the approval
of a site plan as set forth in this code are within the Wellhead Protection
Overlay Zone shall also comply with the following additional site plan
requirements:
   A.   A copy of the MIOSHA Material Safety Data Sheet or “Hazardous Reporting
Form for Site Plan Review”;
   B.   Location of existing and proposed facilities and structures, above and
below ground, including, but not limited to, the following:
      1.   Public and private ground water supply wells on-site and in adjacent
properties;
      2.   Septic systems and other wastewater treatment systems;
      3.   All interior and exterior areas to be used for the storage, use,
loading and unloading, recycling or disposal of hazardous substances;
      4.   Location of all underground and aboveground storage tanks for such
uses as fuel storage, waste oil, chemical storage, hazardous waste storage,
collection of contaminated storm water or wash water and similar uses; and
      5.   Location of interior and exterior drains, dry wells, catch basins,
retention /detention areas, storm water retention ponds, sumps and other
facilities designed to collect, store or transport storm water or wastewater
and the point of discharge for all drains and pipes shall be identified on the
site plan.
   C.   Location of existing wetlands, water bodies, watercourses and
floodplains;
   D.   Soil characteristics of the site (e.g., the U.S. Soil Conservation
Service); and
   E.   Delineation of areas on the site which are known to be contaminated,
together with a report on the status of the site cleanup.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-87. SITE PLAN REVIEW.
   In addition to the standards set forth in herein, the Planning Commission
and the City Council shall be governed by the following standards.
   A.   Ground water protection standards.
      1.   The project and the related improvements shall be designed to
protect the natural environment, including wetlands, water bodies,
watercourses, floodplains, ground water and soils.
      2.   Storm water management and drainage facilities shall be designed to
retain natural retention and storage capacity of any wetland, water body or
watercourse and shall not increase flooding or the possibility of polluting
surface or ground water, on-site or off-site.
      3.   General purpose floor drains shall be connected to a public sewer
system, an on-site holding tank or a system authorized through a state ground
water discharge permit.
      4.   Chemical loading and unloading areas shall not have drains which
discharge into the storm sewer piping or collection system unless equipped with
an appropriate sump pump which can be shut down in the case of a spill.
Further, chemical loading and unloading areas should be designed to contain or
direct spillage in a manner as to prevent potential discharge to the ground or
ground water, storm water piping or recharge lagoons.
      5.   Sites at which hazardous substances are loaded and unloaded, stored,
used or generated shall be designed to prevent spills and discharges to the
air, surface of the ground, wetlands, water bodies, watercourses or ground
water.
      6.   State and federal agency requirements for storage, spill prevention,
record keeping, emergency response, transport and disposal of hazardous
substances shall be met. No discharges to ground water, including direct and
indirect discharges, shall be allowed without required permits and approvals.
   B.   Aboveground storage and use areas for hazardous substances and
polluting materials.
      1.   Secondary containment of hazardous substances shall be provided.
Secondary containment shall be sufficient to store 110% of the stored substance
for the maximum anticipated period of time necessary for the recovery of any
released substance.
      2.   Secondary containment structures such as buildings, storage rooms,
sheds and pole barns shall not have floor drains which outlet to nearby drains,
soils, wetlands, water bodies, watercourses or ground water. Where allowed, the
secondary containment provided in division B.1. above shall apply.
   C.   Underground storage tanks.
      1.   Existing underground storage tanks or replacements allowed above
shall be registered with the State Police Fire Marshal Division and in
accordance with U.S. EPA.
      2.   Installation, operation, maintenance, closure and removal of
underground storage tanks shall be in accordance with the requirements of the
State Police Fire Marshal Division. Leak detection, corrosion protection, spill
prevention and overfill protection requirements shall be met. Records of
monthly monitoring of inventory control must be kept and made available for
review by the city and other applicable government officials.
      3.   Out-of-service or abandoned underground tanks shall be emptied and
removed from the ground in accordance with the requirements of the State Police
Fire Marshal Division and the MDEQ.
   D.   Sites with contaminated soils and/or ground water.
      1.   Site plans shall take into consideration the location and the extent
of any contaminated soils and/or ground water on the site and the need to
protect the public health and the environment.
      2.   Development shall not be allowed on or near contaminated areas of a
site unless information from the MDEQ is available with an indication that the
cleanup will proceed in a timely fashion.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
ARTICLE XV. AREA, HEIGHT, BULK AND PLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 53-88. AREA, HEIGHT, BULK AND PLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS.
                                   Maximum
                                   Building     Minimum Requirements   Minimum
         Minimum Minimum           Height                              Floor
         Lot     Lot     Maximum                                       Area per
Zoning   Width   Area    Lot                                           Dwelling
District (In     (Square Coverage  In      In         Least Total      Unit (In
         Feet)   Feet)   (Percent) Stories Feet Front 1     of 2  Rear Square
                                                                       Feet)
                                   Maximum
                                   Building     Minimum Requirements    Minimum
         Minimum Minimum           Height                               Floor
         Lot     Lot     Maximum                                        Area per
Zoning   Width   Area    Lot                                            Dwelling
District (In     (Square Coverage  In      In          Least Total      Unit (In
         Feet)   Feet)   (Percent) Stories Feet Front  1     of 2  Rear Square
                                                                        Feet)


R-1A     80      12,000  35        2-1/2   35   30a,b  8d    15d   25   1200c
R-1B     70      9,800   35        2-1/2   35   301a,b 84d   15d   25   1000
R-1C     60      7,200e  35        2-1/2   35   30a,b  5d    10d   25   1000
R-2      f       f       f         f       f    f, a,  f, g, f, g, f    f
                                                b      h     h
         See
R-MH     Article 720
         VII
C-1                                2-1/2   35          i, j        j, k
C-2                                3 (l)   40          i, j        j, k l
                                           (l)
CBD                                2-1/2   35          k
CS       100     10,000  35        2-1/2   35   30     20    40    25
I        100     20,000  65        3       50   30     20    40    30
FP
 
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981; Ord. 371, adopted 12-8-2014; Ord. 379, passed 4-9-
2018; Ord. 393, passed 1-9-2023)
Sec. 53-89. FOOTNOTES TO SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS.
   A.   In all residential districts, the required front yard shall not be used
for off-street parking, loading or unloading and shall remain as open space
unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except for landscaping,
plant materials or vehicle access drives. This requirement shall not be
construed to prohibit the parking of vehicles on designated driveways.
   B.   Where lots are on rivers, the property shall be treated as a through
lot and have required front yards on both frontages. If an accessory building
is requested on a lot with river frontage, the accessory building shall be
located in either the side lot area or the frontage along the river setback at
least ten feet from any existing structure.
   C.   The minimum floor area per dwelling unit shall not include areas of
basements, breezeways, unenclosed porches, terraces, attached garages, attached
sheds or utility rooms.
   D.   In the R-1A, R-1B and R-1C Districts, the width of side yards, which
abut upon a street on the same side or on the opposite side of the same block,
upon which other residential lots front, shall not be less than the required
front yard for the homes which front upon the side street.
   E.   For two-family dwellings, the minimum lot area shall be 10,000 square
feet.
   F.    Site requirements:
 Garden Apartments Townhouse Housing for the Elderly
                    Garden Apartments   Townhouse           Housing for the
                                                            Elderly
Gross site area     2 acres (min.)      2 acres (min.)      3 acres (min.)
Maximum floor area  .3 x developable    .25 x developable   .4 x developable
                    area                area                area
Maximum lot         .25 x developable   .25 x developable   .25 x developable
coverage            area                area                area
Maximum height (b)  2-1/2 stories or 35 2-1/2 stories or 35 4 stories or 60
                    feet                feet                feet
Minimum parking     2 spaces per unit   2 spaces per unit   Spaces per unit
Minimum landscaped  .2 x gross site     .25 x gross site    .3 x gross site
area                area                area                area
Maximum density     14 units per acre   8 units per acre    25 units per acre
Minimum front yard  25 feet             25 feet             25 feet
(a)
Minimum side yard   20 feet, 40 feet    20 feet, 40 feet    25 feet, 50 feet
(b, c, d)           (total two)         (total two)         (total two)
Minimum rear yard   30 feet             30 feet             40 feet
(b)
Minimum floor per   600 square feet     600 square feet     500 square feet
unit efficiency
One-bedroom         750 square feet     750 square feet     600 square feet
Two-bedroom         900 square feet     900 square feet     750 square feet
Three-bedroom       1,200 square feet   1,200 square feet
Four-bedroom        1,500 square feet   1,500 square feet
 
    G.   For every lot on which a multiple, row or terrace dwelling is erected,
there shall be provided a side yard on each side of the lot, as indicated in
the schedule. Each side yard shall be increased beyond the yard spaces
indicated by one foot for each ten feet or part thereof by which the length of
the multiple, row or terrace dwelling exceeds 40 feet in overall dimension
along the adjoining lot line.
   H.   Where two or more multiple, row or terrace dwellings are erected upon
the same lot, a minimum yard space of 20 feet in width shall be provided
between structures. This yard width shall be increased by two feet for each ten
feet or part thereof, by which each multiple, row or terrace dwelling, having
common yards, exceeds 40 feet in length on that side of the dwelling facing the
common yard.
   I.   Where any C-1, C-2 or CBD District borders on a side street, whereon a
residential zoning district exists in the same block, there shall be provided a
setback of five feet for all commercial buildings and parking and loading
areas.
   J.   Where C-1, C-2 or CBD District borders a residentially zoned district
and the Districts are not separated by an alley or street, there shall be a
minimum building setback of ten feet from the property line.
   K.   Loading space shall be provided for the rear yard in the ratio of at
least ten square feet per front foot of building. Where an alley or street
exists or is provided at the rear of buildings, the rear building setback and
loading requirements may be computed from the center of the alley or street.
The Board of Appeals may waive this requirement in cases where this section
causes undue hardship.
   L.   Where motels or hotels are permitted in a C-2 District, a minimum of
250 square feet of floor area per unit shall be provided. The requirements of
§ 53.88 above notwithstanding, hotels in the C-2 District west of Prince Street
are permitted a maximum height of 50 feet or four stories, whichever is less.
   M.   Orientation of all new residential dwellings or remodeling of
residential dwellings should enhance the overall cohesiveness and character of
the surrounding neighborhood. Unless site specific hardships are present that
are not self-created, the front door or main entrance shall be oriented toward
the street. Blank walls without openings are not allowed on any public faces of
any residential building.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981; Ord. 393, passed 1-9-2023)
Sec. 53-90. SUPPLEMENTARY DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GARDEN APARTMENTS. A residential structure having a height limit of two and
one-half stories and containing three or more attached rooms or suites of
rooms, each room or suite having its own cooking facilities and being used as a
dwelling for one family.
   GROSS SITE AREA. The total area within and conforming to the legal
description of the site.
   HANDICAPPED PERSON. A person or persons who may be classified as having a
physical impairment that manifests itself in one or more of the following ways:
nonambulatory; semiambulatory; visually impaired; deaf or hard-of-hearing;
having faulty coordination; and having reduced mobility, flexibility,
coordination or perceptiveness due to age or physical or mental conditions.
HANDICAPPED PERSON is one whose impairment is expected to be continued and of
indefinite duration.
   HOUSING FOR THE ELDERLY. A multiple-family housing development having the
following tenant eligibility requirements. At the time of rental application,
tenants must be:
      1.   Families of two or more persons, the head of which (or the spouse of
which) is 62 years of age or older or is handicapped; or
      2.   Single persons who are 62 years of age or older or who are
handicapped.
   LANDSCAPED AREA. A portion of land area which has been changed, rearranged
or to which plant materials or scenery have been added to produce an aesthetic
effect appropriate for a residential area.
   MAJOR THOROUGHFARE. A two-lane or four- or more lane arterial street as
shown and defined in the Plainwell Transportation Plan.
   SITE PLAN. A plan drawn to scale showing uses and structures proposed for a
parcel of land in accordance with the requirements of this code.
   SITE PLAN REVIEW. The process as the Planning Commission reviews the site
plan(s) of a proposed development to assure that it conforms to the stated
purposes and standards of the respective district, provides for necessary
public facilities, protects adjacent properties through appropriate site of
structures and landscaping.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
ARTICLE XVI. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 53-91. CONFLICTING REGULATIONS.
   Whenever any provision of this chapter imposes more stringent requirements,
regulations, restrictions or limitations than are imposed or required by the
provisions of any other law or ordinance, the provisions of this chapter shall
govern.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-92. SCOPE.
   No building or structure or part thereof, shall hereafter be erected,
constructed reconstructed or altered and maintained and no new use or change
shall be made or maintained of any building, structure or land or part thereof,
except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-93. STREETS, ALLEYS AND RAILROAD RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   All streets, alleys and railroad rights-of-way, if not otherwise
specifically designated, shall be deemed to be in the same zone as the property
immediately abutting upon the streets, alleys or railroad rights-of-way. Where
the centerline of a street or alley serves as a district boundary, the zoning
of the street or alley, unless otherwise specifically designated, shall be
deemed to be the same as that of the abutting property up to the centerline.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-94. PERMITTED USES.
   No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or
structurally altered, nor shall any building or land be used, designed or
arranged for any purpose other than is permitted in the district in which the
building or land is located. Where a use is defined or listed as a permitted
use or a special use in a given zoning district, such use shall not be
permitted in any zoning district where it is not listed. This is true even if
such use might be similar to a listed permitted use.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981; Ord. 358, adopted 4-11-2011)
Sec. 53-95. PERMITTED AREA.
   No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or
structurally altered, nor shall any open spaces surrounding any building be
encroached upon or reduced in any manner, except in conformity with the area
regulations of the district in which the building is located.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-96. PERMITTED HEIGHT.
   No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or
structurally altered to exceed the height limit hereinafter established for the
district in which the building is located; except that, roof structures for the
housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans or similar equipment
required to operate and maintain the building and fire or parapet walls,
skylights, towers, steeples, stage lofts and screens, flagpoles, chimneys,
smokestacks, individual domestic radio and television aerials and wireless
masts, water tanks or similar structures may be erected above the height limits
herein prescribed. No structure may be erected to exceed by more than 15 feet
the height limits of the district in which it is located, nor shall the
structure have a total area greater than 25% of the roof area of the building,
nor shall the structure be used for any residential purpose or any commercial
purpose other than a use incidental to the main use of the building.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-97. ZONING LOT.
   Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered to provide dwelling
units shall be located on a lot, as herein defined, and, in no case, shall
there be more than one building on one lot unless otherwise provided in this
chapter.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-98. LOT AREA, YARDS AND OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS.
   Space which has been counted or calculated as part of a side yard, rear
yard, front yard, court, lot area or other open space to meet the requirements
of this chapter for a building, shall not be counted or calculated to satisfy
or comply with a yard, court, lot area or other open space requirement for any
other building. An open porch or paved terrace may occupy a required front yard
or rear yard; provided that, the unoccupied portion of the front yard or rear
yard furnishes a depth of not less than 21 feet.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-99. PROJECTIONS INTO YARDS.
   Architectural features, not including vertical projections, may extend or
project into a required side yard not more than two inches for each one foot of
width of the side yard and may extend or project into a required front yard or
rear yard not more than three feet. Architectural features shall not include
those details which are normally demountable (i.e., awnings).
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-100. USE OF YARD SPACES AND OTHER OPEN AREAS FOR JUNK STORAGE.
   A.   No machinery, equipment, vehicles, lumber piles, crates, boxes,
building blocks or other materials either discarded, unsightly or showing
evidence of a need for repairs, with or without a current license, shall be
placed, stored, parked, abandoned or junked in any open area that is visible
from the street, public place or adjoining residential property for longer than
48 hours. In the event the above items are permitted to be placed, stored,
parked, abandoned or junked in the area, the Building Inspector shall give
written notice to the owner of the premises on which the item is stored and/or
to the owner of the stored item to remove or cause to be removed, the item
within 48 hours after the giving of the notice. Failure to comply with the
notice within 48 hours shall constitute a violation of this chapter. The above
notwithstanding, the Building Inspector may, upon investigation, issue a letter
to the owner or owners authorizing a grace period not to exceed 30 days.
   B.   No upholstered furniture or appliance designed for use inside a
building or vehicle shall be used, remain or be stored outside for longer than
24 hours.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-101. STREET ACCESS.
   No building permit shall be issued for any construction located on any lot
or parcel of land in the city that does not abut on a public street or highway;
provided that, this chapter shall not be the basis for preventing the issuance
of a building permit for ordinary repair or maintenance of any building that is
already erected on the date of the adoption of this chapter upon a lot or
parcel of land that does not so abut a street or highway.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-102. VISIBILITY.
   No structure, wall, fence, shrubbery or trees shall be erected, maintained
or planted on any lot which will obstruct the view of the driver of a vehicle
approaching an intersection, excepting that shrubbery and low retaining walls
not exceeding two and one-half feet in height above the curb level and shade
trees where all branches are not less than eight feet above the street level
will be permitted. For residential corner lots, in the R-1A, R-1B, R-1C and R-
2 Districts, this unobstructed area will be a triangular section of land formed
by the two street curb lines and a line connecting them at points 25 feet from
the intersection of the curb lines.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-103. DWELLINGS IN NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   No dwelling unit shall be erected in the I District. However, the sleeping
quarters of a watchperson or a caretaker may be permitted in the district in
conformance with the specific requirements of the particular district.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981; Ord. 379, passed 4-9-2018)
Sec. 53-104. ONE SINGLE-FAMILY STRUCTURE PER LOT.
   No single-family residential structure shall be erected upon a lot with
another single-family residential structure.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-105. ACCESSORY BUILDINGS.
   Accessory buildings, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter, shall be
subject to the following regulations:
   A.   Where the accessory building is structurally attached to a main
building, it shall be subject to and must conform to all regulations of this
chapter applicable to main or principal buildings;
   B.   Accessory buildings shall not be erected in any required yard except a
rear yard, and shall not be closer than three feet to any side or rear lot
line;
   C.   Accessory buildings shall not exceed the ground floor area (in square
footage) of the main building;
   D.   Accessory buildings shall not exceed the height of the main building or
35 feet, whichever is the lesser;
   E.   No detached accessory building shall be located closer than ten feet to
any main building;
   F.   When an accessory building is located on a corner lot, the side yard of
which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the lot to its
rear, such accessory building shall not project beyond the front yard line
required on the lot to the rear of such corner lot;
   G.   In the case of double frontage lots, accessory buildings shall observe
front yard requirements on both street frontages whenever there are any
principal buildings fronting on said streets in the same block or adjacent
blocks; and
   H.   A carport made of non-flammable materials may be abutted or attached to
the main building. It shall not be erected in any required yard except a side
or rear yard, and shall not be closer than three feet to any side or rear lot
line.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981; Ord. 350, adopted 6-22-2009; Ord. 373, passed 10-26-
2015)
Sec. 53-106. ACCESSORY ANTENNAS; DISH ANTENNAS; SATELLITE RECEIVING STATIONS.
   Accessory antennas, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter, shall be
subject to the following regulations.
   A.   Accessory antennas shall be permitted in all districts as accessory
uses provided they are not used for commercial or profit making activities. If
used for commercial or profit making activities, accessory antennas shall be
governed by § 53-29 of this chapter.
   B.   Where the accessory antenna is structurally attached to a main
building, it shall be subject to and must conform to all regulations of this
chapter applicable to main or principal buildings.
   C.   An accessory antenna may be erected in any required yard except a front
yard, shall not project beyond the front building line of the respective
building and shall not be closer than three feet to any side or rear lot line.
Movable antennas shall not revolve closer than three feet to any side or rear
lot line.
   D.   An accessory antenna shall not exceed one story or 15 feet in height.
The total yard area devoted to an accessory antenna use shall not exceed 100
square feet of yard area.
   E.   A corner lot, the side yard of which is substantially a continuation of
the front lot line of the lot to its rear shall be regarded as having two front
yards. When an antenna is located on this type of lot, it shall not project
beyond the continued front lot line of the rear lot.
   F.   In the case of double frontage lots, accessory antennas shall observe
front yard requirements on both street frontages whenever there are any
principal buildings fronting on the streets in the same block or adjacent
blocks.
   G.   In all cases, an accessory antenna shall be anchored or fastened
securely to the building or surface to which it is attached or upon which it
rests.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-107. PARKING AND STORAGE OF CAMPERS, TRAILERS AND BOATS.
   A.    Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      BOAT. A vessel used or capable of being used as a means of transportation
on water.
      CAMPER (CAMPING TRAILER, TRUCK CAMPER). A vehicular portable temporary
living quarters used for recreational camping or travel and of a size and
weight that does not require a special  highway movement permit when drawn by a
motor vehicle. May be classified as Class B on an industry wide basis.
      FOLDING TENT TRAILER. A folding structure, mounted on wheels for towing
and designed for travel and vacation use.
      GOOD REPAIR. In a state that the ordinary user would find the unit
habitable and fit for ordinary use.
      MAINTENANCE. Preservation from failure or decline.
      MOBILE HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, that is
built on a chassis and is designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a
permanent foundation, when it is connected to the required utilities (plumbing,
heating, air conditioning, electrical systems, water, sewer, septic) contained
in the structure.
      MOTOR HOME. A motor vehicle constructed or altered to provide living
quarters, including permanently installed cooking and sleeping facilities,
which is used for recreation, camping or other noncommercial use. May be
classified as Class A or Class C on an industry-wide basis.
      OTHER RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT. Includes snowmobiles, jet skis, all terrain
or special terrain vehicles, and utility trailers plus the normal equipment
used to transport them on the highway.
      PICKUP CAMPER. A non-self-propelled recreational vehicle, without wheels
for road use, that is designed to rest all of its weight upon and be attached
to a motor vehicle; is primarily intended for use as temporary living quarters
in connection with recreational, camping or travel purposes. Excludes truck
covers or caps as long as the cover or cap does not allow the pickup to be used
as a dwelling. May be classified as Class B on an industry-wide basis.
      RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A new or used vehicle that has its own motive power
or is towed by a motor vehicle; is primarily designed to provide temporary
living quarters for recreation, camping, travel or seasonal use; does not
require a special highway movement permit.
      SNOWMOBILES. Any motor-driven vehicle designed for travel primarily on
snow or ice of a type that utilizes self-type runners or skis, an endless belt
tread or any combination of these or other similar means of contact with the
surface upon which it is operated.
      TRAILER. Every vehicle with or without motive power designed for carrying
property or persons and for being drawn by a motor vehicle, constructed so that
no part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle. Excludes pole-trailers or
implements of husbandry.
      TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicular portable structure mounted on wheels and of a
size and weight that does not require a special highway movement permit when
drawn by a stock passenger  automobile or when drawn with a fifth wheel mounted
on a motor vehicle, primarily designed, constructed and used to provide
temporary living quarters for recreational camping or travel. May be classified
as Class B on an industry-wide basis.
   B.   General provisions.
      1.   This division includes units that are similar in nature and use as
those defined above.
      2.   All units subject to this section must be:
         a.   Properly registered and licensed;
         b.   For personal use only;
         c.   Kept in good running condition to allow immediate movement from
place to place at the time a request to move is made;
         d.   Kept locked and secured at all times, to prevent vandalism or
entry by children or trespassers;
         e.   Covered with a tarpaulin or canvas that is not tattered or
ripped, to prevent vandalism or entry by children or trespassers;
         f.   Parked or stored in the rear or side yard;
         g.   In compliance with front, side and rear-yard setbacks; and
         h.   In compliance with Section
25-4 C (Nuisances).
      3.   All units subject to this section are included in the calculation to
determine the 35% maximum permitted lot coverage.
      4.    One unit may be parked in a driveway that is a minimum of 25 feet
from the city right-of-way.
      5.   For the purpose of loading and unloading, a unit subject to this
section may be parked at a residence and connected to electricity or water for
a maximum of 72 hours.
      6.   For the purpose of maintenance, a unit subject to this section may
be parked at a residence for a maximum of 72 hours.
      7.   In order to park or store a unit subject to this section, the real
property owner or lessee of the real property owner must also be the registered
owner of the unit.
      8.   The exteriors of all units subject to this section must be kept in
good repair.
   C.   Prohibitions.
      1.   Mobile homes must not be parked or stored outside of a mobile home
park or the lot of a dealer who, in the ordinary course of business, sells
mobile homes.
      2.   All units or a combination of units subject to this section must
not:
         a.   Be used or occupied for sleeping or dwelling while parked or
stored;
         b.   Parked in a yard that is directly in front of a residence;
         c.   Connected to electricity, water, gas or sanitary sewer
facilities;
      3.   All units subject to this section must not be parked or stored to
create a vision obstruction for vehicles or pedestrian traffic.
      4.   Maintenance of units subject to this section:
         a.   Must not create excessive noise, vibration, odor or other
nuisance to neighbors;
         b.   Must not release hazardous or toxic chemicals into the
environment; and
         c.   Is restricted to one unit at a time.
         d.   Winterization, oil changes, brake repairs, flushing of systems
(such as but not limited to: refrigerant, gray water, dark water), or removal
of winterization is prohibited.
   D.   Violations and penalties. 
      1.   Any person who violates any provision of this section is responsible
for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not
less than $250, plus costs and other sanctions, for each violation.
      2.   Repeat offenses shall be subject to increased fines as provided by
code, except that the increased fine for a repeat offense shall be as follows.
         a.   The fine for any offense which is a first repeat offense shall be
not less than $500, plus costs and other sanctions.
         b.   The fine for any offense which is a second repeat offense or any
subsequent repeat offense shall be not less than $1,000, plus costs and other
sanctions.
(Ord. eff. 7-12-1985; Ord. 318, adopted 11-12-2001; Ord. 366, adopted 10-13-
2014)
Sec. 53-108. AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATIONS AND PUBLIC GARAGES.
   All automobile service stations erected after the effective date of this
chapter shall comply with all requirements of this section. No automobile
service station existing on the effective date of this chapter shall be
structurally altered so as to provide a lesser degree of conformity with the
provisions of this section than existed on the effective date of this chapter.
   A.   An automobile service station building housing an office and/or
facilities for servicing, greasing and/or washing motor vehicles shall be
located not less than 40 feet from any street lot line.
   B.   All driveways providing ingress or egress from an automobile service
station shall be not more than 30 feet wide at the property line. No more than
one curb opening shall be permitted for each 50 feet of frontage or major
fraction thereof along any street and no more than two curb openings are
permitted on any street. No driveway or curb opening shall be located nearer
than 20 feet to any corner or adjoining property lot line, as measured along
the property line.
   C.   A raised curb six inches in height shall be erected along all street
lot lines, except for driveway openings.
   D.   All lubrication equipment, motor vehicle washing equipment, hydraulic
hoists, shall be enclosed entirely within a building.
   E.   All gasoline pumps shall be located not less than 15 feet from any lot
line and shall be arranged so that motor vehicles shall not be supplied with
gasoline or serviced while parked upon or overhanging any public sidewalk,
street or right-of-way.
   F.   Where an automobile service station adjoins property located in any
residential zone, a masonry wall five feet in height shall be erected and
maintained along the service station property line. All masonry walls shall be
protected by a fixed curb or barrier to prevent vehicles from contacting the
wall.
   G.   All exterior lighting, including illuminated signs, shall be erected
and hooded or shielded so as to be deflected away from adjacent and neighboring
property.
   H.   1.   When a structure designed and used for automobile service station
or filling station purposes ceases to operate on a continuing basis for a
period of 180 consecutive days, the owner of the premises shall be served
written notice by the Building Inspector of the requirement within 60 days of
the date of the notice, to either:
         a.   Resume operation of the premises on a continuing basis as a
lawful automobile service station or filling station;
         b.   Lawfully convert the structure to another permitted use in that
district;
         c.   Demolish the structure and completely remove the debris from the
premises; or
         d.   Demonstrate evidence to the City Council that aggressive
marketing efforts are being pursued so that either divisions H.1.a. or b. can
be met.
      2.   The evidence must be demonstrated every 60 days after having been
served the written notice. In all cases, an abandoned or vacant automobile
service or gasoline filling station shall be maintained in accordance with this
section.
   I.   An abandoned automobile service or filling station may be converted to
a principal permitted use in the district in which the station is located;
provided, the following conditions are met.
      1.   The use shall not be out of architectural harmony with the
surrounding neighborhood by reason of its character or quality of development.
      2.   All gasoline pumps and signs shall be removed and underground
gasoline storage tanks shall be abandoned in conformance with prescribed city
and state fire safety provisions.
      3.   All buildings shall meet all applicable requirements of the City
Building Code for safety and structural condition.
      4.   There shall be adequate off-street parking provided in accordance
with this code.
      5.   No outside storage areas shall be permitted.
      6.   The use shall meet all area, height, bulk and placement requirements
of the district in which the use is located in accordance with this code.
      7.   The use shall comply with all other requirements of the applicable
district unless otherwise provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-109. MAINTENANCE OF VACANT OR ABANDONED BUILDINGS.
   All vacant or abandoned buildings shall be maintained in accordance with the
following requirements.
   A.   All building exteriors shall be secured and continuously maintained to
prevent vandalism.
   B.   No outdoor storage shall be permitted on the site.
   C.   All sites shall be cleaned of debris and maintained in a condition so
as to not cause a threat to health, safety and welfare of the city, the
immediate neighborhood and adjacent land uses.
   D.   For commercial and industrial land uses which have ceased operation on
a continuing basis for a period of 180 days, all identification signs shall be
removed within 60 days of notice receipt.
   E.   For automobile service or gasoline filling stations which have ceased
to operate on a continuing basis for a period of 180 consecutive days, all
signs, pumps, pump islands, grease and oil storage areas shall be removed
within 60 days of notice receipt. In addition, the site shall be thoroughly
cleaned of all oil and grease deposits.
   F.   Maintenance of all vacant and abandoned buildings shall comply with all
applicable state and local ordinances.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-110. RESTORING UNSAFE BUILDINGS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a
safe condition of any part of any building or structure declared unsafe by the
Building Inspector or required compliance with his or her lawful order, except
as provided in this code.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-111. DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENTS.
   A.   When a drive-in establishment adjoins property located in any
residential district, an ornamental masonry wall, five feet in height shall be
erected and maintained along the interior line or if separated from the
residential zone by an alley, then along the alley lot line. In addition, all
outside trash areas shall be enclosed by the five-foot masonry wall. The wall
shall be protected from possible damage inflicted by vehicles using the parking
area by means of pre-cast concrete wheel stops at least six inches in height or
by firmly implanted bumper guards not attached to the wall or by other suitable
barriers.
   B.   The entire parking area shall be paved with a permanent surface of
concrete or asphaltic cement. Any unpaved area of the site shall be landscaped
with lawn or other horticultural materials, maintained in a neat and orderly
fashion at all times and separated from the paved area by a raised curb or
other equivalent barrier.
   C.   Lighting shall be installed in a manner which will not create a driving
hazard on abutting streets or which will not cause direct illumination on
adjacent residential properties.
   D.   Before approval is given for any use, a site plan shall be first
submitted to the Planning Commission for review as to suitability of location
of entrances and exits to the site, parking area, screening, lighting and other
design features.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-112. BUILDING GRADES.
   A.   Any building requiring yard space shall be located at an elevation that
a sloping grade shall be maintained to cause the flow of water to run away from
the walls of the structures thereon. The balance of yard spaces shall be graded
and adequate drainage provided where necessary to deflect proper drainage of
surface waters from the premises.
   B.   When a new building is constructed on a vacant lot between two existing
buildings or adjacent to an existing building, the existing established grade
shall be used in determining the grade around the new building and the yard
around the new building shall be graded in a manner as to meet existing grades.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-113. BUILDINGS TO BE MOVED.
   Any building or structure which has been wholly or partially erected on any
premises within or outside the city shall not be moved to and/or placed upon
any premises in the city unless a building permit for the building or structure
shall have been secured. Any building or structure shall fully conform to all
the provisions of this chapter in the same manner as a new building or
structure.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-114. EXCAVATIONS OR HOLES.
   The construction, maintenance or existence within the city of any
unprotected, unbarricaded, open or dangerous excavations, holes, pits or wells
or of any excavations, holes or pits which constitute or are reasonably likely
to constitute a danger or menace to public health, safety or welfare, are
prohibited; provided, however, this section shall not prevent any excavation
under a permit issued pursuant to this chapter or the Building Code of the city
where the excavations are properly protected and warning signs posted in a
manner as may be approved by the Building Inspector.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-115. EXCAVATION, REMOVAL AND FILLING OF LAND.
   The use of land for the excavation, removal, mixing, crushing, filling, or
depositing of any type of earth material, sand, topsoil, clay, aggregates,
stones, gravel, or rock is not permitted in any zoning district, except under a
permit or approval granted by the authority of this chapter or other city
ordinance. This regulation does not apply to normal soil removal or fill for
basement or foundation work when a building permit has previously been duly
issued within the same calendar year by the Building Inspector for such
basement or foundation or for minor earth material removal or fill of less than
300 cubic yards in total. Minor earth material removal or fill may include, but
is not limited to, work related to the installation of a pool or hot tub,
driveway, street, swale, drainage ditch, or pond. This regulation shall also
exclude those excavations or fill required or directed by a federal or state
agency to provide for flood mitigation or removal of contaminated soils. No
property shall be filled or graded so as to cause or increase a discharge of
surface water run-off onto abutting properties or properties within 500 feet in
such a manner that will cause flooding, inconvenience or damage to adjacent
properties or properties within 500 feet and shall generally maintain existing
drainage courses. No property shall have fill deposited which exceeds 300 cubic
yards in total without a permit or approval pursuant to a city ordinance. When
property is developed or modified, existing grades on adjacent property shall
have favored status.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981; Ord. 387, passed 11-9-2020)
Sec. 53-116. CONSTRUCTION BEGUN PRIOR TO ADOPTION OF ORDINANCE.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require any change in the plans,
construction or design use of any building upon which actual construction was
lawfully begun prior to the adoption of this chapter and upon which building
actual construction has been diligently carried on; and, provided further that,
the building shall be completed within two years from the date of passage of
this chapter.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-117. VOTING PLACE.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not be so construed as to interfere
with the temporary use of any property as a voting place in connection with
municipal or other public election.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-118. APPROVAL OF PLATS.
   No proposed plat of a new subdivision shall hereafter be approved by either
the City Council or the City Planning Commission unless the lots within the
plat equals or exceeds the minimum size and width requirements set forth in the
various districts of this chapter and unless the plat fully conforms with the
statutes of the state and all other provisions of this code.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-119. ESSENTIAL SERVICES.
   The City Council shall have the power to permit the location in any use
district of a public utility building, structure or use, if the Council shall
find the use, building or structure or use are designed, erected and landscaped
to conform harmoniously with the general architecture and character of the
district.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-120. SIGNS.
   A building permit shall be required for the erection, construction or
alteration of any sign, except as hereinafter provided, and all signs shall be
approved by the Building Inspector as to compliance with the requirements of
the Zoning District wherein the sign or signs are to be located and with the
requirements of Chapter 51 of this code.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-121. RADIO, TELEVISION TOWERS.
   All commercial radio, television and other transmitting or relay antenna
towers shall be permitted in any commercial or industrial district which abuts
upon a major commercial or industrial thoroughfare. The setbacks for the towers
from all abutting streets or adjacent property shall be a distance equal to the
height of the tower. The structural plans must be approved by the Building
Inspector.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-122. OPEN AIR BUSINESS USES.
   Open air business uses, where permitted in a C-2 or I District, shall be
subject to the following regulations.
   A.   The minimum area of the site shall be 10,000 square feet.
   B.   The minimum street frontage shall be 100 feet.
   C.   There shall be provided around all sides of the site, except at
entrances, exits and along sides of premises enclosed by buildings, a fence or
wall five feet in height in order to intercept wind-blown trash and other
debris.
   D.   Lighting shall be installed in a manner which will not create a driving
hazard on abutting streets or cast direct illumination on adjacent properties.
   E.   All open air business uses shall comply with all city and county health
regulations regarding sanitation and general health conditions.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981; Ord. 379, passed 4-9-2018)
Sec. 53-123. HISTORICAL DESIGNATION.
   The City Planning Commission and City Council may designate certain
properties or structures as “historical structures or properties”. The
occupation of these structures or properties for uses other than those
permitted in the zoning district in which it lies may be permitted after a
public hearing by the City Planning Commission and approval of the City
Council. Treatment of properties in officially established historical districts
shall be in conformance with the city’s historical preservation ordinance.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-124. MINIMUM LANDSCAPING REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS.
   Whenever required as part of the site plan approval process (§ 53-128), a
landscaping plan shall be prepared and implemented in accordance with the
following requirements.
   A.   1.   For multiple-family uses and nonresidential uses in residential
districts, the following percentages of the total site shall be in functional
open space:
 
Garden apartments              20%
Housing for the elderly        30%
Mixed residential developments 30%
Nonresidential uses            30%
Townhouse developments         25%
 
      2.   The open space shall be landscaped with one tree or shrub for every
1,000 square feet or portion thereof, plus one tree for every 1,500 square feet
or portion thereof not covered by a building or by required parking. (Plant
materials existing on the site prior to development may be included as part of
the requirement.) Ground cover is required in all landscape areas.
   B.   For nonresidential uses in nonresidential districts, a minimum of 15%
of the total lot area in landscaping, one tree or shrub for every 1,000 square
feet or portion thereof, plus one tree for every 1,500 square feet of
landscaped area or portion thereof shall be required. (Plant materials existing
on the site prior to the development may be included as part of the
requirement.) Ground cover is required in all landscape areas. Landscaping of
adjacent right-of-way area shall be included in satisfying the minimum on-site
requirement if it is maintained by the adjacent property owner. A minimum of
33% of required landscape area shall be located between any building and the
street.
   C.   All areas shall be landscaped and shall meet the following standards.
      1.   No synthetic plant materials such as artificial grass, shrubs, trees
or flowers shall be used to fulfill any landscaping requirements.
      2.   Berms, whenever utilized shall be designed and landscaped to
minimize erosion. Berms adjacent to public rights-of-way shall have a slope no
greater than three to one, unless designed as part of a retaining wall.
      3.   All landscaping materials shall consist of healthy specimens
compatible with local climate, soil characteristics, drainage and water supply.
All plant material shall be reasonably resistant to drought and disease. Non-
nursery derived stock shall not be used to satisfy these requirements.
      4.   Grass or other living plants shall be the primary ground cover in
required landscaped areas. Both sod planting and seeding are acceptable.
      5.   Ground covers other than grass shall be planted in required areas to
provide complete coverage within two growing seasons. Vines shall not be used
adjacent to pedestrian areas.
      6.   Materials such as river rock, cobble, boulders, paving stone,
patterned concrete, bark and wood chips shall be limited to small areas and
shall not exceed 25% of the required landscape area. All ground covers shall be
at least six inches deep. Loose gravel less than three-inch minimum aggregate
size shall not be used in areas abutting public streets or sidewalks.
   D.   Maintenance shall include all reasonable and regular irrigation,
weeding, fertilizing and pruning. Plant materials which show signs of insect
pests, diseases and/or damage shall be appropriately treated. Dead plant
material shall be replaced immediately or as soon as practical under the
seasonal conditions existing and according to the approved site plan. The
developer and subsequent owner(s) shall be responsible for maintaining all on-
site landscaping.
   E.   The city maintains a list of recommended and preferred trees for
installation on private sites. These species were selected by the Parks and
Trees Commission because of their aesthetic quality and climate compatibility.
Developers are encouraged to select trees from the list.
   F.   Minimum planting sizes for required landscaping shall be as follows:
      1.   Large deciduous trees (over 30-foot mature height): 2M caliper
measured 6M above ground;
      2.   Small deciduous trees (under 30-foot mature height, generally
ornamental and flowering trees): one and one-half feet caliper measured six
inches above ground;
      3.   Evergreen trees: four feet in height;
      4.   Shrubs: three-gallon container. Generally, deciduous shrubs will be
18 inches high. Spreading shrubs will have a 15 inches and 18 inches spread;
      5.   Ground covers (except vines): two and one-fourth inches to four
inches;
      6.   Vines: up to one-gallon container; and
      7.   Plant material in addition to required quantities is not subject to
size requirements.
   G.   Landscaping shall not interfere with public safety and shall not
interfere with the safe movement of motor vehicles, bicycles or pedestrians.
Planting shall be restricted in certain areas as follows.
      1.   In order to preserve sight distance, an unobstructed view shall be
maintained within these triangular areas:
         a.   At the intersection of two streets or where a street intersects
with an alley: a triangle defined by measuring 25 feet in length along each
curb or edge of roadway from their point of intersection, the third side being
a diagonal line connecting the first two. The city may require a greater
distance in certain high volume or high speed traffic intersections.
         b.   At the intersection of a driveway and a street: two sides of the
triangle defined by measuring 15 feet in length along the edge of the driveway
and along the curb or edge of roadway line from their point of intersection,
the third side being a diagonal line connecting the first two. No shrubs,
ground covers, boulders, berms, fences or other material constituting visual
obstructions shall exceed a height of 30 inches above the grade of the lower
roadway within the triangular areas.
      2.   Landscape materials shall not obstruct the operation and maintenance
of fire hydrants and electric facilities.
   H.   On projects in excess of three acres, the developer may file a phased
plan for completing the landscaping pursuant to these standards. All phases
must be completed within three years of approval.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-125. FENCES, WALLS AND OTHER PROTECTIVE BARRIERS.
   Fences may be constructed in the city in accordance with the following
requirements.
   A.   No electrically charged fences are permitted.
   B.   No barbed wire or other material having jagged or cutting edges shall
be used in connection with the construction of any fence in any residentially
zoned area.
   C.   In nonresidential zones, barbed wire or other pointed materials may be
used; provided, the material is over seven feet above the ground and any
projections at the top shall be over the fence owner’s property and shall not
overhang onto abutting properties.
   D.   In residentially zoned areas, only decorative or ornamental fences not
exceeding 48 inches in height may be permitted in required front yards.
Decorative or ornamental fences may include wrought iron, split rail, picket,
board on board, cyclone, planting screen or masonry wall. In no residentially
zoned area shall any solid fence, wall or planting screen greater than 30
inches in height as measured from grade, be located within a triangular section
of land formed by two 15-foot perpendicular lines intersecting at the driveway
and street pavement point and a connecting line (see attachment “A”).
   E.   In residentially zoned areas, a fence or wall shall not exceed six feet
in height on rear or side property lines or in rear or side yards.
   F.   All fences erected by individual property owners must be located on his
or her property.
   G.   All fences shall be maintained in a good condition so that they do not
result in an unreasonable hazard to persons who might come near them.
   H.   No fence, wall or planting screen shall be erected, established or
maintained on any corner lot which obstructs the view of a driver of a vehicle
approaching an intersection.
   I.   Persons seeking to install fences greater than the specified permitted
height must seek a variance from the Board of Zoning Appeals.
   J.   Fences constructed of wood or other material having one side designed
and considered the decorative side shall be erected with the side facing the
adjoining street or abutting property owner’s premises.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/2e5431c07ead2206b6572f578719c54e7c862c99/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2336.png]
 
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-126. INCINERATORS AND TRASH CONTAINERS.
   All commercial buildings constructed after the passage of this chapter shall
have incinerator facilities subject to all city, county and state health
regulations. Outside trash containers shall be permitted in the R-2, R-MH, C-1,
C-2, CBD, CS, and I Districts; provided that, they comply with the following
requirements.
   A.   Adequate vehicular access shall be provided to the containers for truck
pickup either via a public alley or vehicular access aisle which does not
conflict with the use of off-street parking areas or entrances to or exits from
principal buildings nearby.
   B.   A solid ornamental screening wall or fence shall be provided around all
sides of trash containers which shall be provided with a gate for access and be
of the height as to completely screen the containers, the maximum height of
which shall not exceed six feet.
   C.   The trash container(s), the screening wall or fence and the surrounding
ground area shall be maintained in a neat and orderly appearance, free from
rubbish, waste paper or other debris. This maintenance shall be the
responsibility of the owner of the premises on which the containers are placed.
   D.   The trash container(s) shall not be located closer than five feet to
any lot line of adjacent residentially zoned property.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981; Ord. 379, passed 4-9-2018)
Sec. 53-127. DWELLING UNIT CONVERSIONS.
   The provisions of this section allows for the possibility of converting a
single-family dwelling (within an existing structure) to a two- or three-family
dwelling in the R-1A, R-1D and R-1C Districts; provided that, the conversion be
in conformance with the standards and procedures set forth herein.
   A.    “Dwelling unit conversion” defined. A DWELLING UNIT CONVERSION is
defined as the process in which the owner of a single-family dwelling located
in an R-1A, R-1D and R-1C District may apply for conversion of the dwelling
into a greater number of dwelling units than existed in the dwelling prior to
conversion. Consideration of the application shall be in accordance with the
procedures and standards set forth herein.
   B.   Application, filing procedure and fee. The owners of a single-family
dwelling located in R-1A, R-1B and R-1C Zoning Districts who wish to convert
their existing single- or two-family dwelling into an additional dwelling unit
(s) shall make an application on a form prescribed by the City Council with the
City Clerk not less than one week (seven days) before the next regularly
scheduled Planning Commission meeting. The application shall include a site
plan with front and side elevations in conformance with the requirements of § 
53-128. A separate application shall be required for each structure petitioned
for dwelling unit conversion and each application shall be accompanied by a fee
of $50, no part of which shall be refunded.
   C.   Application of review procedure.
      1.   Upon receipt of the application and site plan, the City Clerk shall
transmit copies of the application and site plan to the Planning Commission and
other individuals and departments as specified in § 
53-128, for comment and recommendation, which comments and recommendations
shall be forwarded to the City Clerk within 30 days of receipt of the plans.
      2.   Upon receipt of comments and recommendations from the Planning
Commission and other contributing departments or individuals, the City Clerk
shall schedule a public hearing on the application before the Zoning Board of
Appeals at its next regularly scheduled meeting; provided that, the notice
requirements required herein cannot be complied with, the hearing shall be
scheduled no later than the second regularly scheduled meeting thereafter.
   D.   Notice requirement for public hearing. Once notice that an application
for a dwelling unit conversion has been filed shall be published in a newspaper
of general circulation in the city and shall be sent by mail or personal
delivery to the owners of property for which approval is being considered, to
all persons to whom real property is assessed within 300 feet of the boundary
of the property in question and to the occupants of all structures within 300
feet; except that, the notice shall be given not less than five and not more
than 15 days before the application will be considered by the Zoning Board of
Appeals. The notice shall:
      1.   Describe the nature of the dwelling unit conversion request;
      2.   Indicate the property which is the subject of the dwelling unit
conversion request;
      3.   State when and where the dwelling unit conversion request will be
considered; and
      4.   Indicate when and where written comments will be received concerning
the request.
   E.   Review power of Zoning Board of Appeals. The Zoning Board of Appeals
may deny, approve or approve with conditions, requests for dwelling unit
conversion approval. The decision on the dwelling unit conversion shall be
incorporated in a statement of conclusions relative to the dwelling unit
conversion under consideration. The decision shall specify the basis for the
decision and any conditions imposed. Consideration of the application by the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall be based upon conformance with the standards set
forth herein. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall render a decision within 30
days after the public hearing required above.
   F.   Review. All applications for dwelling unit conversion as provided
herein, shall be reviewed on the basis of whether or not the application and
proposed use conform with the following standards:
      1.   The conversion will not be detrimental to the neighborhood;
      2.   The proposed conversion shall add no more than two apartments to the
existing dwelling and the maximum number of bedrooms per additional dwelling
unit shall not exceed two and result in no more than three units maximum;
      3.   Conversion of any dwelling unit will not result in leaving a
dwelling unit whose minimum gross floor area per unit is less than 500 square
feet for an efficiency unit, 600 square feet for a one-bedroom unit and 750
square feet for a two-bedroom unit;
      4.   One of the dwelling units must be occupied by the owner who agrees
that all construction and maintenance of the structure and all dwelling units
therein and maintenance of the grounds will be in accordance with and conform
to all city construction codes, including, but not limited to, the Building
Code, Electrical Code, Plumbing Code, Mechanical Code and Housing Code;
      5.   Each dwelling unit shall be self-contained consisting of complete
lavatory and kitchen facilities and a separate living area;
      6.   Each dwelling unit shall provide adequate light and ventilation
pursuant to the Housing Code;
      7.   Stairways leading to the second or any higher floor shall be located
within the walls of the building wherever practical and stairways and fire
escapes shall otherwise be located on the rear wall in preference to either
side wall and in no case on a front wall or side wall facing a street;
      8.   Except as may be necessary for purposes of safety in accordance with
the preceding paragraph, there shall be no major structural change in the
exterior of the building in connection with the conversion and after conversion
the building shall retain substantially the same structural appearance it had
before the conversion; and
      9.   There shall be provided two parking spaces per dwelling unit. The
location of the off-street parking spaces shall be consistent and compatible
with existing off-street parking in the neighborhood. Where possible, parking
should be enclosed or screened from view from any public street. In no case
shall an application be approved where parking is intended to be located in the
front yard of any dwelling unit for which conversion has been applied for.
   G.   Building permit and certificate of occupancy. If the application is
approved, the applicant shall obtain a building permit from the city prior to
the construction associated with the conversion. After all construction or
reconstruction has been completed, the applicant shall obtain a certificate of
occupancy prior to the rental or use of the additional dwelling units. Failure
to comply with the provisions of this section will constitute a violation of
this chapter for the city and subject the offender to penalties defined in § 
53-203.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-128. SITE PLAN REVIEW.
   Before issuance of a building permit for permitted uses and special approval
uses in the R-2, RMH, C-1, C-2, CBD, CS, and I Districts and for special
approval uses in the R-1A, R-1B and R-1C Districts, a site plan shall be
provided. A site plan is also required when a petitioner seeks a variance to
this chapter, the procedure for which is outlined in Article XX. In all cases,
pertinent information is requested on a site plan so that proper decisions can
be made as to the project’s ability to meet the standards of this chapter and
the objectives of the city’s Comprehensive Planning Program.
   A.   Site plans shall be reviewed and approved in accordance with the
following process.
      1.   A site plan for a special land use shall be subject to review and
approval by the City Council after receiving a recommendation from the City
Planning Commission in accordance with the provisions of this section. A site
plan for a use permitted by right shall be approved administratively by the
City Manager or designee or by the Planning Commission, consistent with the
regulation and standards set forth in this section.
      2.   Two hard copies of the site plan, plus one electronic copy,
including all items required to be incorporated in a site plan shall be
submitted to the City Manager’s office 14 days before a regularly scheduled
Planning Commission meeting. The City Manager shall then transmit copies of the
site plan to the Planning Commission and to other departments and/or bodies as
considered appropriate by the City Manager for review and comment. Departments
or bodies receiving a site plan for review shall forward written comments to
the City Manager within the ten days of receipt of the plan, in order that the
reviewing body may review the comments before its regularly scheduled meeting.
As applicable, the Planning Commission shall forward its recommendation to the
City Council within 30 days of its receipt of the site plan. The City Council
shall receive the recommendation from the Planning Commission, departments and
other bodies, at its next regularly scheduled meeting and shall take action
within 45 days of having received the site plan.
      3.   An approved site plan shall regulate the development on the site
unless modified in the same manner as the plans were originally approved;
provided, however, that, incidental or minor variations of the approved site
plan shall not invalidate prior site plan approval; provided that, the
variations have first been revised and written approval received for the
variations from the Building Inspector and City Manager.
      4.   The building permit may be revoked by either the Building Inspector
or the City Manager in any case where the conditions of the permit have not
been or are not being complied with. The building permit shall not be
reinstated until the permittee complies with the conditions of the original
permit or as otherwise provided by law. Upon receiving notice of revocation of
the building permit, the permittee shall be entitled to a hearing before the
City Council at the next regularly scheduled Council meeting at which time the
City Council shall review the basis of the revocation and either affirm or
rescind the action of the Building Inspector or City Manager.
   B.   The following information shall accompany all plans submitted for
review:
      1.   A legal description of the property under consideration;
      2.   A map indicating the gross land area of the development, the present
zoning classification thereof and the zoning classification and land use of the
area surrounding the proposed development, including the location of structures
and other improvements; and
      3.   The names and addresses of the architect, planner, designer or
engineer responsible for the preparation of the site plan.
   C.   The following information shall be included on the site plan:
      1.   A scale of not less than one inch equals 40 feet, if the subject
property is less than three acres and one inch equals 100 feet, if it is three
acres or more;
      2.   Date, north point and scale;
      3.   The dimensions of all lot and property lines, showing the
relationship of the subject property to abutting properties;
      4.   The siting of all structures on the subject property and abutting
properties;
      5.   The location of each proposed structure in the development area, the
use or uses to be contained therein, the number of stories, gross building
areas, distances between structures and lot lines, setback lines and
approximate location of vehicular entrances and loading points;
      6.   The location of all existing and proposed drives and parking areas
with the number of parking and/or loading spaces provided;
      7.   All pedestrian walks, malls or open areas;
      8.   Location and height of all walls, fences and screen planting,
including a general plan for the landscaping of the development and the method
by which landscaping is to be accomplished and be maintained; (Plant materials
shall be chosen and installed in accordance with § 
53-124.)
      9.   The location and right-of-way widths of all abutting streets;
      10.   Types of surfacing such as paving, turfing or gravel to be used at
the various locations;
      11.   A grading plan with topographic elevation of at a minimum of two-
foot contours in the area, showing method of storm drainage into the city storm
sewer system through catch basins, of addressing the storm drainage on-site
through retention or detention ponds;
      12.   Size and location of proposed sewer and water lines and
connections;
      13.   The number of proposed units for multiple-family developments;
      14.   Significant environmental features such as wetlands, streams,
woodlots, existing trees and vegetation; and
      15.   Information as may be required by the City Manager, the Planning
Commission and City Council to assist in the consideration of the proposed
development.
   D.   In order that building, open space and landscaping will be in harmony
with other structures and improvements in the area and to assure that no
undesirable health, safety, noise and traffic conditions will result from the
development, the reviewing body shall determine whether the site plan meets the
following criteria, unless the reviewing body determines that one or more of
the criteria are inapplicable:
      1.   The vehicular transportation system shall provide for circulation
throughout the site and for efficient ingress and egress to all parts of the
site by fire and safety equipment;
      2.   Pedestrian walkways shall be provided as deemed necessary by the
Planning Commission for separating pedestrian and vehicular traffic;
      3.   Recreation and open space areas shall be provided in all multiple-
family residential developments;
      4.   The site plan shall comply with the district requirements for
minimum floor space, height of building, lot size, yard space, density and all
other requirements as set forth in the Zoning Chapter, unless otherwise
provided;
      5.   The requirements for fencing, walks and other protective barriers
shall be complied with as provided in this chapter and as deemed appropriate by
the Planning Commission;
      6.   The site plan shall provide for adequate on-site storage space for
the proposed uses;
      7.   Security measures shall be provided as deemed necessary by the
Police Chief for resident protection in all multiple-family residential
developments;
      8.   Fire protection measures shall be provided as deemed necessary by
the Fire Chief in conformance with all applicable laws of the state for the
protection of residents and/or occupants of the structures; and
      9.   The site plan shall comply with all requirements of the applicable
zoning district, unless otherwise provided.
   E.   The site plan shall be reviewed by the City Planning Commission and
other appropriate bodies for recommendations on any conditions or changes that
may be attached to the site plan.
   F.   The reviewing body shall have the authority to request additional
professional review from the City Attorney, engineering consultant and/or
planning consultant and the permittee shall be responsible for any and all
charges incurred there for.
   G.   The building permit may be revoked in any case where the conditions of
the permit have not been or are not being complied with, in which case the City
Council shall give the permittee notice of intention to revoke the permit at
least ten days prior to review of the permit by the City Council. After
conclusions of the review the City Council may revoke the permit if it feels
that a violation in fact exists and has not been remedied prior to the hearing.
   H.   Three copies of an approved site plan, with or without changes and/or
conditions, shall contain the signatures of the City Manager and the applicant.
One copy of the signed plan shall be kept on file in the city, one given to the
Building Inspector and one returned to the applicant.
   I.   1.   Site change. Any structure, use, field change or other amendment
to the approved final site plan approval must be reviewed and approved by the
appropriate reviewing body.
      2.   Phase construction. Where phases or staged construction is
contemplated for the development of a project, the site plan submitted must
show the interrelationship of the proposed project to the future stages,
including the following:
         a.   Relationship and identification of future structures;
         b.   Pedestrian and vehicular circulation;
         c.   Time schedule for completion of the various phases of the
proposed construction; and
         d.   Temporary facilities or construction of same as required to
facilitate the stated development.
   J.   Administrative short form.
      1.   The City Council shall be responsible to review and approve all site
plans associated with special land use requests consistent with the provisions
of this section.
      2.   Except as otherwise provided in this division, the Planning
Commission shall be responsible to approve all site plan reviews required under
this chapter.
      3.   To facilitate an expedited review and approval of minor developments
as set forth herein, the City Manager or designee shall be responsible to
review and approve site plans otherwise required for the following:
         a.   An increase or decrease in existing floor space of 10% or less;
         b.   Signage;
         c.   Fencing;
         d.   Accessory buildings;
         e.   Changes in the type of finished surface of walks, roads, drives,
parking lots and loading areas, all of which require paving;
         f.   Changes in the species of required trees, shrubs and ground
covers to be used on the site plan;
         g.   Changes in the height of buildings or structures which increase
their height by less than 10%; and
         h.   Increasing the length or height of walls, fencing or screening by
10% or less.
      4.   The City Manager or designee is authorized to refer a matter
otherwise delegated to the Planning Commission and to solicit the opinion of
department heads with regard to any question regarding the site plan review or
of the impact of the proposed construction or alteration of the structure(s) on
adjacent properties. The City Manager or designee may further waive the data
submission requirements of this section and accept a site plan with the
following limited information:
         a.   A legal description of the subject property;
         b.   A description of the land uses surrounding the project;
         c.   Date, north point and scale;
         d.   The dimensions of all lot and property lines;
         e.   The siting of all structures on the subject property;
         f.   Significant environmental features such as wetlands, trees,
bodies of water, and;
         g.   A description of the proposed project.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981; Ord. 379, passed 4-9-2018; Ord. 385, passed 11-11-
2019)
Sec. 53-129. BED AND BREAKFAST FACILITIES.
   The provisions of this section allow larger, older houses, particularly
those within established historical districts, to convert to bed and breakfast
facilities; provided that, the following conditions are met.
   A.   The minimum lot size shall be 7,500 square feet with a minimum frontage
of 60 feet on a public street.
   B.   A residence shall not have or be converted to more rental rooms than
the number of bedrooms which exist at the time of enactment of this amendment.
   C.   The minimum size of rental room shall be: one person: 90 square feet;
two persons: 120 square feet; three or more persons: 50 square feet per person.
   D.   The minimum size for manager/owner living quarters shall be 450 square
feet, excluding common areas and areas devoted to kitchen and baths.
   E.   A common room or area for relaxation of guests is required. For those
facilities which are not owner occupied, a manager must reside on the premises
and have an equity interest in the facility.
   F.   One off-street parking space shall be provided for each rental room in
addition to the two off-street spaces required for single-family dwellings.
Parking shall be adequately screened from adjacent residentially developed or
zoned property.
   G.   Bathrooms must be furnished for guest rooms at a ratio of not less than
one bathroom (minimum three-fourths bath) per four rental rooms.
   H.   The premises (including corner lots) may be permitted one advertising
sign not exceeding six square feet in area.
   I.   Approval by the Building Inspector is required prior to occupancy of
the facility. Thereafter, the Building Inspector shall conduct an annual
compliance inspection.
   J.   The operation shall be in compliance with all applicable state, county
and local regulations, including the city’s Minimum Housing Code.
   K.   The maximum stay at a bed and breakfast facility shall be 30 continuous
days.
   L.   A site plan shall be submitted in accordance with § 
53-128.
   M.   The use of the facility shall not, in the judgment of the City Planning
Commission and the City Council, be detrimental to adjacent land uses and the
immediate neighborhood. If for any reason the bed and breakfast facility ceases
operation for a period of six continuous months, the facility shall revert back
to its original use.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-130. SPECIAL APPROVAL USE PROCEDURE, SPECIAL APPROVAL USE PERMITS.
   In order that this chapter be flexible and reasonable, special approval uses
are provided for in various zoning districts and require special approval use
permits granted by the City Council after the body has received a written
recommendation from the City Planning Commission. Conformance to special
approval use standards is required in addition to all other requirements of
this chapter. All uses are declared to possess characteristics of the unique
and distinct form that each specific use shall be considered on an individual
case. The granting of a special use permit does not negate the requirements for
any other required permit(s).
   A.   Standards for the consideration of special approval uses. The review of
a special approval use shall consider the following:
      1.   The general safety, health and welfare of the community-at-large;
this shall include:
         a.   Accessibility of the property in question to fire and police
protection;
         b.   Traffic conditions, creating or adding to a hazardous situation;
         c.   Transportation design requirements, if any, which will be needed
to accommodate any traffic impact for the use intended; and
         d.   Appropriateness of the location, nature and height of the
proposed use to the size, type and kind of buildings, uses and structures in
the vicinity and adjacent properties, including the safety and convenience of
people therefrom.
      2.   Any potential decrease in the market value of adjacent buildings,
uses and structures which are permitted by right under current zoning, if the
proposed use is granted;
      3.   Harmony with the Land Use Planning Program of the city. This
considers whether the location and size of the proposed use, the nature and
intensity of the activities involved, the size of the site with respect to
existing and future streets (giving access to it), parks and drainage systems
will be in harmony with the Land Use Plan of the city and the character of land
use which is intended by the Land Use Plan for the area or district in
question;
      4.   Impact from the applicant’s proposed use, its location and intensity
and the height of its buildings, walls, fences and other structures upon the
appropriate character of development intended for the area as deemed desirable
by the city’s Land Use Plan;
      5.   Any hazards arising from storage and use of inflammable fluids; and/
or
      6.   The operations in connection with any special approval use shall not
be environmentally objectionable to nearby properties by reason of noise,
fumes, pollution, vibration or lights to an extent which is more than would be
the operations of any use permitted by right for that district wherein the
special use is proposed.
   B.   Conditional approval.
      1.   As a condition of granting a special approval use permit, the City
Council may require that certain development precautions and remedies be taken
by the applicant in order to satisfy the special approval use review standards
and the site plan review standards set forth in this chapter; and which
essentially are designed to protect the general health, safety and welfare, as
well as to promote environmental preservation and nuisance abatement. Site
development guidelines are provided in this chapter. They include, but are not
limited to, drainage, soil erosion, planning and design of site, fencing,
screening, buffer strips, landscaping, on-site lighting, signing and off-street
parking. The measures must be incorporated by the applicant onto the site plan
and maintained at all times.
      2.   Compliance with performance standards for certain uses enumerated in
this chapter is required.
   C.   Site plan approval required. Site plan approval is required by the City
Council for all special approval use permits after the Council receives a
recommendation from the Planning Commission.
   D.   Time constraints. A special approval use permit shall be deemed to
authorize only one particular special approval use and shall expire if the
special approval use shall cease for more than 12 months for any reasons.
Initial development must begin within the one-year extension granted by City
Council. More stringent requirements may be imposed, if, in the judgment of the
City Council, a 12-month discontinuance may have a negative impact on adjacent
land uses.
   E.   Existing violations. No permit shall be issued for a special approval
use for a property where there is an existing violation of this chapter (an
unlawful nonconformity).
   F.   Decisions in writing. It is further provided that in granting or
denying a special approval use permit, the City Council shall specify in the
written decision the particular reason relied upon and its relation to the
proposed use.
   G.   Appeals. Any and all appeals regarding a decision or condition imposed
upon a special approval use application may be made to the Zoning Board of
Appeals within 30 days from the date of decision or imposed condition.
   H.   Application procedures for special approval permits by the City
Council. Prior to construction or physical development of a proposed special
approval use, as specified by this chapter, an application for a special
approval use permit must be obtained. An application for a special approval use
permit must be made to the City Clerk.
      1.   Contents of application. Among the data to be supplied by the
applicant and which shall constitute the application package, the following
shall be included:
         a.   Name and address of applicant or applicants and owner of record.
         b.   Location, shape, area and dimension of the lot and of the
proposed structure or improvement (shown on a site plan);
         c.   Description of proposed use and of the building (dwelling,
structure, barn, garage, etc.) or improvement;
         d.   The proposed number of sleeping rooms, dwelling units, occupants,
employees, customers and other users;
         e.   The yard, open space and location of parking space (as shown on a
site plan); and
         f.   A required site plan which must be approved before any granting
of a special approval use permit.
      2.   A fee as set by the City Council and listed in the city’s schedule
of fees shall accompany any plans or applications in order to defray the cost
of administration and inspection.
      3.   General procedural steps. Upon submission of an application for a
special approval use permit;
         a.   The City Clerk:
            (1)   Reviews the application package:
               (a)   To make sure that it is the proper application for the
zoning action requested;
               (b)   To see that all required information is submitted; and
               (c)   To make sure that the proposed use is permitted in a
particular district by special approval use permit.
            (2)   Takes one or more of the following actions:
               (a)   Requests from the applicant that any omitted or pertinent
and necessary information now be submitted;
               (b)   If necessary, seeks ordinance interpretation from the
Board of Appeals;
               (c)   Makes advisory comments about the site plan based on site
plan review standards;
               (d)   Forwards the complete application with comments to the
City Planning Commission for review and recommendation; and/or
               (e)   Forwards site plan to various departments for technical
review.
         b.   The Planning Commission:
            (1)   Reviews the site plan according to site plan review
standards, as set forth in this chapter;
            (2)   Reviews the proposed special approval use according to
standards for special approval use permits, as set forth in this chapter;
            (3)   Reviews for compliance with any and all additional site
facility design requirements and standards, as may be required by this chapter;
and
            (4)   Give a public notice in a newspaper of general circulation of
official receipt of an application for a special approval use permit which:
               (a)   Describes the nature of the special approval use request;
               (b)   Indicates the property in question;
               (c)   States the time and place where the special use request
will be considered;
               (d)   Indicates when and where written comments will be received
concerning the request; and
               (e)   Indicates that a public hearing by the Planning Commission
on the proposed special approval use is optional, but may be requested by any
property owner or the occupant of any structure located within 300 feet of the
boundary of the property being considered for a special approval use permit.
      4.   This notice is also mailed or delivered to property owners and
occupants within 300 feet of the property in question. These notices must be
made between five and 15 days before the date on which the application is to be
considered. A record of mailing or delivery of notice must be maintained. All
public input is considered and evaluated. A summary of the public comments
should be retained for the record.
      5.   Advertises and holds a “public hearing”, but only if requested by
the Planning Commission, the applicant or any owner of property (or the
occupant of any structure) located within 300 feet of the boundary of the
subject property. Proper notice of the public hearing shall be given in the
same manner and content as described above in “public notice of receipt”;
except that it shall be known as the “notice of public hearing” and further
that this division is omitted.
   I.   Planning Commission report and recommendation.
      1.   After thoroughly evaluating all factors in the application, the
Planning Commission shall make a recommendation to Council for one of the
following actions:
         a.   Approval;
         b.   Approval with identified conditions; or
         c.   Denial.
      2.   The recommendation shall be in writing and shall be submitted to
Council within 45 days of having received the application.
   J.   Final approval, denial or approval with conditions by Council to be in
writing.
      1.   The City Council shall consider the application in light of the
Planning Commission’s recommendations and make its decision within 30 days of
having received the recommendation.
      2.   When an application for a special approval use permit is finally
approved, denied or approved subject to conditions, the decision must be
incorporated into an official written statement which contains the conclusions
relative to the special approval use permit request. The decision shall specify
the basis for the decision, any conditions which may be imposed in the case of
approvals. When conditions are imposed, they must be reasonable and address the
following criteria:
         a.   The proposed use will not adversely affect existing adjacent
uses;
         b.   There will be no adverse affect upon public health, safety or
general welfare and that it will not impair the intent of this chapter;
         c.   The conditions will be designed to protect natural resources, the
health, safety and welfare and the social and economic well being of those who
will use the land use or activity under consideration, residents and landowners
immediately adjacent to the proposed land use or activity and the community as
a whole;
         d.   The conditions will be related to the valid exercise of the
police power and purposes which are affected by the proposed use or activity;
         e.   The conditions will be necessary to meeting the intent and
purpose of the zoning ordinance, be related to the standards established in the
ordinance for the land use or activity under consideration and be necessary to
ensure compliance with those standards; and
         f.   The conditions imposed with respect to the approval of a special
approval use shall be recorded in the record of the approval action and shall
remain unchanged, except upon the mutual consent of the City Council and the
landowner. The approving Council shall maintain a record of conditions which
are changed.
   K.   Inspection. At least two site inspections by the Building Inspector
must be held: one during development and one before the use or structure is
occupied. If development is phased or in stages, then two inspections per phase
or stage shall be made.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-131. OUTDOOR DISPLAY OF MERCHANDISE.
   The provisions of this section allow outdoor display of merchandise in the
C-1, C-2 and CBD zoning districts by retail businesses other than open air
businesses; provided that:
   A.   Merchandise shall be limited to that normally sold by the business,
including the sale of seasonal merchandise such as Christmas trees and seasonal
produce;
   B.   In the case of sales of cut trees intended to be displayed during the
Christmas season, all trees, poles, lights, wires or other items incidental to
this use shall be removed from the premises by December 31;
   C.   Merchandise shall not be stored in any required yard space, landscaped
areas or required off-street parking or loading area;
   D.   Merchandise displayed in the public right-of-way shall abut the
building whenever possible and shall be located so as to leave a minimum of a
six-foot unobstructed sidewalk width for the safe and convenient circulation of
pedestrians;
   E.   Merchandise shall not be displayed beyond the hours of operation of the
business without approval from the City Planning Commission and City Council;
   F.   Merchandise shall be for display only and not in a state of operation;
   G.   Merchandise shall not have sharp edges, open flames, barbed wire or
otherwise represent a health and safety hazard to customers or passers-by;
   H.   A site plan showing the proposed location of the outdoor display area
shall be submitted for review by the Planning Commission and approval by the
City Council; and
   I.   There shall be no loose piles of mulch, wood chips, fertilizer, top
soil, sand or landscaping stone, (other than that associated with a lawn and
garden center). All materials shall be stored in bags and stacked in neat
piles.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-132. OUTDOOR CAFÉS.
   Restaurants shall be permitted by special permit to operate outdoor cafés or
eating areas, on frontage sidewalks (located between the front of the building
and the roadway), including areas within the public right-of-way and in
courtyards; provided that, pedestrian circulation and access to store entrances
shall not be impaired.
   A.   Permit required. Any establishment in the city which is licensed to
sell food for consumption may apply to the City Council by and through the City
Clerk’s office for a special permit to conduct a portion of the licensed
business in a sidewalk café on a part of the public way immediately adjoining
the licensed premises. The permit shall be valid for one year from the date of
Council approval and renewable on an annual basis.
   B.   Restrictions.
      1.   Each permit issued for a sidewalk café shall be valid during the
period from April 1 at to November 1 at of the calendar year the permit is
issued.
      2.   Each permit issued pursuant to this article shall specify the area
in which the café may be operated; provided that, no sale or service shall be
permitted in any portion of the street designated for vehicular travel.
      3.   Permit procedure:
         a.   An applicant for a permit under this article shall file his or
her application therefore with the City Council on forms provided by the City
Clerk. A scaled diagram will be required to be submitted with information as
requested on the application, including, but not limited to, the dimension of
the sidewalk café area, position of tables, fixtures and anything else to be
placed on the sidewalk and the width of the sidewalk remaining for pedestrian
use. In the case of establishments holding licenses for on-sale liquor, this
diagram will be considered an expansion of the previously designated premises
for the sale of liquor.
         b.   The City Clerk shall also notify the Public Services Department,
the Police Department and the County Health Department of the application and
they shall each report to the City Clerk and make recommendations as they deem
appropriate.
         c.   The recommendation of these departments, including the
recommended minimum unobstructed sidewalk width necessary for pedestrian
traffic on the application, shall be reported to the City Council for its
action.
   C.   Insurance. No permit authorized by this article shall be effective
until the applicant has filed with the City Clerk evidence of insurance
insuring the applicant against liability imposed by law arising out of the
ownership, maintenance or operation of the sidewalk café in amounts of at least
$50,000 for the injury or death of one person; $300,000 for the injury or death
of two persons; and $10,000 for damage to property.
   D.   Permit suspension and revocation. Any special permit authorized by this
article may be revoked at any time by the City Council when it appears that
adequate grounds exist. Any permit may be suspended by the City Council for the
period as the Council shall determine.
   E.   Permit fees. Each year at the time of filing the application for a
permit, the applicant shall pay to the City Clerk the sum of $50.
   F.   General requirements.
      1.   To allow for pedestrian circulation, a minimum of four feet of
sidewalk along the curb and leading to the entrance to the establishment shall
be maintained free of tables and other encumbrances.
      2.   The outdoor eating area shall not exceed 15% of the gross floor area
of the principal building.
      3.   Planters, posts with ropes or other removable enclosures are
encouraged and shall be used as a way of defining the area to be occupied by
cafés.
      4.   Extended awnings, canopies or large umbrellas shall be permitted and
located to provide shade. Colors shall complement building colors. Awnings and
canopies shall have at least eight feet of open vertical clearance between the
sidewalk and the bottom edge of the awning or canopy. Large umbrellas shall
provide at least six feet of open vertical clearance between the sidewalk and
bottom edge of the umbrella.
      5.   Tables, chairs, planters, trash receptacles and other elements of
street furniture shall be compatible with the architectural character the
building where the restaurant is established and the existing street furniture
provided by the city.
      6.   Outdoor cafés shall not be entitled to additional signage beyond
what is permitted for the permanent establishment.
      7.   The outdoor eating areas shall not be located within 30 feet of any
properties zoned for residential purposes. The area shall be completely
screened from view from all residential properties by an obscuring wall or
greenbelt.
      8.   The operators of outdoor cafés shall be responsible for maintaining
a clean, litter-free and well-kept appearance within and immediately adjacent
to the area of the outdoor seating area. Outdoor cafés shall be required to
provide additional trash receptacles.
      9.   All vending machines shall be located within a completely enclosed
building.
   G.   Riverwalk seating. Restaurants located along or within 300 feet of the
riverwalk may maintain limited seating on the riverwalk, subject to the
requirements and restrictions of divisions A. through G. of this section.
   H.   Deck seating. Restaurants may provide outdoor seating on open or
enclosed decks located in either the side or rear yard of the facility. The
seating shall be subject to the requirements and restrictions of divisions A.
through G. of this section.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-132A. HOME OCCUPATIONS.
   A.   Home occupations shall be approved by the Zoning Administrator, who may
issue a certificate of occupancy, which shall specify the home occupation as to
use, size, and the specific measures by which compliance with this section will
be maintained.
   B.   The use of the dwelling for the home occupation shall be clearly
incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its
occupants, and not more than 20% of the floor area of the dwelling shall be
used in the conduct of the home occupation (not including basement area). No
part of the home occupation shall be conducted in any accessory building.
   C.   There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building that
would indicate the presence of a home occupation, or depart from the
residential character of the dwelling or the immediate neighborhood.
   D.   There shall be no sale of products or services except as are produced
on the premises or those products that may be directly related to and
incidental to the home occupation. There shall be no outdoor, on-site storage
of materials, equipment or accessory items and/or display of materials, goods
or supplies used in the conduct of the home occupation.
   E.   The home occupation must not require parking spaces in excess of two
spaces, located in the driveway or on the street directly adjacent to the
property.
   F.   No equipment or process shall be used in the home occupation which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference
detectable to the normal senses off the premises. In the case of electrical
interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or
audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises or
causes fluctuations in the line voltage off the premises.
   G.   No more than two customers, clients, students or patients shall be on
the premises in which a home occupation is located at any one time.
   H.   Visits by customers, clients, students or patients to a home occupation
shall be limited to between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., local time. A
relative on the premises for purposes other than availing him or herself of the
services of a home occupation shall not be required to adhere to the
requirements of this division H.
   I.   All applicable building, housing, fire and other local or state codes
and ordinances shall be adhered to for home occupations.
   J.   A registered primary caregiver, as defined by and in compliance with
the General Rules of the Michigan Department of Community Health (the “General
Rules”), the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act (the “Act”), and the requirements
of this section, shall be allowed as a home occupation. Nothing in this
section, or in any companion regulatory section adopted in any other provision
of this chapter, is intended to grant, nor shall they be construed as granting
immunity from prosecution for the growing, sale, consumption, use, distribution
or possession of marihuana not in strict compliance with the Act and the
General Rules. Also, since federal law is not affected by the Act or the
General Rules, nothing in this section, or in any companion regulatory section
adopted in any other provision of this chapter, is intended to grant, nor shall
they be construed as granting immunity from criminal prosecution under federal
law. The Act does not protect users, caregivers or the owners of properties on
which medical use of marihuana is occurring from federal prosecution, or from
having their property seized by federal authorities under the Federal
Controlled Substances Act. The following requirements for a registered primary
caregiver shall apply:
      1.   The medical use of marihuana shall comply at all times and in all
circumstances with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act and the General Rules of
the Michigan Department of Community Health, as they may be amended from time
to time.
      2.   A registered primary caregiver must be located outside of a 1,000-
foot radius from any school or library, as defined by the Michigan Public
Health Code, 1978 PA 365, as amended, M.C.L.A.. 333.7410, to insure community
compliance with federal “Drug-Free School Zone” requirements.
      3.   Not more than one primary caregiver shall be permitted to service
qualifying patients on a parcel.
      4.   Not more than five qualifying patients shall be assisted with the
medical use of marihuana within any given calendar week.
      5.   All medical marihuana shall be contained within the main building in
an enclosed, locked facility, inaccessible on all sides and equipped with locks
or other security devices that permit access only by the registered primary
caregiver or qualifying patient, as reviewed and approved by the City Building
Official and the City Police Department.
      6.   All necessary building, electrical, plumbing and mechanical permits
shall be obtained for any portion of the residential structure in which
electrical wiring, lighting or watering devices that support the cultivation,
growing or harvesting of marihuana are located.
      7.   If a room with windows is utilized as a growing location, any
lighting methods that exceed the usual residential periods between the hours of
11:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., local time, shall employ shielding methods, without
alteration to the exterior of the residence, to prevent ambient light spillage
that may create a distraction for adjacent residential properties.
      8.   That portion of the residential structure where energy usage and
heat exceeds typical residential use, such as a grow room, or where the storage
of any chemicals such as herbicides, pesticides and fertilizers occurs, shall
be subject to inspection and approval by the City Fire Department to ensure
compliance with applicable provisions of the fire code.
      9.   A registered primary caregiver, as defined by and in compliance with
the General Rules and the Act, assisting, exclusively, one registered
qualifying patient, as defined by and in compliance with the General Rules and
the Act, in the medical use of marihuana shall not be required to comply with
the home occupation requirements of this section, provided that each of the
following conditions are continuously met:
         a.   The registered primary caregiver and the registered qualifying
patient reside in the same residential dwelling;
         b.   The registered qualifying patient is the spouse, child, sibling,
parent or immediate family member of the registered primary caregiver;
         c.   The medical use of marihuana complies at all times and in all
circumstances with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act and the General Rules of
the Michigan Department of Community Health, as they may be amended from time
to time.
         d.   All medical marihuana shall be contained within the main building
in an enclosed, locked facility, inaccessible on all sides and equipped with
locks or other security devices that permit access only by the registered
primary caregiver or registered qualifying patient.
(Ord. 358, adopted 4-11-2011)
Sec. 53-132B. ANIMAL BOARDING FACILITIES.
   All animal boarding facilities shall comply with the requirements of this
section.
   A.   The permanent building or structure used in the operation of an animal
boarding facility shall be provided with proper sanitary refuse receptacles,
and with floors that can be properly cleaned and flushed.
   B.   Fenced yard areas used in conjunction with an animal boarding facility
shall be determined by site plan and shall comply with § 
53-125 of this chapter. Animals shall be under direct supervision at all times
while kept in any fenced yard area.
   C.   No more than 15 animals shall be boarded, housed or otherwise kept at
an animal boarding facility at any one time.
   D.   Boarding shall only occur within the permanent building or structure
used in the operation of an animal boarding facility.
   E.   The operator of an animal boarding facility shall comply with all
applicable laws, rules and regulations of the State of Michigan and the County
of Allegan, including, without limitation, regulations pertaining to the proper
age of animals, health, spaying and/or neutering requirements, and vaccination
requirements.
(Ord. 361, adopted 9-12-2011)
Sec. 53-132C. SIMILAR USES.
   A.   Intent. Since every potential land use cannot be addressed in the
Zoning Ordinance, each district may accommodate similar uses, as referenced in
this section.
   B.   Decision. All applications for a use not specifically addressed in a
zoning district, or inquiries concerning a use, shall be submitted to the
Zoning Administrator for review and a decision.
      1.   Factors. The Zoning Administrator shall base their determination on
the following factors:
         a.   The proposed use is not listed as a permitted or special land use
in any other zoning district.
         b.   The use is consistent with the district purpose.
         c.   The use is similar to other allowed uses relative to its
character, scale, and overall compatibility.
         d.   The use is not expected to create objectionable impacts to public
health, safety, and welfare if it were established in the applicable zoning
district.
         e.   The use would not be more appropriate within a different zoning
district.
      2.   Zoning Board of Appeals. The Zoning Administrator may, in their sole
discretion, submit a proposed use to the Zoning Board of Appeals for a similar
use determination if consideration of the review factors does not lead to a
clear conclusion.
   C.   Compliance. If a proposed use is determined to be similar to a use
listed within the district, the proposed use shall comply with all the
standards or requirements associated with the listed use. If the named use is a
special land use within the applicable zoning district, the use shall be
reviewed and approved per the applicable requirements within the Zoning
Ordinance.
   D.   Determination. The determination of whether a proposed use is similar
to another listed use shall be considered as an interpretation of the use
regulations and is not determined to be a use variance. Once a use has been
determined to be similar, it shall be specifically determined to be the named
use with which it shares similarities.
   E.   Prohibited use. If a use is not specifically listed anywhere in this
ordinance and is not determined to be similar to any other specifically listed
uses, the use-is prohibited .
   F.   Notification. In the event the Zoning Administrator has made a
determination in accordance with this provision, the Zoning Administrator shall
notify the Planning Commission during the subsequent regularly-scheduled
meeting.
(Ord. 379, passed 4-9-2018)
Sec. 53-132D. KEEPING OF BACKYARD CHICKENS.
   A.   Intent. The intent of this section is to allow the raising of backyard
chickens in single-family neighborhoods while protecting the urban character of
the community. The keeping of backyard chickens is distinct from the keeping of
other types of livestock or animals of a similar nature as chickens do not
graze and require a small, contained area that more appropriately fits within
the existing built environment and lot sizes in the City of Plainwell.
   B.   No person shall keep chickens unless they comply with the following
requirements:
      1.   Prior to keeping any chickens, a backyard chicken permit shall be
obtained, along with any fee required by the City Council. A backyard chicken
permit shall be valid indefinitely or until the property is sold or transferred
to another owner unless the permit is suspended or revoked
      2.   The keeping of chickens is permitted only on lots where the
principal use is a single-family dwelling in the R-1A and R-1B zoning
districts. The single-family dwelling shall be owner- occupied. The keeping of
chickens in all other zoning districts is prohibited.
      3.   The maximum number of chickens permitted per property shall be
three. Roosters are prohibited.
      4.   Chickens shall be provided, and maintained within, a fully enclosed,
roofed structure at all times.
      5.   All areas accessible to the chickens, including the structure and
run, shall be contained in a single enclosure not to exceed 60 square feet in
footprint and six feet in height measured from the immediate surrounding grade.
      6.   The enclosure shall be constructed of durable, conventional
residential building materials suitable for the purpose intended, and in a
manner which serves to enhance the aesthetic appearance of the neighborhood or
surrounding area. The use of tarps, scrap materials, plastic sheeting, and
similar non-rigid or poor-quality coverings is prohibited.
      7.   The enclosure shall have chicken wire or similar material embedded
12 inches into the ground around the enclosure to deter predators from digging
under the enclosure wall. The enclosure may alternatively be raised or contain
a durable, hard surface bottom to accomplish the same.
      8.   The enclosure shall be located in the rear yard and at least 20 feet
from the side and rear property lines.
      9.   The enclosure shall be maintained in a clean and orderly fashion.
      10.   Chicken feed shall be kept in a vermin-proof sealed container.
      11.   Slaughtering of chickens is not permitted.
      12.   Eggs shall not be sold on the property at retail.
(Ord. 398, eff. 9-26-2024)
ARTICLE XVII. PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
Sec. 53-133. OBJECTIVES FOR PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS.
   A.   It shall be the policy of the city to promote progressive development
of land and construction thereon by encouraging planned unit developments to
achieve:
      1.   A maximum choice of living environments by allowing a variety of
housing and building types and permitting an increased density per acre and a
reduction in lot dimensions, yards, building setbacks and area requirements;
      2.   A more useful pattern of open space and recreation areas and, if
permitted as part of the project, more convenience in the location of accessory
commercial uses and services;
      3.   A development pattern which preserves and utilizes natural
topography and geologic features, scenic vistas, trees and other vegetation and
prevents the disruption of natural drainage patterns;
      4.   A more efficient use of land than is generally achieved through
conventional development resulting in substantial savings through shorter
utilities and streets; and
      5.   A development pattern in harmony with land use density,
transportation facilities and community facilities objectives of the city’s
Land Use Plan.
   B.   The city is also prepared to accept a greater population density in
undeveloped areas than that reflected by present zoning provided the developer
can demonstrate that any increment of public cost clearly attributable to
increased densities will be compensated for by the private amenities and public
benefits to be achieved by the plan of development.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-134. PROVISIONS GOVERNING PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS.
   Because of the special characteristics of planned unit developments, special
provisions governing the development of land for this purpose are required.
Whenever there is a conflict or difference between the provisions of this
article and those of the other articles of this chapter, the provisions of this
article shall prevail. Subjects not covered by this article shall be governed
by the respective provisions found elsewhere in this chapter.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-135. APPLICATION AND PROCEDURE.
   Upon approval by the Planning Commission and the City Council, a planned
unit development district may be applied to any existing residential district.
Upon approval of a final development plan, the Official Zoning Map shall be
annotated for the land area involved so that the district name includes the
notation, “PUD”. Planned unit development districts shall be approved by the
Planning Commission and the City Council in the manner provided in §§ 
53-147 through
53-161.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-136. RESERVED.
Sec. 53-137. USES PERMITTED.
   A.   Compatible residential, commercial and public uses may be combined in
PUD districts; provided that, the proposed location of the commercial or
industrial uses will not adversely affect adjacent property, and/or the public
health, safety and general welfare. Building site area and other setback
requirements of the residential districts shall apply, except as modified
herein.
   B.   The amount of land devoted to commercial use in a residential-
commercial development shall be determined by the Planning Commission and
approved by the City Council.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-138. MINIMUM PROJECT AREA.
   The gross area of a tract of land to be developed in a planned unit
development district shall be a minimum of five acres. Smaller parcels may be
considered; provided that, they meet the requirements of § 
53-133. Provisions for smaller parcels are also contained in § 
53-164. When the planned unit development proposes a mixture of residential
uses with commercial uses, the Planning Commission may limit the development to
not more than 8% of the tract to commercial uses.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-139. PROJECT OWNERSHIP.
   The project land may be owned, leased or controlled either by a single
person or corporation or by a group of individuals or corporations. The
ownership may be by a public or private corporation.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-140. COMMON OPEN SPACE.
   A minimum of 20% of the land developed in any planned unit development
project shall be reserved for common open space and recreational facilities for
the residents or users of the area being developed. The open space shall be
disposed of as required in § 
53-141.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-141. DISPOSITION OF OPEN SPACE.
   A.   The required amount of common open space land reserved under a planned
unit development shall either be held in corporate ownership by owners of the
project area for the use of each owner who buys property within the development
or be dedicated to the city and retained as common open space for parks,
recreation and related uses. All land dedicated to the city must meet the
Planning Commission’s requirements as to size, shape and location. Public
utility and similar easements and rights-of-way for water courses and other
similar channels are not acceptable for common open space dedication to the
city unless the land or right-of-way is usable as a trail or other similar
purpose and approved by the Planning Commission.
   B.   The responsibility for the maintenance of all open spaces shall be
specified by the developer before approval of the final development plan.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-142. UTILITY REQUIREMENTS.
   Underground utilities, including telephone and electrical systems, are
required within the limits of all planned unit developments. Appurtenances to
these systems which can be effectively screened may be excepted from this
requirement if the Planning Commission finds that the exemption will not
violate the intent or character of the proposed planned unit development.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
 Sec. 53-143. BUILDING SITE AREA PER SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING.
   A.   In platted area or site condominium projects, the building site area
per dwelling unit may be reduced by not more than 40% of the minimum building
site area required in the schedule of regulations.
   B.   Building site widths may be varied to allow for a variety of structural
designs. It is also recommended that setbacks be varied.
   C.   Densities may not exceed 150% of that which is permitted in the
existing zoning district.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-144. BUILDINGS SITES TO ABUT UPON COMMON OPEN SPACE.
   Every property developed under the planned unit development approach should
be designed to abut upon common open space or similar areas. A clustering of
dwellings is encouraged. In areas where townhouses are used, there shall be no
more than eight townhouse units in any contiguous group.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-145. HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS.
   For each foot of building height over the maximum height regulations, the
distance between the buildings and the side and rear property lines of the
planned unit development project area shall be increased by a one-foot addition
to the side and rear yard required in the districts.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-146. PARKING.
   Off-street parking, loading and service areas shall be provided in
accordance with Article XIX of this chapter. However, off-street parking and
loading areas shall not be permitted within 15 feet of any residential use.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-147. PERIMETER SETBACKS.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, every building site abutting
the perimeter of the planned unit development district shall maintain all
setback requirements for the applicable conventional zoning district.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-148. ARRANGEMENT OF COMMERCIAL USES.
   A.   When planned unit development districts include commercial uses,
commercial buildings and establishments shall be planned as groups having
common parking areas and common ingress and egress points in order to reduce
the number of potential accident locations at intersections with thoroughfares.
Planning screens or fences shall be provided on the perimeter of the commercial
areas abutting residential areas.
   B.   The plan of the project shall provide for the integrated and harmonious
design of buildings and for adequate and properly arranged facilities for
internal traffic circulation, landscaping and other features and facilities as
may be necessary to make the project attractive and efficient from the
standpoint of the adjoining and surrounding noncommercial areas.
   C.   All areas designed for future expansion or not intended for immediate
improvement or development shall be landscaped or otherwise maintained in a
neat and orderly manner as specified by this chapter.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-149. PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF PUD DISTRICT.
   Planned unit development districts shall be approved in accordance with the
procedures in §§ 
53-149 through
53-154.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-150. PRE-APPLICATION MEETING.
   The developer shall meet with the City Manager and Planning Commission prior
to the submission of the preliminary development plan. The purpose of this
meeting is to discuss early and informally the purpose and effect of this
chapter and the criteria and standards contained herein and to familiarize the
developer with the policies contained in the city’s Land Use Plan.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-151. CONTENTS OF APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY DEVELOPMENT
PLAN.
   A.   An application for preliminary planned unit development shall be filed
with the City Clerk by at least one owner or lessee of property for which the
planned unit development is proposed. At a minimum, the application shall
contain the following information submitted in with 15 copies:
      1.   Name, address and phone number of applicant;
      2.   Name, address and phone number of registered surveyor, register
engineer and/or site designer assisting in the preparation of the preliminary
development plan;
      3.   Legal description of property;
      4.   Description of existing use;
      5.   Zoning district(s);
      6.   A vicinity map at a scale approved by the Planning Commission,
showing property lines, streets, existing and proposed zoning and other items
as the Planning Commission may require to show the relationship of the planned
unit development to the land use and to existing schools and other community
facilities and services;
      7.   A preliminary development plan at a scale approved by the Commission
showing topography at two-foot intervals; location and type of residential,
commercial and industrial land uses; layout, dimensions and names of existing
and proposed streets, rights-of-way, utility easements, parks and community
spaces; layout and dimensions of lots and building setback lines; preliminary
improvement drawings showing water, sewer, drainage, electricity, telephone and
natural gas; and other characteristics as the Planning Commission deems
necessary;
      8.   Proposed schedule for the development of the site; and
      9.   Evidence that the applicant has sufficient control over the land in
question to initiate the proposed development plan within two years.
   B.   The application for preliminary planned unit development shall be
accompanied by a written statement by the developer setting forth the reasons
why the planned unit development would be in the public interest and would be
consistent with the city’s statement of objectives for planned unit
developments in § 
53-133.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-152. PUBLIC HEARING BY PLANNING COMMISSION.
   Within 30 days after receipt of the preliminary development plan, the
Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-153. NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING BY PLANNING COMMISSION IN NEWSPAPER.
   Before holding the public hearing provided in § 
53-152, notice of the hearing shall be given in one or more newspapers of
general circulation of the city at least 15 days before the date of the
hearing. The notice shall set forth the time and place of the public hearing
and a general description of the planned unit development.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-154. NOTICE TO PROPERTY OWNERS BY PLANNING COMMISSION.
   Before holding the public hearing required in § 
53-152, written notice of the hearing shall be sent by the Chairperson of the
Planning Commission by first class mail, at least 20 days before the hearing,
to all owners of property contiguous to or directly across the street from the
area proposed to be included within the planned unit development district. The
failure to deliver the notice, as provided in this section, shall not
invalidate any approval. The notice shall contain the same information as
required of notices published in newspapers as specified in § 
53-153.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-155. APPROVAL IN PRINCIPLE BY PLANNING COMMISSION.
   Within 30 days after the public hearing required by § 
53-152, the Planning Commission shall review the preliminary development plan
to determine if it is consistent with the intent and purpose of this chapter;
whether the proposed development advances the general welfare of the community
and neighborhood; and whether the benefits, combination of various land uses
and the interrelationship with the land uses in the surrounding area justify
the deviation from standard district regulations. The Commission’s approval in
principle of the preliminary development plan shall be necessary before an
applicant may submit a formal development plan. Approval in principle shall not
be construed to endorse a precise location of uses, configuration of parcels or
engineering feasibility.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-156. FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
   After approval in principle of the preliminary development plan, the
developer shall submit a final development plan to the Planning Commission. The
final development plan shall be in general conformance with the preliminary
development plan approved in principle. Five copies of the final development
plan shall be submitted and may be endorsed by a qualified professional team
which should include a registered land surveyor, registered civil engineer and
registered landscape architect.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-157. CONTENTS OF APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL OF FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
   An application for approval of the formal development plan shall be filed
with the City Clerk by at least one owner or lessee of property for which the
planned unit development is proposed. Each application shall be signed by the
owner or lessee, attesting to the truth and exactness of all information
supplied on the application for final development plan. Each application shall
clearly state that the approval shall expire and may be revoked if construction
on the project has not begun within two years from the date of issuance of the
approval. At a minimum, the application shall contain the following
information:
   A.   A survey of the proposed development site, showing the dimensions and
bearings of the property lines, area in acres, topography, existing features of
the development site, including major wooded areas, structures, streets,
easements, utility lines and land uses;
   B.   All the information required on the preliminary development plan; the
location and sizes of lots, location and proposed density of dwelling units,
nonresidential building intensity and land use considered suitable for adjacent
properties;
   C.   A schedule for the development of units to be constructed in
progression and a description of the design principles for buildings and
streetscapes; tabulation of the number of acres in the proposed project for
various uses, the number of housing units proposed by type, estimated
residential population by type of housing; estimated nonresidential population;
anticipated timing for each unit; and standards for height, open space,
building density, parking areas, population density and public improvements
proposed for each unit of the development whenever the applicant proposes an
exception from standard zoning districts or other ordinances governing
development;
   D.   Engineering feasibility studies and plans showing, as necessary, water,
sewer, drainage, electricity, telephone and natural gas installations; waste
disposal facilities; street improvements and nature and extent of earth work
required for site preparation and development;
   E.   Site plan, showing building(s), various functional use areas,
circulation and their relationship;
   F.   Preliminary building plans, including floor plans and exterior
elevations;
   G.   Landscaping plans; and
   H.   Deed restrictions, protective covenants and other legal statements or
devices to be used to control the use, development and maintenance of the land
and the improvements thereon, including those areas which are to be commonly
owned and maintained.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-158. PUBLIC HEARING BY PLANNING COMMISSION.
   Within 30 days after submission of the final development plan, the Planning
Commission may hold a public hearing. If a second public hearing is held,
notice shall be given as specified in §§ 
53-152 and
53-153.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-159. RECOMMENDATION BY PLANNING COMMISSION.
   Within 60 days after receipt of the final development plan, the Planning
Commission shall recommend to the City Council that the final development plan
be approved as presented, approved with supplementary conditions or
disapproved. The Planning Commission shall then transmit all papers
constituting the record and the recommendations to the City Commission.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-160. CRITERIA FOR RECOMMENDATIONS BY PLANNING COMMISSION.
   Before making its recommendation as required in § 
53-159, the Planning Commission shall find that the facts submitted with the
application and presented at the public hearing establish that:
   A.   The proposed development can be initiated within two years of the date
of approval;
   B.   Each individual unit of the development, as well as the total
development, can exist as an independent unit capable of creating an
environment of sustained desirability and stability or that adequate assurance
will be provided that the objective will be attained; the uses proposed will
not be detrimental to present and potential surrounding uses, but will have a
beneficial effect which could not be achieved under standard district
regulations;
   C.   The streets and thoroughfares proposed are suitable and adequate to
carry anticipated traffic and increased densities will not generate traffic in
amounts as to overload the street network outside the planned unit development;
   D.   Any proposed commercial development can be justified at the locations
proposed;
   E.   Any exception from standard district requirements is warranted by the
design and other amenities incorporated in the final development plan, in
accord with the planned unit development and the adopted policy of the Planning
Commission and the City Council;
   F.   The area surrounding the development can be planned and zoned in
coordination and substantial compatibility with the proposed development;
   G.   The planned unit development is in general conformance with the Land
Use Plan of the city; and
   H.   The existing and proposed utility services are adequate for the
population densities and nonresidential uses proposed.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-161. ACTION BY CITY COUNCIL.
   Within 60 days after receipt of the final recommendation of the Planning
Commission, the City Council shall either approve, approve with supplementary
conditions or disapprove the application as presented. If the application is
either approved or approved with conditions, the City Council shall direct the
Building Inspector to issue building permits only in accordance with the
approved formal development plan and the supplementary conditions attached
thereto.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-162. SUPPLEMENTARY CONDITIONS AND SAFEGUARDS.
   In approving any planned unit development district, the City Council may
prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards such as performance bonds or
escrow accounts in conformity with this chapter. Violation of the conditions or
safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the final development
plan is approved, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-163. EXPIRATION AND EXTENSION OF APPROVAL PERIOD.
   A.   The approval of a final development plan for a planned unit development
district shall be for a period not to exceed two years to allow for preparation
and recording of the required subdivision plat and the development of the
project. If no construction has begun within two years after approval is
granted, the approved formal development plan shall be void and the land shall
revert to the district regulations in which it is located. An extension of the
time limit or modification of the approved final development plan may be
approved if the Planning Commission finds that the extension or modification is
not in conflict with the public interest.
   B.   No zoning amendment passed during the time period granted for the
approved final development plan shall, in any way, affect the terms under which
approval of the planned unit development was granted.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-164. CLUSTER HOUSING PROVISION FOR SMALL PARCELS.
   A.   On parcels less than five acres, the PUD provision can be utilized. The
purpose of this provision is to encourage innovative residential development on
small, irregularly shaped parcels that have limited potential for platting. The
development shall be limited to single-family attached or detached dwellings
and the density shall not exceed that which is permitted by the existing zoning
district. The parcel under consideration for this cluster housing provision
shall have a minimum frontage of 66 feet on a public street.
   B.   The developer shall have a pre-application meeting as specified in § 
53-150. The developer shall submit an application the contents of which are
specified in § 
53-151. The Planning Commission shall hold one public hearing in accordance
with §§ 
53-152 and
53-153 and recommend to the City Council, approval, approval with conditions or
denial of the application within 30 days of review. Criteria for the Planning
Commission’s recommendation shall be:
      1.   The area surrounding the development can be planned and developed in
coordination and substantial compatibility with the proposed development;
      2.   The planned development is in general conformance with the Land Use
Plan for the city; and
      3.   The planned development will not generate traffic in amounts as to
have a significant negative impact on adjacent properties.
   C.   Within 60 days of receipt of the recommendation of the Planning
Commission shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the application.
Supplementary conditions and safeguards as specified in § 
53-162 may also apply.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
ARTICLE XVIII. NONCONFORMING USES AND BUILDINGS
Sec. 53-165. NONCONFORMANCE REGULATED.
   Any lawful use of the land or buildings existing at the date of passage of
this chapter and located in a district in which it would not be permitted as a
new use under the regulations of this chapter is declared to be a
“nonconforming use” and not in violation of this chapter; provided, however,
that, a nonconforming use shall be subject to and the owner comply with, the
regulations in this article.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-166. NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND.
   Where at the time of passage of this chapter lawful use of land exists which
would not be permitted by the regulations imposed by this chapter and where the
use involves no individual structure with an assessed value exceeding $500, the
use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful; provided:
   A.   No nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended to
occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this chapter;
   B.   No nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any portion
of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by the use at the effective date
of adoption or amendment of this chapter;
   C.   If any nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of
more than one year, the land shall conform to the regulations specified by this
chapter for the district in which the land is located; and
   D.   No additional structure not conforming to the requirements of this
chapter shall be erected in connection with the nonconforming use of land.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-167. NONCONFORMING USES OF STRUCTURE.
   If lawful use involving individual structures with an assessed value of $500
or more or of structure premises in combination, exists at the effective date
of adoption of this chapter that would not be allowed in the district under the
terms of this chapter, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains
otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions.
   A.   No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this chapter in
the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed,
reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in changing the use of the
structure to use permitted in the district in which it is located.
   B.   If any nonconforming use of a structure ceases for any reason for a
period of more than six months, the use shall conform to the regulations
specified by this chapter for the district in which the use is located.
   C.   Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a
building which were manifestly arranged or designed for the use at the time of
adoption or amendment of this chapter, but no use shall be extended to occupy
any land outside the building.
   D.   If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a
structure or structure and premises, may be changed to another nonconforming
use; provided that, the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate
to the district than the existing nonconforming use. Whenever a nonconforming
use has been changed to a conforming use or to a use permitted in a district of
greater restrictions, it shall not thereafter be changed to a nonconforming
use.
   E.   Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in
combination, removal or destruction of the entire structure shall eliminate the
nonconforming status of land.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-168. NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.
   Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this chapter that could not be built under the terms of this
chapter by reason of restriction on area, lot coverage, height, yards or other
characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot, the structures may
be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following
provisions.
   A.   No structure may be enlarged, altered or rebuilt in a way which
increases its nonconformity. The structures may be enlarged, altered or rebuilt
in a way which does not increase its nonconformity.
   B.   Should the structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever,
it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is
located after it is moved.
   C.   In the event any nonconforming building or structure shall be damaged
by fire, wind or an act of God or the public enemy, the same shall be permitted
to be rebuilt provided it does not in crease its nonconformity.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-169. NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD.
   A.   In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted,
notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this chapter, a
single-family dwelling and customary accessory building may be erected on any
single lot of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this
chapter. This provision shall apply even though the lots fail to meet the
requirements for area or width or both, that are generally applicable in the
district; provided that, yard dimensions and other requirements not involving
area or width or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the
district in which the lot is located.
   B.   If two or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots with
continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the time of passage or
amendment of this chapter and if all or part of the lots do not meet the
requirements for lot width and area as established by this chapter, the lands
involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of this
chapter and no portion of the parcel shall be used or occupied which does not
meet lot width and area requirements established by this chapter, nor shall any
division of the parcel be made which leaves remaining any lot width or area
below the requirements stated in this chapter.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-170. REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE; UNSAFE CONDITIONS; NUISANCE PER SE.
   A.   On any nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a
nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of 12 consecutive months on
ordinary repairs or on repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures,
wiring or plumbing, to an extent not exceeding 25% of the state equalized
valuation of the nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of the
structure as the case may be; provided that, the cubic content existing when it
became nonconforming shall not be increased.
   B.   If a nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a
nonconforming use becomes physically unsafe or unlawful due to a lack of
repairs and maintenance or due to the presence of hazardous materials in a
quantity which is or may become injurious to the public health, safety or
welfare or the environment and is declared by the Building Inspector to be
unsafe or unlawful because of its physical condition or the presence of
hazardous materials, it shall not thereafter be restored, repaired or rebuilt,
except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is
located. Further, any nonconforming structure or portion of a structure
containing a nonconforming use which is declared unsafe or unlawful, as
provided by this section, is declared a nuisance per se, subject to abatement
by a court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-171. RECONSTRUCTION OF DAMAGED NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.
   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the reconstruction, repair or
restoration and the continued use of any nonconforming building or structure
damaged by fire, collapse, explosion, acts of God or acts of public enemy,
subsequent to the effective date of this chapter, wherein the expense of the
reconstruction does not exceed 50% of the state equalized valuation of the
entire building or structure at the time the damage occurred; provided that,
the restoration and resumption shall take place within six months of the time
of the damage and that it be completed within one year from time of the damage;
and, provided further that, the use be identical with nonconforming use
permitted and in effect directly preceding the damage. Where pending insurance
claims require an extension of time, the Building Inspector may grant a time
extension; provided that, the property owner submit a certification from the
insurance company attesting to the delay. Until a time as the debris from the
fire damage is fully removed, the premises shall be adequately fenced or
screened from access by children who may be attracted to the premises.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-172. MOVING.
   No nonconforming building or structure shall be moved in whole or in part to
another location unless the building or structure and the off-street parking
spaces, yard and other open spaces provided are made to conform to all the
regulations of the district in which the building or structure is to be
located.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-173. CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   A.   1.   At any time after the adoption of this chapter should the city
become aware of a nonconforming use, the owner of the nonconforming use shall
be notified by the City Clerk of the provisions of this section and that his or
her property constitutes a nonconforming use. Within 30 days after receipt of
the notice, the owner shall apply for and be issued a certificate of occupancy
for the nonconforming use. The application for the certificate shall designate
the location, nature and extent of the nonconforming use and other details as
may be necessary for the issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
      2.   If the owner of a nonconforming use fails to apply for a certificate
of occupancy within 30 days after receipt of the foregoing notice, the use
ceases to be nonconforming and is declared to be in violation of this chapter.
The City Clerk and the City Attorney shall take appropriate action to enjoin
the violation.
   B.   If the Building Inspector shall find, upon reviewing the application
for a certificate of occupancy, that the existing use is illegal or in
violation of any other ordinance or law or if he or she finds that the building
for which the certificate is requested has been constructed or altered for the
existing use or any other use without full compliance with the Building Code or
this chapter in effect at the time of construction or alteration, he or she
shall not issue the certificate of occupancy, but shall declare the use to be
in violation of this chapter.
   C.   After the adoption of this chapter or any amendments thereto, the
Building Inspector shall prepare a record of all known nonconforming uses and
occupations of lands, buildings and structures, including tents and trailer
coaches, existing at the time of the ordinance or amendment. The record shall
contain the names and addresses of the owners of record of the nonconforming
use and of any occupant, other than the owner, the legal description of the
land and the nature and extent of use. The list shall be available at all times
in the office of the City Clerk.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-174. PLANS ALREADY FILED.
   In any case where plans and specifications for a building or structure have
been filed, which would conform with the zoning regulations effective at the
date of the filing, but not with the regulations of this chapter, and where a
building permit for the building or structure has been issued and construction
work started at the effective date of this chapter, the work may proceed,
provided it is completed within one year of the date.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
ARTICLE XIX. OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 53-175. REQUIRED OFF-STREET PARKING, GENERAL.
   A.   Off-street parking in conjunction with all land and building uses shall
be provided as herein prescribed.
      1.   For the purpose of this article, 300 square feet of lot area shall
be deemed a parking space for one vehicle, including access aisle; except that,
the standard shall be 325 square feet where parking is perpendicular to the
access aisle; and, except that, 180 square feet open area which has a direct
means of ingress and egress from an alley or street may also be deemed a
parking space.
      2.   When units or measurements determining number of required parking
spaces result in requirement of a fractional space, any fraction up to and
including one-half shall be disregarded and fractions over one-half shall
require one parking space.
      3.   The minimum number of off-street parking spaces shall be determined
in accordance with the following table in § 
53-176. For uses not specifically mentioned therein, off-street parking
requirements shall be interpreted by the Board of Zoning Appeals from
requirements for similar uses.
      4.   Any area once designated as required off-street parking shall never
be changed to any other use unless and until equally required facilities are
provided elsewhere. Off-street parking existing at the effective date of this
chapter in connection with the operation of an existing building or use shall
not be reduced to an amount less than would hereinafter be required for the
building or use.
      5.   Off-street parking may be provided either by individual action or by
a parking program carried out through public action, whether by a special
assessment district or otherwise.
      6.   Required off-street parking shall be for the use of occupants,
employees, visitors and patrons and shall be limited in use to motor vehicles.
The storage of merchandise, motor vehicles for sale or the repair of vehicles
is prohibited. All off-street parking, whether public or private, for
nonresidential uses shall be either on the same lot or within 300 feet of the
building it is intended to serve, measured from the nearest point of the
building to the nearest point of the off-street parking lot, except in the
Central Business District.
      7.   Specific parking requirements for one-family and two-family
dwellings.
         a.   Required off-street parking for one-family and two-family
dwellings shall be provided
within a garage, carport, on a paved driveway, or as set forth in a recorded
shared parking arrangement.
         b.   Off-street parking may be permitted in a required front yard or
side yard, provided that the following standards are met:
            (1)   Automobiles shall be parked on an approved paved surface
which shall extend as a continuous paved surface to the street; and
            (2)   Not more than 50% of a required front or side yard shall be
utilized as paved surface for the parking of automobiles.
         c.   Access to enclosed or unenclosed parking shall be provided by
means of a driveway which shall extend as a continuous uninterrupted way from
the parking apron or structure to a street or alley. Such driveway shall comply
with the following standards:
            (1)   The driveway and parking apron shall be paved with an
approved hard surface, such as asphalt, concrete or other similar materials.
            (2)   Driveways shall not be wider than 18 feet, or the front width
of a parking enclosure, whichever is greater. All other driveways for one- and
two-family dwellings may be up to 18 feet wide, provided however, one approved
hard-surfaced driveway extension not more than nine feet wide nor more than 20
feet long may be placed along one side of the driveway and may extend beyond
the front wall of the parking enclosure, if applicable, to a point no closer
than one foot from an interior side or rear property line. A rolled curb may be
required along the side or rear property line to prevent stormwater from
entering adjacent properties. The length of the driveway taper for the
extension shall not exceed six feet. (see Figure)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/2e5431c07ead2206b6572f578719c54e7c862c99/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2349.png]
 
            (3)   The driveway extension shall be a physical extension of the
driveway and shall be located at the far end of the driveway, furthest from the
street right-of-way line.
            (4)   The width of a driveway at the front or comer front yard
property line shall not exceed 18 feet.
            (5)   Driveway curb cuts shall be placed at least 24 feet from an
intersection measured from the edge of pavement.
         d.   A one-family dwelling may have two curb cuts, provided the
driveway is a continuous driveway, extending uninterrupted from curb cut to
curb cut. A two-unit dwelling may have two separate driveways and curb cuts.
      8.   Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the shared
collective provision of off-street parking facilities for two or more buildings
or uses; provided, the facilities collectively shall not be less than the sum
of the requirements for the various individual uses computed separately in
accordance with the table. Shared parking areas may be located on a different
lot from the building or use that it serves if the following conditions are
met:
         a.   The parking area is located no more than 300 feet from the
nearest point of the subject building containing the use to the nearest point
of the off-street parking lot.
         b.   The sharing of parking shall be guaranteed via a legally binding
and recorded agreement between the owner of the parking area and the owner of
the buildings or uses which is located on a different lot served by the parking
area. Such agreement shall be submitted to the city for review and approval and
address the issue of how parking will be shared, maintained, and be adequate if
the parties modify operating hours or other factors. The Planning Commission
may waive the requirement for a recorded agreement where it finds satisfactory
alternative documentation of an assured long-term shared parking arrangement.
         c.   Shared access drives to separate parking areas may be utilized
provided that appropriate shared access agreements and/or easements are
provided and approved by the city.
      9.   In stadiums, sports arenas, churches and other places of assembly in
which patrons or spectators occupy benches, pews or other similar seating
facilities, each 24 inches of the seating facilities shall be counted as one
seat for the purpose of determining requirements for off-street parking
facilities under this article.
   B.   The City Council may, upon recommendation of the City Planning
Commission, vary or modify the parking space requirements set forth in this
article as follows. In a case where existing off-street parking facilities have
unused parking capacity and where the facilities are open to the use of the
public free of charge or at reasonable rates, the City Council may reduce the
parking space requirement for any use within 300 feet from the facility or
facilities; provided that, the total number of stalls in the reduction shall be
not greater than the total number of stalls of excess capacity.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981; Ord. 400, adopted 5-12-2025)
Sec. 53-176. TABLE OF PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   The amount of required off-street parking space for new uses or buildings,
additions thereto and additions to existing buildings, additions thereto and
additions to existing buildings as specified above, shall be determined in
accordance with the following table and the space, so required shall be stated
in the application for a building permit and shall be irrevocably reserved for
the use and/or shall comply with the initial part of this section. Land uses
within the Central Business District Zoning District may be exempt from the
table of parking requirements, if the Board of Appeals determines that required
parking cannot be met.
 Use Number of Minimum Off-street Parking Spaces per Unit of Measure
   Use                                                                         Number of Minimum Off-street Parking Spaces per
                                                                               Unit of Measure
1. Residential                                                                  
a. Residential, one-family and two-family                                      2 for each dwelling unit
                                                                               2 for each dwelling unit for developments of 1–24
b. Residential, multiple-family                                                units
                                                                               1.75 space for each dwelling unit for developments
                                                                               of 24+ units
c. Mobile home park and mobile home courts                                     2 for each trailer or mobile home site and 1 for
                                                                               each employee of the trailer or mobile home court
d. Boarding and rooming house and bed and breakfast facility                   1 for each sleeping room
e. Senior citizen apartments                                                   1 space for each unit, plus 1 visitor space for
                                                                               every 6 dwelling units
2. Institutional
                                                                               1 for each 3 seats, maximum seating capacity in the
a. Churches, temples or synagogues                                             main unit of workshop or 1 space for each 35 square
                                                                               feet of gross floor area, whichever is greater
b. Hospitals                                                                   1 per 600 square feet of gross floor area
c. Sanitariums, convents, homes for the aged, convalescent homes, children’s 1 per 600 feet of gross floor area
   homes
d. Adult foster care facilities                                                ½ space per bed, plus 1 space for each employee
                                                                               1 for each classroom plus one space for each 5
e. Public or private elementary and junior high schools                        fixed seats of any area used for auditorium
                                                                               purposes or for each 35 square feet of seating area
                                                                               where there are no fixed seats
                                                                               1 space for each classroom and each other room used
f. Senior high schools                                                         by students, plus 1 for each 10 full-time students
                                                                               in addition to the requirements for auditorium.
                                                                               (see k)
                                                                               1 for each 3 allowed within the maximum occupancy
g. Private clubs or lodge halls                                                load as established by Local, County or State Fire,
                                                                               Building or Health Codes
h. Private golf clubs, swimming pool clubs, tennis clubs or racquetball clubs  1 for each 3 member families or individuals
i. Golf course open to the general public, except miniature or “par 3" course6 for each 1 golf hole and 1 for each 1 employee
j. Stadium, sport arena or similar place of outdoor assembly                   1 for each 3 seats or 10 feet of bench
k. Theaters and auditoriums (indoors)                                          1 for each 4 seats, plus 1 for each 2 employees
l. Libraries, museums and noncommercial art galleries                          1 for each 250 square feet of gross floor area
                                                                               1 space for each staff member, plus 1 space for
m. Day-care, preschool and nursery schools                                     every 5 children or 1 space for every 10 children
                                                                               if adequate off-street drop-off facilities are
                                                                               provided
                                                                               1 space for each staff member, plus 1 space for
n. Jail                                                                        every 5 cells, in addition to off-street loading
                                                                               spaces for delivery and transport vehicles
3. Business and commercial
                                                                               2-1/2 for each lubrication stall, rack, pit or
a. Automobile service stations, gasoline stations, convenience stores in       pump, plus 1 for every 75 square feet of gross
   conjunction with service or gas stations                                    floor area devoted to retail sales, plus 1 for each
                                                                               employee
                                                                               1 for each 1 employee, plus 1 for each 250 square
b. Auto wash, auto reconditioning, auto cleaning (interior/exterior)           feet of gross floor area devoted to reconditioning
                                                                               or cleaning
c. Beauty parlor or barber shop                                                3 spaces for each of the first 2 beauty or barber
                                                                               chairs and 1-1/2 spaces for each additional chair
d. Bowling alleys                                                              5 for each 1 bowling lane, plus employees
e. Dance halls, pool or billiard parlors, roller or ice rinks, exhibition      1 for each 3 seats or 1 for each 100 square feet of
   halls and assembly halls without fixed seats                                gross floor area, whichever is greater
f. Drive-in establishments                                                     1 for each 40 feet of gross floor area, with a
                                                                               minimum of 25 parking spaces
g. Establishments for sale and consumption on the premises of beverages, food  1 for every 6 seats or 80 square feet, whichever
   or refreshments                                                             requires the greater amount of parking
   Furniture and appliance, household equipment, repair shop, showroom of a    1 for each 800 square feet of floor area, occupied
h. plumber, decorator, electrician or similar trade, shoe repair and other     in processing or manufacturing
   similar uses
i. Laundromats and coin operated dry cleaners                                  1 for each 2 washing machines
j. Miniature golf courses                                                      3 for each 1 hole, plus 1 for each 1 employee
k. Mortuary establishments                                                     1 for each 100 square feet of gross floor area
                                                                               l for each 1 occupancy unit, plus 1 for each 1
l. Motel, hotel or other commercial lodging establishments                     employee, plus extra spaces for dining rooms,
                                                                               ballrooms or meeting rooms based upon maximum
                                                                               occupancy load
m. Motor vehicles sales and service establishments, trailer sales and rental   1 for each 400 square feet of gross floor area of
   boat showrooms                                                              sales room
n. Open air business                                                           1 for each 600 square feet of lot area
o. Restaurant, carry-out                                                       1 for each 100 square feet of gross floor area
p. Retail stores                                                               1 for each 300 square feet of gross floor area
q. Shopping center or clustered commercial                                     1 for each 300 square feet of gross floor area
r. Auto body shop                                                              1 space for each 500 square feet of gross floor
                                                                               area, plus 1 space for each employee
s. Autotruck sales                                                             1 space for each 500 square feet of gross floor
                                                                               area for automobile sales
t. Cocktail lounges and taverns                                                1 space for each 75 feet of gross floor area
                                                                               10 for each club of spas, plus 1 space for each 200
u. Health spas, gymnasiums and health clubs                                    square feet of gross floor area in excess of 1,000
                                                                               gross square feet
4. Offices
a. Banks, savings and loan offices                                             1 for each 200 square feet of gross floor area
b. Business offices or professional offices except as indicated in the         1 for each 400 square feet of gross floor area
   following item c., but including courthouses and governmental offices
c. Medical or dental clinics, professional offices of doctors, dentists or     1 for each 175 square feet of gross floor area
   similar professions
5. Industrial
                                                                               1 space for every 650 square feet of gross floor
a. General manufacturing establishments                                        area, plus 1 space per each 350 square feet of
                                                                               office space
                                                                               1 space for every 500 square feet of gross floor
b. Light and limited industrial manufacturing                                  area, plus 1 space per each 350 square feet of
                                                                               office, sales or similar space
                                                                               1 space for every 350 square feet of gross floor
c. Research and development                                                    area, plus 1 space per each 350 square feet of
                                                                               office, sales or similar space
d. Warehousing                                                                 1 space for every 2,000 square feet of gross floor
                                                                               area
 
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-177. OFF-STREET PARKING LOT LAYOUT, CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE.
   Wherever a parking lot is built as required off-street parking, the parking
lot shall be laid out, constructed and maintained in accordance with the
following requirements.
   A.   The building of a parking lot is subject to the requirements for a
building permit. The Building Inspector in reviewing the application may
request the findings of the City Engineer on the basis of the requirements, set
forth in divisions B. through J. below.
   B.   Each parking space shall constitute a net land area of at least 170
feet. The total parking lot space, including access lanes, shall constitute at
least 300 square feet land area per parking space.
   C.   Adequate ingress and egress to the parking lot by means of clearly
limited and bermed drives shall be provided for vehicles.
   D. Where the parking lots abuts a residential district:
 
                                         Required Setback of Parking Spaces
Contiguous common frontage in same block 5 feet from the street lot line
Rear lot line                            None
Side lot lines                           2 feet from the side lot line
 
   E.   There shall be bumper stops or wheel chocks provided so as to prevent
any vehicle from projecting over the lot line.
   F.   The parking lot shall be drained to eliminate surface water.
   G.   The surface of the parking lot, including drives and aisles, excepting
the buffer strips, shall be constructed of a concrete or bituminous concrete
surfacing. Lighting shall be arranged to reflect away from residential areas.
   H.   Parking structures may be built to satisfy off-street parking
requirements, when located in commercial or industrial zone districts, subject
to the area, height, bulk and placement regulations of the districts in which
located.
   I.   Automotive sales areas. Every parcel of land hereafter used as an
automobile or trailer sales area or as an automobile service station shall be
subject to the above requirements of this section.
   J.   Plans for the layout of off-street parking facilities shall be in
accordance with the following minimum requirements.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/2e5431c07ead2206b6572f578719c54e7c862c99/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2338.png]
 
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-178. OFF-STREET WAITING AREA FOR DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITIES.
   A.   An OFF-STREET WAITING SPACE is defined as an area at a minimum of ten
feet wide by 24 feet long and shall not include the use of any public space,
street, alley or sidewalk and shall be located entirely within the Commercial
Zoning District.
   B.   On the same premises with every building, structure or part thereof,
erected and occupied for the purpose of serving customers in their automobiles
by means of a service window or similar arrangement where the automobile engine
is not turned off, there shall be provided five off-street waiting spaces for
each service window.
   C.   Automatic auto wash establishment shall provide a minimum of 15 off-
street waiting spaces, with at least one off-street waiting space on the exit
side, for each wash lane. Manual or coin operated auto wash establishments
shall provide at least three off-street waiting spaces on the entrance side for
each auto wash stall and one off-street waiting space on the exit side for each
auto wash stall.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-179. OFF-STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING.
   A. On the same premises with every building, structure or part thereof,
erected and occupied for manufacturing, storage, warehousing, retailing
display, or other uses involving the receipt or distribution of vehicles or
materials or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on the lot
adequate space for standing, loading and unloading services adjacent to the
opening used for loading and unloading, designed to avoid interference with
public use of the streets or alleys. The loading and unloading space shall be
an area in minimum 12 feet in width by 50 feet in length with a 15-foot height
clearance, and shall be provided according to the following table:
 
Gross Floor Area Square Feet Loading and Unloading Spaces Required in Terms of
                             Square Feet or Gross Floor Area
0 – 2,000                  None
2,101 – 20,000             1 space
20,001 – 100,000           1 space, plus 1 space for each 20,000 square feet
                             in excess of 20,000 square feet
100,001 – 500,000          5 spaces, plus 1 space for each 40,000 square feet
                             in excess of 100,000 square feet
Over 500,000                 15 spaces, plus 1 space for each 80,000 square
                             feet in excess of 500,000 square feet
 
   B. No loading space shall be located closer than 50 feet from any residence
district unless adjoining a public alley or located within a completely
enclosed building or enclosed on all sides facing a residential zoning district
by a solid masonry wall or ornamental fence of a type approved by the Planning
Commission not less than six feet in height.
   C. Except as otherwise provided within division D. below, in the I District
truck or rail docks will be located at the side or rear of the building.
   D. Subject to the review and approval of the Planning Commission, buildings
and properties located within a certified industrial park that was approved
before 2000 may locate and maintain front yard truck docks or loading spaces
when the Planning Commission determines they are needed due to site design or
property space limitations. No truck dock or loading space shall be permitted
to encroach upon the required front yard setback. No truck dock or loading
space shall be located within 75 feet of the right-of-way line of the street
upon which it fronts.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981; Ord. 352, adopted 11-9-2009; Ord. 379, passed 4-9-
2018)
ARTICLE XX. BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
Sec 53-180. INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this article is to ensure that the objectives of this chapter
are fully and equitably achieved, that a means be provided for competent
interpretation of this chapter, that flexibility be provided for the strict
application of this chapter, that the spirit of this chapter be observed,
public safety secured and substantial justice done.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-181. APPOINTMENT.
   The City Council shall appoint a Board of Zoning Appeals, hereinafter
sometimes referred to as the Board, while Board shall have the powers and
duties prescribed by law and by this chapter. The City Council shall also have
the power to appoint itself as the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-182. CREATION AND MEMBERSHIP.
   A.   A Board of Zoning Appeals is established in accordance with Public Act
207 of 1921, as amended. The Board shall consist of five members: the
Chairperson of the Planning Commission, a member of the City Council appointed
by the City Council; and the remaining members appointed by the City Commission
from the electors residing in the city. In addition to the five regular
members, the Council shall appoint two alternate members to serve the same term
as regular members. Alternate members may be called on a rotating basis to sit
as regular members in the absence of a regular member. Alternate members may
also be called to serve in the place of a regular member for the purpose of
reaching a decision on a case in which the regular member has abstained for
reasons of conflict of interest. The alternate member having been appointed
shall serve in the case until a final decision has been made. Alternate members
shall have the same voting rights as regular members.
   B.   Members may be reappointed. An elected officer of the city shall not
serve as Chairperson of the Board of Zoning Appeals. An employee of the city
may not serve as a member of the Board. Members shall be appointed for three-
year terms. Members of the Board of Appeals shall be removable by the City
Council for nonfeasance, malfeasance and misfeasance of office. A member shall
disqualify himself or herself from a vote in which the member has a conflict of
interest. Failure to do so shall constitute misconduct in office. If the City
Council sits as the Board of Zoning Appeals, its membership shall consist of
duly elected members of the Council.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-183. ORGANIZATION.
   A.   Rules of procedure. The Board of Zoning Appeals may adopt rules of
procedure for the conduct of its meetings and the implementation of its duties.
The Board shall annually elect a Chairperson, a Vice-Chairperson and a
Secretary.
   B.   Meetings and quorum. Meetings of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be
held at the call of the Chairperson and at other times as the Board, in its
rules of procedure, may specify. A majority of the total membership of the
Board shall comprise a quorum. All meetings shall be open to the public.
   C.   Oaths and witnesses. The Chairperson may administer oaths and compel
the attendance of any witness in order to ensure a fair and proper hearing.
   D.   Records. The minutes of all meetings shall contain the grounds for
every determination made by the Board and the final ruling on each case. The
Board of Zoning Appeals shall file its minutes in the office of the City Clerk.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-184. JURISDICTION.
   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall act upon questions as they arise in the
administration of this chapter. The Board shall perform its duties and exercise
its powers as provided in Public Act 207 of 1921, as amended. The Board of
Zoning Appeals shall not have the power to alter or change the zoning district
classification of any property, nor make any change in the terms or intent of
this chapter, but does have the power to act on those matters for which this
chapter provides an administrative review, interpretation, variance or
temporary use permit. Within this capacity the Board of Zoning Appeals may
reverse or affirm, wholly or partly or may modify the order, requirement,
decision or determination of the Building Inspector, Planning Commission or any
official administering or enforcing the provisions of this chapter as set forth
in § 53-201.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-185. AUTHORIZED APPEALS.
   A.   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hear the following specified
categories of appeals in accordance with the following standards.
      1.   Administrative review. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hear and
decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is an error in
any order, requirement, permit, decision or refusal made by the Building
Inspector or by any other official in administering or enforcing the provisions
of this chapter.
      2.   Interpretation of the ordinance. The Board of Appeals shall hear and
decide upon request to:
         a.   Interpret the provisions of this chapter when it is alleged that
certain provisions are not clear or that they could have more than one meaning.
In deciding upon the request, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall ensure that its
interpretation is consistent with the intent and purpose of this chapter and
the article in which the language in question is contained;
         b.   Determine the precise location of the boundary lines between
zoning districts when there is dissatisfaction with a decision made by the
Building Inspector;
         c.   Classify a use which is not specifically mentioned as part of the
use regulations of any zoning district so that it conforms to a comparable
permitted or prohibited use, in accordance with the purpose and intent of each
district; and
         d.   Determine the parking space requirements of any use not
specifically mentioned either by classifying it with one of the groups listed
by an analysis of the specific needs or developing a requirement based on
evaluation of documented need.
      3.   Variance. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the power to
authorize specific variances from site development requirements such as lot
area and width regulations, building height and bulk regulations, yard width
and depth regulations, off-street parking and loading space requirements, of
this chapter; provided that, all the required findings listed below are met:
         a.   There are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships which
prevent carrying out the strict letter of this chapter. Where hardships or
difficulties shall not be deemed economic, but shall be evaluated in terms of
the use of a particular parcel of land;
         b.   A genuine hardship exists because of unique circumstances or
physical condition such as narrowness, shallowness, shape or topography of the
property involved or to the intended use of the property, that do not generally
apply to other property uses in the same zoning district and shall not be
recurrent in nature;
         c.   The hardship or special conditions or circumstances do not result
from actions of the applicant;
         d.   The variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and
intent of this chapter and will not cause a substantial adverse effect upon
surrounding property, property values and the use and enjoyment of property in
the neighborhood or district;
         e.   Granting the variance will not confer on the applicant any
special privilege that is denied by this chapter to other lands, structures or
buildings in the same district;
         f.   The variance requested is the minimum amount necessary to
overcome the inequality inherent in the particular property or mitigate the
hardship; and/or
         g.   The variance shall not permit the establishment, within a
district, of any use which is not permitted by right within the zoning district
or any use for which a special use permit or a temporary use permit is
required.
   B.   In granting the variance, the Board of Zoning Appeals may prescribe
appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this chapter.
Violations of the conditions and safeguards, when made part of the terms under
which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and
shall automatically invalidate the permit.
   C.   Each variance granted under the provisions of this chapter shall become
null and void unless:
      1.   The construction authorized by the variance or permit has commenced
within six months of granting of the variance; and/or
      2.   The occupancy of land, premises or building has taken place within
one year after the granting of the variance.
   D.   No application for the variance which has been denied, wholly or in
part, by the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be resubmitted for a period of one
year from the date of the last denial, except on the ground of newly discovered
evidence or proof of changed conditions found upon inspection by the Board to
be valid.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-186. APPEAL PROCEDURES.
   A.   Notice of appeal. Appeals to the Board of Zoning Appeals may be made by
any person aggrieved or by an officer or department of the city, filing a
written notice of appeal with the City Clerk. Upon receipt of a notice of
appeal, the City Clerk shall promptly transmit the records concerning the
appealed action to the members of the Appeals Board. Any appeal from the ruling
of the Building Inspector concerning the enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter shall be filed within ten days after the date of the Building
Inspector’s decision.
   B.   Hearing. Upon receipt of a notice of appeal, the Chairperson of the
Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time and date for a public hearing, not
to exceed 30 days from the date of filing of the notice of appeal. Upon
determination of the date and time of the public hearing, the City Clerk shall
notify the following, by first class mail or by personal service, not more than
15 or less than eight days before the public hearing:
      1.   The appellant;
      2.   The Building Inspector;
      3.   All persons to whom real property is assessed within 300 feet of the
boundary of the property in question and to the occupants of all structures
within 30 feet;
      4.   The Mayor; and
      5.   The City Manager.
   C.   Notice of hearing. Where the hearing, in the opinion of the City Clerk,
concerns matters of general applicability in the city and does not concern only
individual lots or parcels, the notice shall be given in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city not more than 15 or less than eight days before the
public hearing.
   D.   Appearance. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by
agent or attorney. The Board may recess the hearing from time to time, and, if
the time and place of the continued hearing are announced at the time of
adjournment, no further notice shall be required.
   E.   Fee. A fee as established by the City Council, shall be paid to the
City Clerk at the time the petitioner files an application with the Board. The
purpose of the fee is to cover the necessary advertisements, investigations,
hearing records and other expense incurred by the Board in connection with the
appeal. No fee shall be charged if the city or any official body of the city is
the moving party.
   F.   Decision. The Board of Appeals shall render its decision within 30 days
of filing of notice of appeal unless an extension of time is necessary to
review new information pertinent to making the decision and is agreed upon by
the appellant and a majority of members of the Appeals Board present. The vote
of a majority of members of the Board shall be necessary to take action on an
appeal.
   G.   Bonding. In authorizing any variance or in granting any conditional,
temporary or special approval permits, the Board may require that a cash
deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit or surety bond
acceptable to the city covering the estimated cost of improvements associated
with a project for which zoning approval is sought, be deposited with the City
Clerk to insure faithful completion of the improvements. The performance
guarantee shall be deposited at the time of the issuance of the permit
authorizing then activity or project. The Board may not require the deposit of
the performance guarantee before the date on which the permit is to be issued.
The Board shall establish procedures under which a rebate of any cash deposits
in reasonable proportions to that ratio of work completed on the required
improvements will be made as work progresses.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-187. ADMINISTRATIVE VARIANCE.
   A.   Procedure and criteria.
      1.   The Building Inspector is authorized to grant an administrative
variance to the provisions of this chapter in an amount not to exceed a 10%
variation from the site development standards, parking and loading requirements
and the specific provisions and requirements contained in this chapter.
      2.   Upon receipt of a request for an administrative variance, the
Building Inspector shall prepare a report of the situation and all factual data
concerning the site in terms of the criteria stated in this chapter. Upon
completion of the report, the Building Inspector shall determine whether or not
the request meets the above stated criteria and shall approve or deny the
request exclusively on that basis. Decisions rendered by the Building Inspector
shall be in the form of a letter which states specifically a determination on
each of the items contained in § 53-185 of this chapter, with reference to the
above mentioned report.
      3.   The City Manager may assist the Building Inspector in the
implementation of the administrative variance. This may include accompanying
the Building Inspector on a site visit, providing the inspector with
information, discussing the details of the situation with the inspectors or
acting to expedite the process in lieu of the availability of the Building
Inspector. If an administrative variance is granted by the City Manager, a
report of the action must be provided to the Council stating the reason for the
action taken.
   B.   Appeals. The decision of the Building Inspector may be appealed to the
Board of Appeals pursuant to § 
53-186.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-188. FLOOD HAZARD AREA VARIANCES.
   A.   Variances from the provisions of Article XIV, Flood Hazard Areas, shall
only be granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals upon a determination of
compliance with the general standards for variances contained in this chapter
and each of the following specific standards.
      1.   A variance shall be granted only upon:
         a.   A showing of good and sufficient causes;
         b.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in an exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
         c.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in a harmful increase in flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public or conflict with existing laws or ordinances.
      2.   The variance granted shall be the minimum necessary, considering the
flood hazard, to afford relief to the applicant.
   B.   The Board of Zoning Appeals may attach the conditions to the granting
of a variance to ensure compliance with the standards contained in this
chapter.
   C.   Variances may be granted for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or
the State Historic Markers listing of historic sites or any other state
register of historic places without regard to the requirements of this section
governing variances in flood hazard areas.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-189. MAPPING DISPUTES.
   A.   Where disputes arise as to the location of the flood hazard area
boundary or the limits of the floodway, the Board of Zoning shall resolve the
dispute and establish the boundary location. In all cases, the decision of the
Board of Zoning Appeals shall be based upon the most current floodplain studies
issued by the Federal Insurance Administration. Where Federal Insurance
Administration information is not available, the best available floodplain
information shall be utilized.
   B.   Where a dispute involves an allegation that the boundary is incorrect
as mapped and Federal Insurance Administration floodplain studies are being
questioned, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall modify the boundary of the flood
hazard area or the floodway only upon receipt of an official letter of map
amendment issued by the Federal Insurance Administration.
   C.   All parties to a map dispute may submit technical evidence to the Board
of Zoning Appeals.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-190. REVIEW BY CIRCUIT COURT.
   Any party aggrieved by an order, determination or decision of any officer,
agency, board, commission, board of appeals or legislative body of the city
which has acted pursuant to the provisions of Public Act 207 of 1921 as amended
may obtain a review thereof both on the facts and the law, in the Circuit Court
of the county; provided that, all other means of local appeal and review as
provided in this chapter have first been exhausted. The Circuit Court shall
review the record and decision of the Board of Appeals to ensure that the
decision:
   A.   Complies with the constitution and laws of the state;
   B.   Is based upon proper procedure;
   C.   Is supported by competent, material and substantial evidence on the
record; and
   D.   Represents the reasonable exercise and discretion granted by the Board
of Appeals.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
ARTICLE XXI. AMENDMENTS
Sec. 53-191. PROCEDURE.
   The City Council may, from time to time, amend, supplement or repeal the
regulations and provisions of this chapter in the manner prescribed by Public
Act 207 of 1921, as amended and in accordance with the following procedural
outline.
   A.   A proposed amendment, supplement or repeal may be originated by the
City Council, City Planning Commission or by petition. All proposals not
originating with the City Planning Commission shall be referred to the
Commission for a report thereon before any action is taken on the proposal by
the City Council.
   B.   1.   The City Planning Commission shall study the proposed amendment,
supplement or repeal. If it decides the proposal has merit, the City Planning
Commission shall hold a public hearing thereon in accordance with procedures
stated in Public Act 207 of 1921, as amended and make a report of its findings
and recommendation to the City Council.
      2.   If the City Planning Commission decides that a proposed amendment,
supplement or repeal does not have merit, it shall so report to the City
Council, without holding a public hearing.
   C.   When the City Council receives an adverse report on a proposed
amendment or change that has not received a public hearing by the City Planning
Commission, it may concur with the recommendation and stop further action, or,
if it does not agree with the recommendation, the City Council shall refer the
proposed amendment or change back to the City Planning Commission, with a
request that the City Planning Commission hold a public hearing on the proposed
amendment, supplement or repeal and make a final report to the City Council.
   D.   When the City Council receives a recommendation from the City Planning
Commission on a proposal that has been given a public hearing by the Planning
Commission, the City Council shall hold a public hearing thereon. If a hearing
is held, notice shall be given in the manner prescribed by Public Act 207 of
1921, as amended, and the City Council may adopt the amendment, supplement or
repeal without further reference to the City Planning Commission unless the
recommendation from the City Planning Commission is to be amended in which
case, the same shall be referred again to the City Planning Commission for
reconsideration.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-192. PROTESTS.
   Whenever a written protest against the proposed amendment, supplement or
change be presented, duly signed by the owners of 20% or more of the frontage
proposed to be altered or by the owners of 20% or more of the frontage
immediately in the rear thereof or by the owners of 20% of the frontage
directly opposite the frontage proposed to be altered, the amendment shall not
be passed except by the favorable vote of three-fourths of the entire City
Council.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-193. FEE.
   Each request or application for amendment to this chapter shall be
accompanied by a fee of $50, no part of which shall be refunded.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
ARTICLE XXII. ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 53-194. BUILDING INSPECTOR.
   A.   The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by
the Building Inspector or any other employees, inspectors and officials as the
Building Inspector may delegate to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   The powers and duties of the Building Inspector shall include the
following:
      1.   To issue all permits and certificates required by this chapter;
      2.   To cause any building, structure, land, place or premises to be
inspected and examined and to order in writing the remedying of any condition
found to exist therein in violation of any provisions of this chapter; and
      3.   To carry out and enforce any decisions and determinations of the
Board of Zoning Appeals.
   C.   For the purposes of this chapter, the Building Inspector shall have the
powers of a police officer.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-195. BUILDING PERMIT, PLAT.
   In order to facilitate administration of the conditions of this chapter,
each application for a building permit shall be accompanied by a drawing or
plat, in duplicate, drawn to scale and showing the lot and the proposed
building and dimensions of both; the exact location of the proposed building on
the lot, notations as to the use for the building and any existing building on
the same lot; the information on front yard depths and other yard sizes on
other lots; and other information as the Building Inspector shall require for
the proper enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-196. CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   A.   A certificate of occupancy, stating that all of the provisions of this
chapter have been fully complied with shall have been obtained from the
Building Inspector before:
      1.   Any structure for which a building permit is required is used or
occupied;
      2.   Any use of an existing structure is changed to a use of a different
classification; and/or
      3.   Any use of a nonconforming use is changed.
   B.   In the case of a structure or use established, altered, enlarged or
moved after the conditional approval thereof by the Board of Zoning Appeals,
the certificate shall be issued only if all the conditions thereof shall have
been satisfied.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-197. APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE.
   A.   Application for a certificate of occupancy shall be made and filed with
the Building Inspector when any structure or use for which the certificate is
required is ready for use or occupancy.
   B.   Within ten days after the filing thereof the Building Inspector shall
inspect the structure or use and if found to be in conformity with all
provisions of this chapter, shall sign and issue a certificate of occupancy.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-198. PERMIT, LICENSE APPLICATIONS.
   No permit or license required by the city or other governmental agency shall
be issued by any department, official or employee of the city or governmental
agency, unless the application for the permit or license is accompanied by a
certificate of occupancy issued by the Building Inspector.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-200. ENFORCEMENT.
   All departments, officials and employees of the city who are vested with the
duty or authority to issue permits or licenses shall issue no permit or license
for any use, structure or purpose if the same would not conform to the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-201. CORRECTION ORDER.
   In case of any violation of this chapter, the Building Inspector shall,
after inspection, order in writing the correcting of the conditions as are
found to constitute a violation. If, within 30 days or longer time as the
Building Inspector may, in writing, authorize, any conditions have not been
corrected, it shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to institute
appropriate action.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
Sec. 53-202. FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT ADMINISTRATIVE DUTIES.
   A.   With regard to the National Flood Insurance Program and the regulation
of development within the flood hazard area zone as prescribed in Article XIV,
the duties of the Building Inspector shall include, but are not limited to:
      1.   Notification to adjacent communities and the Department of Natural
Resources of the proposed alteration or relocation of any watercourse and the
submission of the notifications to the Federal Insurance Administration; and
      2.   Recording of written notification to all applicants to whom
variances are granted in a flood hazard area indicating the terms of the
variance, the increased danger to life and property and what the cost of flood
insurance will increase commensurate with the increased flood risk and may
reach amounts in excess of $25 for $100 of insurance coverage per year. A
record of all variance notifications and variance actions shall be maintained
together with the justification for each variance.
   B.   All records and maps pertaining to the National Flood Insurance Program
shall be maintained in the office of the Building Inspector and shall be open
for public inspection.
   C.   It shall be the responsibility of the Building Inspector to obtain and
utilize the best available flood hazard data for purposes of administering this
chapter in the absence of data from the Federal Insurance Administration.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
ARTICLE XXIII. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
Sec. 53-203. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   A.   Any person (including, but not limited to, any owner, agent-in-charge,
occupant, architect, contractor or builder) who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects or refuses to comply with any provision of this chapter or any
condition or requirement of any permit, certificate, plan, agreement, variance
or other approval or authorization granted under this chapter is responsible
for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not
less than $500, plus costs and other sanctions, for each violation. Repeat
offenses shall be subject to increased fines as provided by § 
1-8 of this code.
   B.   Any building or structure erected, moved, altered, razed or converted
(including tents and trailer coaches) or any use of land which is begun or
changed subsequent to the effective date of this chapter or its amendment, that
is in violation of any provision of this chapter or any condition or
requirement of any permit, certificate, plan, agreement, variance or other
approval or authorization granted under this chapter, is declared to be a
nuisance per se and shall be abated by any court of competent jurisdiction.
   C.   For purposes of chapter, the city officials authorized to issue
municipal civil infraction citations and notices include, but are not limited
to, the Building Inspector, the Zoning Administrator and their designated
representatives.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
ARTICLE XXIV. INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION
Sec. 53-204. INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION.
   In interpreting applying the provisions of this chapter, the provisions
shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public
safety, health, convenience, comforts, morals, prosperity and general welfare.
It is not intended by this chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any
ordinance, rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued and not
in conflict with any of the provisions of this chapter or which shall be
adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to the use of buildings or premises
and likewise not in conflict with this chapter; nor is it intended by this
chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or
other agreements between parties; provided, however, that, where this chapter
imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or land or upon height
of buildings or requires larger open spaces or larger lot areas than are
imposed or required by the ordinance or agreements, the provisions of this
chapter shall control.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
ARTICLE XXV. SEVERABILITY
Sec. 53-205. SEVERABILITY.
   Articles, sections, divisions, clauses, provisions and portions of this
chapter are deemed to be severable and should any section, division, clause,
provision or portion of this chapter be declared by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid the same shall not affect the
validity of this chapter as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so
declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
ARTICLE XXVI. ENACTMENT AND EFFECTIVE DATE
Sec. 53-206. ENACTMENT AND EFFECTIVE DATE
   This chapter is declared to have been adopted by the City Council, at a
meeting thereof, duly held on 3-10-1980, is ordered to be given publication in
the manner prescribed by law and shall be given immediate effect.
(Ord. 188, eff. 2-25-1981)
CHAPTER 54: TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES: REZONINGS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. Date   Description
No.  Passed
184  8-9-   Land and premises to be rezoned from Agricultural District to D Industrial
     1978   District: A part of Section 29, Town 1 North, Range 11 West
            Lands and premises to be rezoned from A1 Residential District to D Industrial
            District:
            1. 234 Allegan Street, Plainwell, MI 49080
     8-14-  2. 138 Cedar Street, Plainwell, MI 49080
183  1978   3. 115 Scott Street, Plainwell, MI 49080
            4. 132 Cedar Street, Plainwell, MI 49080
            5. 302 West Allegan Street, Plainwell, MI 49080
            6. 310 Allegan Street, Plainwell, MI 49080
            7. 137 North Cedar Street, Plainwell, MI 49080
189  1-12-  Premises to be rezoned from R-2 Multiple-Family Residential District to C-
     1981   2 General Commercial District
            1. Amending Ord. 188 to be annotated in accordance with section 1702 of Ord.
            188. Further the premises are amended from R1A to include the notation PUD
     5-24-  designating the district as a Planned Use District in accordance with Article 17
–  1982   of the Zoning Ordinance
            2. The application and final development plan is approved and the Building
            Inspector directed to issue building permits in accordance with the approved
            final development plan and supplementary conditions, if any
–  5-24-  Rezoning Lots 59 and 60 from C1 Local Commercial District to C2 General
     1982   Commercial District
            Rezoning the following from C1 Commercial to C2 Commercial:
     5-24-  Lot 7-8-9 of Talbot’s Addition, also known as 551 Allegan Street; also, 601
–  1982   Allegan Street - Lots 56 and 57 of Hardendorf’s Addition and 611 Allegan Street
            - Lots 55, 58 and the east 24' of Lots 21 and 22 and the north 9' of Lot 23
            except the west 110' of Hardendorf’s Addition
–  5-9-   Rezoning Lots 53 and 54 of Hardendorf’s Addition (413 Prince Street) from R1B
     1983   Residential to C1 Commercial
–  9-12-  Rezoning a parcel containing 5.0 acres from R1A to C2
     1983
     9-26-  Rezoning the following from R1B Residential to R2 Multi-Family:
–  1983   Lots 78 (304 E. Bridge), 79 (310 E. Bridge), 80 (318 E. Bridge) and 81 (324 East
            Bridge) of Woodhams Second Addition
–  10-10- Rezoning the East 30 feet of Lot 54 of Woodhams Addition, 109 East Grant from
     1983   CBD Central Business District to R1C Residential
–  2-13-  Rezoning the following from R1C Residential to CS Community Services: 211
     1984   Allegan Street - Ely. 66 feet of Lot 18, Whitney’s Addition
            Rezoning the following from R1C Residential to R2 Multi-Family:
–  2-13-  1. 304 West Bridge Street - Lot 15 of Whitney’s Addition, and
     1984   2. 320 West Bridge Street - Lot 16 ex. NE’ly 16.5 feet also Lot 17 Whitney’s
            Addition
            1.a. Rezoning the following from CBD to R1C, Single- and Two-Family:
               E. 135 ft of Lot 10- Thompson’s Addition - 308 Main
               Lot 11 Thompson’s Addition -314 South Main
               Lot 12 also E. ½ Lot 13 - Thompson’s Addition - 320 South Main
               Lot 61 - Woodhams Second - 309 South Main
               Lot 62 - Woodhams Second - 315 South Main
               Lot 63 - Woodhams Second - 321 South Main
            1.b. Rezoning the following from C1 Local Commercial to R1C, Single- and Two-
     9-10-  Family:
220  1984      N. ½ Lot 49 & N. ½ Lot 52 - Thompson’s Addition - 402 South Main
               S. ½ Lot 49 & S. ½ Lot 52 - Thompson’s Addition - 408 South Main
               N. ½ Lot 50 & N. ½ Lot 51 - Thompson’s Addition - 414 South Main
               S. ½ Lot 50 & S. ½ Lot 51 - Thompson’s Addition - 420 South Main
               Lot 127 - Woodhams Second - 403 South Main
               Lot 126 - Woodhams Second - 409 South Main
               Lot 125 - Woodhams Second - 415 South Main
               Lot 124 - Woodhams Second - 421 South Main
            2. Deleting Article 4, Section 4.01.2.
            3. Amending Article 4, Section 402
233  4-28-  Amending Ord. 188
     1986
–  2-8-   Rezoning the following from R1C Residential to CS Community Service: 211 West
     1998   Bridge and 203 West Bridge
            1. Zoning three parcels as M2 General Manufacturing
            2. Zoning the following as R1B Single-Family Residential: 839 Thomas Street, 120
            Florence Street, 455 North 10th, 475 North 10th, 401 North 10th, 829 Glenview,
            834 Thomas, 900 Glenview
            3. Zoning the following as R1A Single-Family Residential: 1155 West Bridge, 719
            West Bridge, 1162 West Bridge, 1170 West Bridge
     5-9-   4. Zoning the following R1B Single-Family Residential: 1121 102nd Ave
–  1988   5. Rezoning 1059 Starr Road and vacant lot immediately west
            6. Rezoning the following from R1A Single-Family Residential to C2 General
            Commercial: Property between Big Boy and Fairlane Street
            7. Rezoning the following from R1C Single- and Two-Family Residential to CS
            Community Service: Bridgewood Manor, 320 Brigham
            6. Rezoning the following: 127 Locust Street, 121 Locust Street, 950 East Bridge
            Street, 954 East Bridge Street, 938 East Bridge Street, 920 East Bridge Street,
            936 East Bridge Street
            Newly annexed properties located in the Jersey, Brigham, Gladys, Plainwell
            Streets Area as follows:
            1. R1C Single- and Two-Family Residential:
               a. 506, 512, 514, 520, 600, 610, 614, 620, 626, 511, 515, 521, 613, 629
            Gladys Street;
               b. 504, 506, 520, 604, 620, 614, 624, 720, 740, 741, 731, 721, 623, 521, 511,
250  7-25-  507, 501 Brigham Street
     1988      c. 1071 Starr Road
               d. 423, 421, 419, 415 Plainwell Street
               e. 500, 502, 506 Jersey Street
            2. R2 Multi-Family Residential:
            610, 640, 724, 728 Jersey Street
            3. M1 Restricted Manufacturing:
            734 Jersey (Ano-Kal)
251  8-22-  Rezoning the following from R1C Single- and Two-Family Residential to CBD
     1988   Central Business District: 127 West Bridge Street; 128 West Chart Street
253  3-27-  Rezoning 112 East Chart Street; Lot 58 O.P. Section 29 from R1C Single- and Two-
     1989   Family Residential to CBD Central Business District
256  5-8-   Zoning property as R1A Single-Family Residential
     1989
     7-10-  Rezoning the following from C1 Local Commercial to C2 General Commercial: Lots
257  1989   2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 15 - Talbot’s Addition (533 Allegan
            Street)
276  4-13-  Rezoning a parcel of land from R1A Single-Family Residential to R2 Multi-Family
     1992   to be used for the development of North Prairie Manor
278  11-23- Rezoning 441 East Bridge from R1C Single- and Two-Family Residential to C1
     1992   Commercial
290  3-27-  Rezoning parcels of land from R1A Single-Family Residential to C1 Commercial to
     1995   be used by Boylan Leasing
            1. Rezoning the following land in the Anderson/Woodhams/Cushman and E. Bridge
            Street Area:
               a. 215 Cushman (100-001-20) from CBD Central Business District to R1B Single-
            Family Residential
               b. 219 Cushman (100-001-30) from CBD Central Business District to R1B Single-
            Family Residential
               c. 229 Cushman (160-076-00) from CBD Central Business District to R1B Single-
            Family Residential
               d. 231 Cushman, city, (160-076-10) from CBD Central Business District to R1B
            Single-Family Residential
               e. 233 Cushman (160-077-00) from CBD Central Business District to R1B Single-
            Family Residential
               f. 118 N. Woodhams (160-077-10) from CBD Central Business District to R1B
            Single-Family Residential
               g. 303 E. Bridge (160-078-10) from CBD Central Business District to R1B
            Single-Family Residential
               h. 323 E. Bridge (160-079-00) from CBD Central Business District to SB
     9-11-  Service Business District
292  1995      i. 335 E. Bridge (160-080-00) from CBD Central Business District to R1A
            Single-Family Residential
               j. 208 Cushman (100-023-00) from CBD Central Business District to R1B Single-
            Family Residential
               k. 212 Cushman (100-024-00) from CBD Central Business District to R1B Single-
            Family Residential
               l. 220 Cushman (100-024-10) from CBD Central Business District to R1B Single-
            Family Residential
               m. 228 Cushman (100-026-00) from CBD Central Business District to R1B Single-
            Family Residential
               n. 227 E. Bridge (100-027-00) from CBD Central Business District to R1B
            Single-Family Residential
               o. 221 E. Bridge (100-028-00) from CBD Central Business District to R1B
            Single-Family Residential
               p. 215 E. Bridge (100-029-00) from CBD Central Business District to R2
            Multiple-Family Residential
               q. 209 E. Bridge (100-030-00) from CBD Central Business District to R2
            Multiple-Family Residential
            2. Amending Ord. 188, Article 10 and Article 8A
     11-13- Rezoning 122 North Anderson - PL174 - N ½ Lot 22 also N ½ Lot 23 Ex E. 55 ft.
294  1995   O.P. Section 29 from CBD Central Business District to R1B Single-Family
            Residential
297  7-28-  Rezoning Corporation Plat (68) - 437 North Sherwood Avenue from R1C Single- and
     1997   Two-Family Residential to R2 Multiple-Family Residential
300  8-24-  Rezoning property located at 1059 Starr Road/Wright’s Party Store (102 Street)
     1998   from C1 Local Commercial to C2 General Commercial
304  4-12-  Amending Ord. 188
     1999
309  4-24-  Rezoning property from M2 Manufacturing to 2 General Commercial
     2000
314  1-8-   Rezoning 945 Second Division (03-55-029-011-00) from M1 Light Industrial to R1C
     2001   Single- and Two-Family Residential
            Rezoning the following properties from R1B Single-Family Residential to CS
315  5-29-  Community Service:
     2001   1. 345 Naomi Street (Parcel #030-090-00)
            2. 351 Naomi Street (Parcel #030-090-70)
316  7-23-  Rezoning 610 Allegan Street (Parcel #03-55-030-077-40) from R1A Single-Family to
     2001   C2 General Commercial
            1. Rezoning following properties from C-2 General Commercial to R1C Single- and
            Two-Family Residential:
               a. 542 Allegan Street (Parcel #03-55-030-077-00)
               b. 548 Allegan Street (Parcel #03-55-030-077-10)
               c. 554 Allegan Street (Parcel #03-55-030-077-20)
     7-8-      d. 600 Allegan Street (Parcel #03-55-030-077-30)
321  2002      e. 422 Allegan Street Allegan Street (Parcel #03-55-030-080-00)
            2. Rezoning following properties from M-2 General Manufacturing to R1C Single-
            and Two-Family Residential
               a. 200 Allegan Street (Parcel #03-55-160-043-00)
               b. 180 Michigan Ave. (Parcel #03-55-030-076-00)
               c. 170 Prospect Street (Parcel #003-55-030-078-00)
               d. 175 Prospect Street (Parcel #03-55-280-013-00)
325  1-13-  Rezoning 102 Starr Road from R-1A Single-Family Residential to R-1C Single- and
     2003   Two-Family Residential
326  11-10- Rezoning 322 West First Avenue from R-1A Single-Family Residential to R-1B
     2003   Single-Family Residential
327  2-9-   Rezoning 426 Naomi Street from C1 Local Commercial to R1B Single-Family
     2004   Residential
     2-23-  Rezoning the following properties from R-1C Single- and Two-Family Residential
328  2004   to R-2 Multiple-Family Residential: 100 Starr Road, 110 Starr Road, and 120
            Starr Road
329  5-10-  Rezoning 760 North Main Street from R2 Multi-Family Residential to C2 General
     2004   Commercial
335  12-28- Rezoning 201 E. Bridge Street from CBD Central Business District to SB Service
     2004   Business District
338  2-22-  Rezoning 886 Miller Road from M-1 Restrictive Manufacturing to C-2 General
     2005   Commercial
343  10-22- Rezoning 315 North Sherwood Avenue from C-1 Local Commercial to R1-C Single- and
     2007   Two-Family Residential
     1-10-  Rezoning the following from R1C Single-and Two-Family Residential to CBD Central
356  2011   Business District: 542, 548, 600,422 & 200 Allegan, 180 Michigan Ave. &175, 170
            Prospect Street
374  10-12- Rezoning the following from C-1 Local Commercial to R1-C Single and Two Family
     2015   Residential: 437 North Sherwood Avenue
380  12-10- Rezoning the following from R1-B/C-1 Single-Family Residence/Local Commercial to
     2018   R1-B Single-Family Residential: 712 North Main Street
376  8-8-   Rezoning the following from M-2 General Manufacturing District to R1-C Single
     2016   and Two Family Residential: 139 Mariette Street
382  6-24-  Rezoning the following from C-1 Local Commercial to SB Service Business: 720
     2019   North Main Street
           
 
CHAPTER 55: VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDERS
Section
   
55-1   Purpose
   
55-2   Consistent interpretation
   
55-3   Definitions
   
55-4   Applicability to permittees
   
55-5   Contacts, maps and plans
   
55-6   Use of public right-of-way
   
55-7   Indemnification
   
55-8   Insurance
   
55-9   Performance bond or letter of credit
   
55-10   Removal
   
55-11   Other items
   
55-12   Effective date
Sec. 55-1. PURPOSE.
   A.   Under the Uniform Video Services Local Franchise Act, video service
providers may obtain a franchise to provide video services in municipality
using a standardized, uniform form of franchise agreement established by the
MPSC. This form includes the right to use the public right-of-way to provide
the service, but does not contain right-of-way management and related
provisions.
   B.   Telecommunications providers who obtain a standardized, uniform form of
franchise agreement generally will have previously obtained from the
municipality a permit under the Metro Act to construct and maintain their
telecommunications facilities in the public right-of-way. The Metro Act permits
set forth the terms and conditions for the right-of-way usage, standard forms
of the permits were agreed to in a collaborative process between municipalities
and providers that was initiated by the MPSC and the standard forms have since
been approved by the legislature and the MPSC.
   C.   Because telecommunications providers typically provide video services
over combined video and telecommunications facilities, the Metro Act permits
generally provide adequate public right-of-way related protections for
municipality and the public when the providers are providing video services.
   D.   Other video service providers, in particular new providers or existing
cable companies, may not have a Metro Act permit issued by the municipality.
   E.   The Uniform Video Services Local Franchise Act and the standardized,
uniform franchise agreement require video service providers to comply with all
valid and enforceable local regulations regarding the use and occupation of the
public right-of-way in the delivery of video services, including the police
powers of the franchising entity and makes the right-of-way usage subject to
the laws of the state and the police powers of the franchising entity.
   F.   The Uniform Video Services Local Franchise Act and the standardized,
uniform franchise agreement state that franchising entities shall provide video
service providers with open, comparable, nondiscriminatory and competitively
neutral access to the public right-of-way and may not discriminate against a
video service provider for the authorization or placement of a video service or
communications network in the public right-of-way.
   G.   The State Constitution reserves reasonable control of their highways,
streets, alleys and public places to local units of government.
   H.   The purpose of this chapter is to promote and protect the public
health, safety and welfare and exercise reasonable control over the public
right-of-way by regulating the use and occupation of the rights-of-way by video
service providers who have a standardized, uniform franchise but who lack a
Metro Act permit from municipality. This chapter does so by setting forth terms
and conditions for such usage and occupation from the forms of Metro Act permit
approved by the MPSC and approved by the legislature in § 6(1) of the Metro
Act, thus providing open, comparable, nondiscriminatory and competitively
neutral access to the public right-of-way and not discriminating against a
video service provider for the authorization or placement of a video service or
communications network in public right-of-way.
(Ord. 345, adopted 12-26-2007)
Sec. 55-2. CONSISTENT INTERPRETATION.
   This chapter shall be interpreted and applied so as to be consistent with
the Metro Act and corresponding provisions of the forms of Metro Act permit
approved by the MPSC, including applicable MPSC, Metro Authority and court
decisions and determinations relating to same.
(Ord. 345, adopted 12-26-2007)
Sec. 55-3. DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. The Uniform Video Services Local Franchise Act, being Public Act 480 of
2007, (M.C.L.A. §§ 484.3301 and following), as amended from time to time.
   CLAIMS. The meaning set forth in § 
55-7A.
   FACILITIES. The lines, equipment and other facilities of a permittee which
use or occupy the public right-of-way in the delivery of video services in
municipality.
   FRANCHISE AGREEMENT. The franchise agreement entered into or possessed by a
video service provider with municipality as required by § 3(1) of the Act, if
it is the standardized, uniform form of franchise agreement established by the
MPSC.
   MANAGER. The City Administrator or his or her designee.
   METRO ACT. The Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way
Oversight Act, being Public Act 48 of 2002 (M.C.L.A. §§ 484.3101 and
following).
   METRO ACT PERMIT. A permit to use the public right-of-way issued by
municipality under its ordinance implementing the Metro Act after a provider’s
application for same to municipality as set forth in the ordinance.
   METRO AUTHORITY. The same meaning as “Authority” in the Metro Act.
   MPSC. The Michigan Public Service Commission and shall have the same meaning
as the term “Commission” in the Act and the Metro Act.
   MUNICIPALITY. The City of Plainwell.
   PERMITTEE. A video service provider with a currently valid franchise
agreement, but without a currently valid Metro Act permit. Upon applying to
municipality for and then obtaining a Metro Act permit from municipality, a
video service provider is not a PERMITTEE and is no longer required to comply
with this chapter. A video service provider is also not a PERMITTEE and is not
required to comply with this chapter if it and the municipality enter into a
voluntary franchise agreement as described in § 
55-11B.
   PERSON. An individual, corporation, association, partnership, governmental
entity or any other legal entity.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. The same meaning as in the Act.
   STREET CONSTRUCTION and STREET RESURFACING. The meanings set forth in § 
55-6H.
   VIDEO SERVICE. The same meaning as in the Act.
   VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER. The same meaning as in the Act.
(Ord. 345, adopted 12-26-2007)
Sec. 55-4. APPLICABILITY TO PERMITTEES.
   All permittees shall comply with this chapter, except that a permittee need
not comply with the insurance provisions of § 
55-8A. through F. if it is maintaining the insurance required by § 
55-11. of its franchise agreement (pertaining to incumbent video providers
continuing certain insurance provided under their preceding franchise).
(Ord. 345, adopted 12-26-2007)
Sec. 55-5. CONTACTS, MAPS AND PLANS.
   A.   Permittee contacts. The permittee shall provide the manager with the
names, addresses and the like for engineering and construction related
information for permittee and its facilities as follows:
      1.   The address, e-mail address, phone number and contact person (title
or name) at the permittee’s local office (in or near municipality);
      2.   If the permittee’s engineering drawings, as-built plans and related
records for the facilities will not be located at the preceding local office,
the location address, phone number and contact person (title or department) for
them;
      3.   The name, title, address, e-mail address and telephone numbers of
permittee’s engineering contact person(s) with responsibility for the design,
plans and construction of the facilities;
      4.   The address, phone number and contact person (title or department)
at the permittee’s home office/regional office with responsibility for
engineering and construction related aspects of the facilities;
      5.   The permittee shall, at all times, provide the manager with the
phone number at which a live representative of the permittee (not voice mail)
can be reached 24 hours a day, seven days a week, in the event of a public
emergency; and
      6.   The permittee shall notify the municipality in writing pursuant to
the notice provisions of the franchise agreement of any changes in the
preceding information.
   B.   Route maps. Within 90 days after the substantial completion of
construction of new facilities in the municipality, the permittee shall submit
route maps showing the location of the facilities to municipality, in the same
manner and subject to the same provisions as apply to telecommunications
providers under §§ 6(7) and 6(8) of the Metro Act (M.C.L.A. § 484.3106(7) and
(8)).
   C.   As-built records. The permittee, without expense to municipality,
shall, upon 48 hours’ notice, give the municipality access to all “as-built”
maps, records, plans and specifications showing the facilities or portions
thereof in the public right-of-way. Upon request by municipality, the permittee
shall inform the municipality as soon as reasonably possible of any changes
from previously supplied maps, records or plans and shall mark up maps provided
by municipality so as to show the location of the facilities.
(Ord. 345, adopted 12-26-2007)
Sec. 55-6. USE OF PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   A.   Overlashing. The permittee shall not allow the wires or any other
facilities of a third party to be overlashed to the permittee’s facilities
without the municipality’s prior written consent. The municipality’s right to
withhold written consent is subject to the authority of the MPSC under § 361 of
the State Telecommunications Act (M.C.L.A. § 484.2361).
   B.   No burden on public right-of-way. The permittee, its contractors,
subcontractors and the facilities shall not unduly burden or interfere with the
present or future use of any of the public right-of-way. The permittee’s aerial
cables and wires shall be suspended so as to not endanger or injure persons or
property in or about the public right-of-way. If the municipality reasonably
determines that any portion of the facilities constitutes an undue burden or
interference, due to changed circumstances, the permittee, at its sole expense,
shall modify the facilities or take other actions as the municipality may
determine is in the public interest to remove or alleviate the burden and the
permittee shall do so within a reasonable time period. The municipality shall
attempt to require all occupants of a pole or conduit whose facilities are a
burden to remove or alleviate the burden concurrently.
   C.   No priority. This chapter does not establish any priority of use of the
public right-of-way by the permittee over any present or future permittees or
parties having agreements with the municipality or franchises for the use. In
the event of any dispute as to the priority of use of the public right-of-way,
the first priority shall be to the public generally, the second priority to the
municipality, the third priority to the state and its political subdivisions in
the performance of their various functions and thereafter as between other
permit, agreement or franchise holders, as determined (except as otherwise
provided by law) by municipality in the exercise of its powers, including the
police power and other powers reserved to and conferred on it by the state.
   D.   Restoration of property. The permittee, its contractors and
subcontractors shall immediately (subject to seasonal work restrictions)
restore, at the permittee’s sole expense, in a manner approved by the
municipality, any portion of the public right-of-way that is in any way
disturbed, damaged or injured by the construction, installation, operation,
maintenance or removal of the facilities to a reasonably equivalent (or, at the
permittee’s option, better) condition as that which existed prior to the
disturbance. In the event that the permittee, its contractors or subcontractors
fail to make the repair within a reasonable time, the municipality may make the
repair and the permittee shall pay the costs the municipality incurred for the
repair.
   E.   Marking.
      1.   The permittee shall mark its facilities installed after the
effective date of this chapter as follows: aerial portions of the facilities
shall be marked with a marker on the permittee’s lines on alternate poles which
shall state the permittee’s name and provide a toll-free number to call for
assistance. Direct buried underground portions of the facilities shall have:
         a.   A conducting wire placed in the ground at least several inches
above the permittee’s cable (if the cable is nonconductive);
         b.   At least several inches above that, a continuous colored tape
with a statement to the effect that there is buried cable beneath; and
         c.   Stakes or other appropriate above ground markers with the
permittee’s name and a toll-free number indicating that there is buried cable
below.
      2.   Bored underground portions of the facilities shall have a conducting
wire at the same depth as the cable and shall not be required to provide the
continuous colored tape. Portions of the facilities located in conduit,
including conduit of others used by the permittee, shall be marked at its
entrance into and exit from each manhole and handhole with permittee’s name and
a toll-free telephone number.
   F.   Tree trimming. The permittee may trim trees upon and overhanging the
public right-of-way so as to prevent the branches of the trees from coming into
contact with the facilities, consistent with any standards adopted by
municipality. The permittee shall dispose of all trimmed materials. The
permittee shall minimize the trimming of trees to that essential to maintain
the integrity of the facilities. Except in emergencies, all trimming of trees
in the public right-of-way shall have the advance approval of the manager.
   G.   Installation and maintenance. The construction and installation of the
facilities shall be performed pursuant to plans approved by municipality. The
open cut of any public right-of-way shall be coordinated with the manager or
manager’s designee. The permittee shall install and maintain the facilities in
a reasonably safe condition. If the existing poles in the public right-of-way
are overburdened or unavailable for the permittee’s use or the facilities of
all users of the poles are required to go underground then the permittee shall,
at its expense, place the portion of its facilities underground, unless
municipality approves an alternate location. The permittee may perform
maintenance on the facilities without prior approval of municipality; provided
that, the permittee shall obtain any and all permits required by municipality
in the event that any maintenance will disturb or block vehicular traffic or
are otherwise required by the municipality.
   H.   Pavement cut coordination. The permittee shall coordinate its
construction and all other work in the public right-of-way with the
municipality’s program for street construction and rebuilding (collectively
“street construction”) and its program for street repaving and resurfacing
(except seal coating and patching) (collectively, “street resurfacing”). The
goals of the coordination shall be to encourage the permittee to conduct all
work in the public right-of-way in conjunction with or immediately prior to any
street construction or street resurfacing planned by municipality.
   I.   Compliance with laws. The permittee shall comply with all valid and
enforceable federal and state statutes and regulations; and all valid and
enforceable local regulations regarding the use and occupation of the public
right-of-way, including the police powers of municipality; regarding the
construction, installation and maintenance of its facilities, now in force or
which hereafter may be promulgated. Before any installation is commenced, the
permittee shall secure all necessary permits, licenses and approvals from
municipality or other governmental entity as may be required by law, including,
without limitation, all utility line permits and highway permits. The
municipality shall not unreasonably delay or deny issuance of any permits,
licenses or approvals. The permittee shall comply in all respects with
applicable codes and industry standards, including, but not limited to, the
National Electrical Safety Code (latest edition adopted by State Public Service
Commission) and the National Electric Code (latest edition). The permittee
shall comply with all zoning and land use ordinances and historic preservation
ordinances as may exist or may hereafter be amended. This section does not
constitute a waiver of the permittee’s right to challenge laws, statutes,
ordinances, rules or regulations now in force or established in the future.
   J.   Street vacation. If the municipality vacates or consents to the
vacation of public right-of-way within its jurisdiction and the vacation
necessitates the removal and relocation of the permittee’s facilities in the
vacated public right-of-way, the permittee shall consent to the vacation and
remove its facilities, at its sole cost and expense, when ordered to do so by
municipality or a court of competent jurisdiction. The permittee shall relocate
its facilities to the alternate route as municipality and the permittee
mutually agree, applying reasonable engineering standards.
   K.   Relocation. If the municipality requests the permittee to relocate,
protect, support, disconnect or remove its facilities because of street or
utility work or other public projects, the permittee shall relocate, protect,
support, disconnect or remove its facilities, at its sole cost and expense,
including where necessary to the alternate route as the municipality and the
permittee mutually agree, applying reasonable engineering standards. The work
shall be completed within a reasonable time period.
   L.   Public emergency. The municipality shall have the right to sever,
disrupt, dig-up or otherwise destroy facilities of the permittee if the action
is necessary because of a public emergency. If reasonable to do so under the
circumstances, the municipality shall attempt to provide notice to the
permittee. Public emergency shall be any condition which poses an immediate
threat to life, health or property caused by any natural or human-made
disaster, including, but not limited to, storms, floods, fire, accidents,
explosions, water main breaks, hazardous material spills, etc. The permittee
shall be responsible for repair, at its sole cost and expense, of any of its
facilities damaged pursuant to any action taken by the municipality.
   M.   Miss dig. If eligible to join, the permittee shall subscribe to and be
a member of “MISS DIG”, the association of utilities formed pursuant to Public
Act 53 of 1974, as amended, (M.C.L.A. §§ 460.701 et seq.) and shall conduct its
business in conformance with the statutory provisions and regulations
promulgated thereunder.
   N.   Underground relocation. If the permittee has its facilities on poles of
Consumers Energy, Detroit Edison or another electric or telecommunications
provider and Consumers Energy, Detroit Edison or another electric or
telecommunications provider relocates its system underground, then the
permittee shall relocate its facilities underground in the same location at the
permittee’s sole cost and expense.
   O.   Identification. All personnel of the permittee and its contractors or
subcontractors who have as part of their normal duties contact with the general
public shall wear on their clothing a clearly visible identification card
bearing the permittee’s name, their name and photograph. The permittee shall
account for all identification cards at all times. Every service vehicle of the
permittee and its contractors or subcontractors shall be clearly identified as
such to the public, such as by a magnetic sign with the permittee’s name and
telephone number.
(Ord. 345, adopted 12-26-2007)
Sec. 55-7. INDEMNIFICATION.
   A.   Indemnity. The permittee shall defend, indemnify, protect and hold
harmless the municipality, its officers, agents, employees, elected and
appointed officials, departments, boards and commissions from any and all
claims, losses, liabilities, causes of action, demands, judgments, decrees,
proceedings and expenses of any nature (collectively “claims”) (including,
without limitation, attorneys’ fees) arising out of or resulting from the acts
or omissions of permittee, its officers, agents, employees, contractors,
successors or assigns, but only to the extent the acts or omissions are related
to the permittee’s use of or installation of facilities in the public right-of-
way and only to the extent of the fault or responsibility of the permittee, its
officers, agents, employees, contractors, successors and assigns.
   B.   Notice, cooperation. The municipality shall notify the permittee
promptly in writing of any claims and the method and means proposed by the
municipality for defending or satisfying any claims. The municipality shall
cooperate with the permittee in every reasonable way to facilitate the defense
of any claims. The municipality shall consult with the permittee respecting the
defense and satisfaction of claims, including the selection and direction of
legal counsel.
   C.   Settlement. The municipality shall not settle any claim subject to
indemnification under the preceding two divisions A. and B. without the advance
written consent of the permittee, which consent shall not be unreasonably
withheld. The permittee shall have the right to defend or settle, at its own
expense, any claim against the municipality for which the permittee is
responsible hereunder.
(Ord. 345, adopted 12-26-2007)
Sec. 55-8. INSURANCE.
   A.   Coverage required. Prior to beginning any construction in or
installation of the permittee’s facilities in the public right-of-way, the
permittee shall obtain insurance as set forth below and file certificates
evidencing same with the municipality. The insurance shall be maintained in
full force and effect until the end of the term of the franchise agreement. In
the alternative, the permittee may satisfy this requirement through a program
of self-insurance, acceptable to the municipality, by providing reasonable
evidence of its financial resources to the municipality. The municipality’s
acceptance of the self-insurance shall not be unreasonably withheld:
      1.   Commercial general liability insurance, including completed
operations liability, independent contractors liability, contractual liability
coverage, railroad protective coverage and coverage for property damage from
perils of explosion, collapse or damage to underground utilities, commonly
known as XCU coverage, in an amount not less than $5,000,000;
      2.   Liability insurance for sudden and accidental environmental
contamination with minimum limits of $500,000 and providing coverage for claims
discovered within three years after the term of the policy. Pursuant to the
2006 MPSC decision in Case U-14720, the permittee need not comply with the
preceding sentence until the time after the effective date of this chapter that
it decides to place any new or existing facilities underground within the
public right-of-way in the municipality;
      3.   Automobile liability insurance in an amount not less than
$1,000,000;
      4.   Worker’s compensation and employer’s liability insurance with
statutory limits and any applicable Federal insurance of a similar nature; and
      5.   The coverage amounts set forth above may be met by a combination of
underlying (primary) and umbrella policies so long as in combination the limits
equal or exceed those stated. If more than one insurance policy is purchased to
provide the coverage amounts set forth above, then all policies providing
coverage limits excess to the primary policy shall provide drop down coverage
to the first dollar of coverage and other contractual obligations of the
primary policy, should the primary policy carrier not be able to perform any of
its contractual obligations or not be collectible for any of its coverages for
any reason during the term of the franchise agreement or (when longer) for as
long as coverage could have been available pursuant to the terms and conditions
of the primary policy.
   B.   Additional insured. The municipality shall be named as an additional
insured on all policies (other than worker’s compensation and employer’s
liability). All insurance policies shall provide that they shall not be
canceled, modified or not renewed unless the insurance carrier provides 30 days
prior written notice to the municipality. The permittee shall annually provide
the municipality with a certificate of insurance evidencing the coverage. All
insurance policies (other than environmental contamination, worker’s
compensation and employer’s liability insurance) shall be written on an
occurrence basis and not on a claims made basis.
   C.   Qualified insurers. All insurance shall be issued by insurance carriers
licensed to do business by the state or by surplus line carriers on the State
Insurance Commission approved list of companies qualified to do business in the
state. All insurance and surplus line carriers shall be rated A+ or better by
A.M. Best Company.
   D.   Deductibles. If the insurance policies required by this chapter are
written with retainages or deductibles in excess of $50,000, they shall be
approved by manager in advance in writing. The permittee shall indemnify and
save harmless the municipality from and against the payment of any deductible
and from the payment of any premium on any insurance policy required to be
furnished hereunder.
   E.   Contractors. The permittee’s contractors and subcontractors working in
the public right-of-way shall carry in full force and effect commercial general
liability, environmental contamination liability, automobile liability and
worker’s compensation and employer liability insurance which complies with all
terms of this section. In the alternative, the permittee, at its expense, may
provide the coverages for any or all its contractors or subcontractors (such as
by adding them to the permittee’s policies).
   F.   Insurance primary. The permittee’s insurance coverage shall be primary
insurance with respect to the municipality, its officers, agents, employees,
elected and appointed officials, departments, boards and commissions
(collectively “them”). Any insurance or self-insurance maintained by any of
them shall be in excess of the permittee’s insurance and shall not contribute
to it (where “insurance or self-insurance maintained by any of them” includes
any contract or agreement providing any type of indemnification or defense
obligation provided to or for the benefit of them, from any source and includes
any self-insurance program or policy or self-insured retention or deductible
by, for or on behalf of them).
(Ord. 345, adopted 12-26-2007)
Sec. 55-9. PERFORMANCE BOND OR LETTER OF CREDIT.
   The municipality may require the permittee to post a bond (or letter of
credit), in the amount provided in § 15(3) of the Metro Act, as amended
(M.C.L.A. § 484.3115(3)).
(Ord. 345, adopted 12-26-2007)
Sec. 55-10. REMOVAL.
   A.   Removal; underground. As soon as practicable after the term of the
franchise agreement expires, the permittee or its successors and assigns shall
remove any underground cable or other portions of the permittee’s facilities
from the public right-of-way which has been installed in a manner that it can
be removed without trenching or other opening of the public right-of-way. The
permittee shall not remove any underground cable or other portions of the
facilities which requires trenching or other opening of the public right-of-
way, except with the prior written approval of the manager. All removals shall
be at the permittee’s sole cost and expense. For purposes of this division A.,
CABLE means any wire, coaxial cable, fiber optic cable, feed wire or pull wire.
   B.   Removal; above ground. As soon as practicable after the expiration of
the term of a franchise agreement, the permittee or its successor or assigns at
its sole cost and expense, shall, unless waived in writing by the Manager,
remove from the public right-of-way all above ground elements of its
facilities, including, but not limited to, poles, pedestal-mounted terminal
boxes and lines attached to or suspended from poles.
   C.   Schedule. The schedule and timing of removal shall be subject to
approval by the manager. Unless extended by manager, removal shall be completed
not later than 12 months following the expiration of the term of the franchise
agreement. Portions of the permittee’s facilities in the public right-of-way
that are not removed within that time period shall be deemed abandoned and, at
the option of the municipality exercised by written notice to the permittee at
the address provided for in the franchise agreement, title to the portions
described in the notice shall vest in the municipality.
(Ord. 345, adopted 12-26-2007)
Sec. 55-11. OTHER ITEMS.
   A.   Duties. The permittees shall faithfully perform all duties required by
this chapter.
   B.   Different terms. The Act allows local units of government and video
service providers to enter into voluntary franchise agreements that include
terms and conditions which are different from those required under the Act or
which are different from those in the standardized, uniform form of franchise
agreement established by the MPSC. The Metro Act allows municipalities and
providers to mutually agree to Metro Act permit terms differing from those in
the standard forms of Metro Act permit approved by the MPSC. Current or
prospective the permittees who desire terms different from those in this
chapter, as applied to them, should request a voluntary franchise agreement or
a mutually agreed to Metro Act permit from the municipality.
   C.   Interpretation and severability. The provisions of this chapter shall
be liberally construed to protect and preserve the peace, health, safety and
welfare of the public and should any provision or section of this chapter be
held unconstitutional, invalid, overbroad or otherwise unenforceable, the
determination/holding shall not be construed as affecting the validity of any
of the remaining conditions of this chapter. If any provision in this chapter
is found to be partially overbroad, unenforceable or invalid, the permittee and
the municipality may nevertheless enforce the provision to the extent permitted
under applicable law.
   D.   Violations. A permittee who violates any provision of this chapter is
responsible for a municipal civil infraction and shall be subject to civil
infraction fines and costs as provided in the municipality’s ordinances or
municipal code. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the
remedies available to the municipality in the event of a violation by a the
permittee of this chapter.
   E.   Authorized officials. The manager, which includes his or her designee,
is hereby designated as the authorized official of the municipality to issue
municipal civil infraction citations (directing alleged violators to appear in
court) or municipal civil infraction violation notices (directing alleged
violators to appear at the Municipal Chapter Violations Bureau) for violations
of this chapter, as provided by the municipality’s ordinances or municipal
code.
(Ord. 345, adopted 12-26-2007)
Sec. 55-12. EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall take effect on 1-13-2008 unless given immediate effect.
(Ord. 345, adopted 12-26-2007)
CHAPTER 56: TAXES
Section
Article I: Tax Exemption; Koehler Crossing
   
56-1   Name
   
56-2   Preamble
   
56-3   Definitions
   
56-4   Class of housing developments
   
56-5   Establishment of annual service charge
   
56-6   Limitation on the payment of annual service charge
   
56-7   Contractual effect of article
   
56-8   Payment of service charge
   
56-9   Duration
   
56-10   Severability
   
56-11   Effective date
Article II: Tax Exemption; West Town Apartments
   
56-12   Name
   
56-13   Preamble
   
56-14   Definitions
   
56-15   Class of the housing development
   
56-16   Establishment of annual service charge
   
56-17   Annual reporting
   
56-18   Limitation on the payment of annual service charge
   
56-19   Contractual effect of article
   
56-20   Payment of service charge
   
56-21   Duration
   
56-22   Severability
   
56-23   Inconsistent ordinances
   
56-24   Effective date
ARTICLE I. TAX EXEMPTION; KOEHLER CROSSING.
Sec. 56-1. NAME.
   This article shall be known and cited as the City of Plainwell Tax Exemption
Ordinance for Koehler Crossing.
(Ord. 354 of 2010, passed 7-12-2010)
Sec. 56-2. PREAMBLE.
   A.   It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose of the State of
Michigan and its political subdivisions to provide housing for its citizens of
low and moderate income and to encourage the development of that housing by
providing for a service charge in lieu of property taxes in accordance with the
State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966 (Public Act 346 of 1966, as
amended, M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1401 et seq.) The city is authorized by this Act to
establish or change the service charge to be paid in lieu of taxes by any or
all classes of housing exempt from taxation under this Act at any amount it
chooses not to exceed the taxes that would be paid but for this Act. It is
further acknowledged that the housing for persons of low and moderate income is
a public necessity and as the city will be benefitted and improved by the
housing the encouragement of the same by providing certain real estate tax
exemption for the housing is a valid public purpose; further, that the
continuance of the provisions of this article for tax exemption and the service
charge in lieu of taxes during the period contemplated in this article are
essential to the determination of economic feasibility of housing developments
which are constructed and financed in reliance on the tax exemption.
   B.   The city acknowledges that Koehler Crossing Limited Dividend Housing
Association Limited Partnership (LDHA LP) (the sponsor) has offered subject to
receipt of an allocation under the Low Income Housing Tax Credit Program
(LIHTC) form the Michigan State Housing Development Authority, to erect, own
and operate a housing development identified as Koehler Crossing on certain
property located at 1100 N. Main Street in the City of Plainwell to serve
persons of low and moderate income and that the sponsor has offered to pay the
city on account of this housing development an annual service charge for public
services in lieu of taxes on that part of the development designed for and
occupied by persons of low and moderate income and that the sponsor has offered
to pay the city on account of this housing development an annual service charge
for public services in lieu of all taxes.
(Ord. 354 of 2010, passed 7-12-2010)
Sec. 56-3. DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. The State Housing Development Authority Act being Public Act 346 of
1966 of the State of Michigan as amended.
   AUTHORITY. The Michigan State Housing Development Authority.
   HOUSING DEVELOPMENT. A development which contains a significant element of
housing for persons of low and moderate income and such elements of other
housing commercial, recreational, industrial, communal and educational
facilities as the Authority determines improve the quality of the development
as it relates to housing for persons of low income.
   SPONSOR. Koehler Crossing (LDHA LP) which has applied to the Authority for
an allocation of Low Income Housing Tax Credits to finance a Housing
Development.
(Ord. 354 of 2010, passed 7-12-2010)
Sec. 56-4. CLASS OF HOUSING DEVELOPMENTS.
   It is determined that the class of housing developments to which the tax
exemption shall apply and for which a service charge shall be pain in lieu of
the taxes shall be multi-family dwellings for persons and families of low to
moderate income which are finance or assisted pursuant to the Act. It is
further determined the Koehler Crossing is of this class. Passage of this
article shall not be deemed precedent for other PILOT ordinances.
(Ord. 354 of 2010, passed 7-12-2010)
Sec. 56-5. ESTABLISHMENT OF ANNUAL SERVICE CHARGE.
   A.   The housing development identified as Koehler Crossing and the property
upon which it sits shall be exempt from all property taxes from and after the
date the project is placed in service as evidenced by a certificate of
occupancy from the applicable public authority. The city, acknowledging that
the sponsor and the Authority have established the economic feasibility of the
housing development in reliance upon the enactment and continuing effect of
this article and the qualification of the housing development for exemption
from all property taxes and a payment in lieu of taxes as established in this
article and in consideration of the sponsor’s offer, subject to receipt of an
allocation of LDHA LP from the authority to construct, own and operate the
housing development agrees to accept payment of an annual service charge for
public services in lieu of all property taxes attributable to the portion of
the project occupied by persons of low or moderate income.
   B.   The initial annual service charge shall be equal to $____ (which is
equal to the tax on the property on which the project is located for the 2010
tax year). In each succeeding year the annual service charge shall increase by
the same percentage increase in the Consumer Price Index for the United States
as defined and officially reported by the United States Department of Labor or
its successor agency in the immediately preceding year but shall not increase
by more than 3% in any one year. However, in no event, shall the service charge
drop below the taxes paid on the property on which the project is located for
the 2010 tax year, nor shall the service charge exceed the taxes that would be
paid but for the Act or this article.
(Ord. 354 of 2010, passed 7-12-2010)
Sec. 56-6. LIMITATION ON THE PAYMENT OF ANNUAL SERVICE CHARGE.
   A.   Notwithstanding § 
56-5, the service charge to be paid each year in lieu of taxes for the part of
the housing development which is tax exempt and which is occupied by other than
low or moderate income persons or families shall be equal to the full amount of
the taxes which would be paid on that portion of the housing development were
not tax exempt.
   B.   The term LOW INCOME PERSONS OR FAMILIES as used herein shall be the
same meaning as found in Section 15(a)(7) of the Act.
(Ord. 354 of 2010, passed 7-12-2010)
Sec. 56-7. CONTRACTUAL EFFECT OF ARTICLE.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 15(a)(5) of the Act to the
contrary, a contract between the city and sponsor with the Authority as third-
party beneficiary under the contract, to provide tax exemption and accept
payments in lieu of taxes, as previously described, is effectuated by enactment
of this article.
(Ord. 354 of 2010, passed 7-12-2010)
Sec. 56-8. PAYMENT OF SERVICE CHARGE.
   The annual service charge in lieu of taxes as determined under the article
shall be payable in the same manner a general property taxes are payable to the
city except that the annual payment shall be paid on or before July 1 of each
year and shall be distributed to the several units levying the general property
tax in the same proportion as for general property taxes.
(Ord. 354 of 2010, passed 7-12-2010)
Sec. 56-9. DURATION.
   This article shall commence on the last day of the calendar year in which
the city issues its certificate of occupancy for the housing development, and
shall remain in effect and shall not terminate so long as the housing
development remains subject to income and rent restrictions pursuant to Section
42 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 as amended, and the regulatory
agreement of the Authority; provided, that renovation of the housing
development commences within two years from the effective date of this article.
(Ord. 354 of 2010, passed 7-12-2010)
Sec. 56-10. SEVERABILITY.
   The various sections and provisions of this article shall be deemed to be
severable. If any section or provision of this article be declared by any court
of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, this determination
shall not affect the validity of the article as a whole or any section or
provision of this article other than the section or provision so declared to be
unconstitutional or invalid.
(Ord. 354 of 2010, passed 7-12-2010)
Sec. 56-11. EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This article shall become effective on _____ 2010 or as otherwise provided
in the Charter. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this
article are repealed to the extent of the conflict.
(Ord. 354 of 2010, passed 7-12-2010)
ARTICLE II: TAX EXEMPTION; WEST TOWN APARTMENTS
Sec. 56-12. NAME.
   This article shall be known and cited as the City of Plainwell Tax Exemption
Ordinance for West Town Apartments.
(Ord. 375, passed 2-22-2016)
Sec. 56-13. PREAMBLE.
   A.   It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose of the State of
Michigan and its political subdivisions to provide housing for its citizens of
low income and to encourage the development of such housing by providing for a
service charge in lieu of property taxes in accordance with the State Housing
Development Authority Act of 1966 (1966 PA 346, as amended, M.C.L.A.
§§ 125.1401 et. seq.). The city is authorized by this act to establish or
change the service charge to be paid in lieu of taxes by any or all classes of
housing exempt from taxation under this act at any amount it chooses not to
exceed the taxes that would be paid but for this act. It is further
acknowledged that such housing for persons of low income is a public necessity,
and as the city will be benefitted and improved by such housing, the
encouragement of the same by providing certain real estate tax exemption for
such housing is a valid public purpose; further, that the continuance of the
provisions of this article for tax exemption and the service charge in lieu of
taxes during the period contemplated in this article are essential to the
determination of economic feasibility of housing developments which are
constructed and financed in reliance on such tax exemption.
   B.   The city acknowledges that Craftsmen Development LLC, a Michigan
limited liability company, in its own behalf and on behalf of a Michigan
limited dividend housing association limited partnership to be formed
(collectively, the “Sponsor”) has offered, subject to receipt of an allocation
under the Low Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC) to purchase, own, rehabilitate
and operate an existing housing development known as West Town Apartments,
located in the City of Plainwell, Allegan County, Michigan, as more accurately
described as follows:
COM N’LY COR OF LOT 14 OF TOWN AND COUNTRY ADD TH S 67 DEG 21'30" W 206.17' TO
NE’LY COR OF BENHOY ST TH 52.77 ALG THE ARC OF A CUR TO RT ALG N’LY EXT OF SD
ST WITH A RAD OF 217' AND A CHD BEARING N 15 DEG 40'30" W 52.64' TH S 81 DEG
17'30" W 66' TO NW’LY COR SD ST AS EXT TH N 89 DEG 52'45" W 150.15' TH N
259.34' TO PT ON SE’LY R/W LN OF RAMP “D” US 131 TH N 39 DEG 34'05" E ALG SD
LIN 581.80' TH S 58 DEG 04' E 19.4' TH S 659.22' TH E 33.08' SEC 30 T1N R11W.
(The West Town Development)
   C.   The Sponsor intends that the West Town Development will serve low
income persons or families, and has offered to pay the city on account of this
housing development an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all
ad valorem property taxes.
(Ord. 375, passed 2-22-2016)
Sec. 56-14. DEFINITIONS.
   All terms not herein defined shall have the meanings given them in the State
Housing Development Authority Act of 1966, being Public Act 346 of 1966, of the
State of Michigan, as amended.
   ACT. The State Housing Development Authority Act, being Public Act 346 of
1966, of the State of Michigan, as amended.
   ANNUAL SHELTER RENT. The total collections during an agreed annual period
from all occupants of West Town Development representing rent or occupancy
charges, exclusive of charges for gas, electricity, heat, or other utilities
furnished to the occupants.
   AUTHORITY. The Michigan State Housing Development Authority.
   HOUSING DEVELOPMENT. A development which contains a significant element of
housing for low income persons or families and such elements of other housing,
commercial, recreational, industrial, communal, and educational facilities as
the Authority determines improve the quality of the development as it relates
to housing for persons of low income.
   LOW INCOME PERSONS OR FAMILIES. Persons or families eligible to move into a
housing project.
   SPONSOR. Persons or entities which have applied to the Authority for an
allocation under the Low Income Housing Tax Credit Program to finance a Housing
Development.
   UTILITIES. Fuel, water, sanitary sewer service and/or electrical service
which are paid by the Housing Development.
(Ord. 375, passed 2-22-2016)
Sec. 56-15. CLASS OF THE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT.
   It is determined that the class of housing development to which this tax
exemption shall apply and for which a service charge shall be paid in lieu of
such taxes shall be housing developments which are financed or assisted
pursuant to the act. It is further determined that the West Town Development is
of this class.
(Ord. 375, passed 2-22-2016)
Sec. 56-16. ESTABLISHMENT OF ANNUAL SERVICE CHARGE.
   A.   The housing development known as West Town Development and the property
on which it is located shall be exempt from all ad valorem property taxes as of
December 31 after the sponsor commences rehabilitation of the West Town
Development, secures an allocation of low income housing tax credits from the
authority, and completes the certification process in Section 15a(1) of the Act
by November 1; provided that the rehabilitation commences by March 10, 2018.
The city, acknowledging that the sponsor and the authority have established the
economic feasibility of the housing development in reliance upon the enactment
and continuing effect of this article and the qualification of the housing
development for exemption from all ad valorem property taxes and a payment in
lieu of taxes as established in this article, and in consideration of the
sponsor’s offer, subject to receipt of an allocation under the LIHTC program,
to purchase, own, rehabilitate and operate the housing development, agrees to
accept payment of an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all
ad valorem property taxes.
   B.   The annual service charge for each operating year shall be the greater
of:
      1.   The total amount of ad valorem property taxes assessed against the
parcel on which the West Town Development is located in the 2016 tax year; and
      2.   Fifteen and seventy-four hundredths percent of the Annual Shelter
Rents actually collected by the Housing Development the given operating year.
(Ord. 375, passed 2-22-2016; Ord. 378, passed 3-13-2017)
Sec. 56-17. ANNUAL REPORTING.
   Beginning in the year in which the sponsor first receives the benefit of the
tax exemption granted under this article, the sponsor shall annually submit to
the city assessor on or before April 30 a certified audit report showing the
annual shelter rents collected and the utilities paid by the sponsor in the
prior year. The sponsor shall also annually submit to the city assessor on or
before April 30 acceptable proof of compliance with all terms and conditions of
the sponsor’s allocation of low income housing tax credits from the authority.
(Ord. 375, passed 2-22-2016)
Sec. 56-18. LIMITATION ON THE PAYMENT OF ANNUAL SERVICE CHARGE.
   Notwithstanding § 
56-16 of this article, the service charge to be paid each year in lieu of taxes
for the part of the housing development which is tax exempt and which is
occupied by other than low income persons or families shall be equal to the
full amount of the taxes which would be paid on that portion of the housing
development if the housing development were not tax exempt.
(Ord. 375, passed 2-22-2016)
Sec. 56-19. CONTRACTUAL EFFECT OF CHAPTER.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 15(a)(5) of the Act, to the
contrary, a contract between the city and the sponsor with the authority as
third party beneficiary under the contract, to provide tax exemption and accept
payments in lieu of taxes, as previously described, is effectuated by enactment
of this article.
(Ord. 375, passed 2-22-2016)
Sec. 56-20. PAYMENT OF SERVICE CHARGE.
   The service charge in lieu of taxes as determined under the article shall be
payable in the same manner as general property taxes are payable to the city
and is subject to the same penalties and interest charges if not paid in a
timely manner, except that the annual payments shall be paid on or before
August 15 and February 14 of each year. The City Treasurer shall distribute the
service charge in the same proportions as would apply to ad valorem property
taxes.
(Ord. 375, passed 2-22-2016)
Sec. 56-21. DURATION.
   This article shall remain in effect and shall not terminate so long as the
housing development remains subject to income and rent restrictions pursuant to
Section 42 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
(Ord. 375, passed 2-22-2016)
Sec. 56-22. SEVERABILITY.
   The various sections and provisions of this article shall be deemed to be
severable, and should any section or provision of this article be declared by
any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid the same
shall not affect the validity of the article as a whole or any section or
provision of this article other than the section or provision so declared to be
unconstitutional or invalid.
(Ord. 375, passed 2-22-2016)
Sec. 56-23. INCONSISTENT ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent or in conflict with the
provisions of this article are repealed to the extent of such inconsistency or
conflict.
(Ord. 375, passed 2-22-2016)
Sec. 56-24. EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This article shall become effective on March 10, 2016 or as otherwise
provided in the charter. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with
this article are repealed to the extent of such conflict.
(Ord. 375, passed 2-22-2016)
CHAPTER 57: MARIHUANA ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
Article I: Marihuana Establishments
   
57-1   Title
   
57-2   Definitions
   
57-3   Marihuana establishments prohibited
ARTICLE I: MARIHUANA ESTABLISHMENTS
Sec. 57-1. TITLE.
   This article shall be known as and may be cited as the City of Plainwell
Marihuana Establishments Ordinance.
(Ord. 381, passed 12-26-2018)
Sec. 57-2. DEFINITIONS.
   Words used in this article shall have the same meanings as in Initiated Law
1 of 2018, also known as the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act,
unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. The remainder of this article
refers to Initiated Law 1 of 2018 as the MRTMA.
(Ord. 381, passed 12-26-2018)
Sec. 57-3. MARIHUANA ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED.
   Marihuana establishments are prohibited in the City of Plainwell until such
time as the city amends this article to allow one or more establishments.
(Ord. 381, passed 12-26-2018)
CHAPTER 58: COMPLETE STREETS
Section
   
58-1   Definitions
   
58-2   Requirement of infrastructure ensuring safe travel
   
58-3   Statutory construction and severability
Sec. 58-1. DEFINITIONS.
   COMPLETE STREETS. A design principle to promote a safe network of access for
pedestrians, bicyclists, and motorists of all ages and abilities.
   COMPLETE STREETS INFRASTRUCTURE. Design features that contribute to a safe,
convenient, or comfortable travel experience for users, including but not
limited to features such as sidewalks, shared use paths (sharrows), bicycle
lanes, automobile travel lanes, paved shoulders, street trees, and landscaping,
planting strips, curbs, accessible curb ramps, bulb outs, crosswalks, refuge
islands, pedestrian, bike, and traffic signals, including countdown accessible
signals, signage, street furniture, bicycle parking facilities, and traffic
calming devices.
   STREET. Any right-of-way, public or private, including arterials,
connectors, alleys, ways, lanes, and roadways as well as bridges, tunnels, and
any other portion of the transportation network.
   STREET PROJECT. The construction, reconstruction, retrofit, maintenance,
alteration, or repair of any street, and includes the planning, design,
approval, and implementation processes.
   USERS. Individuals that use streets, including pedestrians, bicyclists,
motor vehicle drivers, public transportation riders and drivers, and people of
all ages and abilities, including children, youth, families, older adults, and
individuals with disabilities.
(Ord. 383, passed 9-23-2019)
Sec. 58-2. REQUIREMENT OF INFRASTRUCTURE ENSURING SAFE TRAVEL.
   A.   The City of Plainwell shall make complete streets practices a routine
part of everyday operations, shall approach every transportation project and
program as an opportunity to improve public streets and the transportation
network for all users, and shall work in coordination with other departments,
agencies, and jurisdictions to achieve complete streets.
   B.   Every street project on public streets shall incorporate Complete
Streets infrastructure sufficient to enable reasonably safe travel along and
across the right-of-way for each category of users; provided, however, that
such infrastructure may be excluded, upon written approval by the City Manager,
where documentation and data indicate that:
      1.   Use by non-motorized users is prohibited by law;
      2.   The cost would be excessively disproportionate to the need or
probable future use over the long term;
      3.   There is an absence of current or future need; or
      4.   Inclusion of such infrastructure would be unreasonable or
inappropriate in light of the scope of the project.
   C.   As feasible, the city shall incorporate Complete Streets infrastructure
into existing public streets to improve the safety and convenience of users and
construct and enhance the transportation network for each category of users.
   D.   If the safety and convenience of users can be improved within the scope
of pavement resurfacing, restriping, or signalization operations on public
streets, such projects shall implement Complete Streets infrastructure to
increase safety for users.
   E.   At the planning stage, the city shall work with local residents,
business operators, neighboring jurisdictions, school districts, students,
property owners, and other stakeholders who will be directly affected by a
Complete Streets project.
   F.   The city shall review and either revise or develop proposed revisions
to all appropriate plans, laws, procedures, rules, regulations, guidelines,
programs, templates, and design manuals to integrate, accommodate, and balance
the needs of all users in all street projects on public streets.
   G.   The city shall rely upon the current editions of street design
standards and guidelines that promote and support Complete Streets.
   H.   Training in how to integrate, accommodate, and balance the needs of
each category of users shall be provided for planners, civil and traffic
engineers, project managers, plan reviewers, inspectors, and other personnel
responsible for the design and construction of streets, as available.
   I.   The City of Plainwell shall create a Complete Streets project map that
shall guide community investment in Complete Streets infrastructure and include
suggested cross section details. This infrastructure shall be determined
through a public involvement process and determine planned or proposed projects
including, but not limited to, the following: proposed sidewalks, proposed bike
lane connectors, proposed sharrows, and proposed non-motorized paths. In lieu
of a Complete Streets project map, the non-motorized plan located in the
Plainwell Master Plan may be utilized as a substitute.
(Ord. 383, passed 9-23-2019)
Sec. 58-3. STATUTORY CONSTRUCTION AND SEVERABILITY.
   A.   This chapter shall be construed so as not to conflict with applicable
federal or state laws, rules, or regulations. Nothing in this chapter
authorizes any city agency to impose any duties or obligations in conflict with
limitations on municipal authority established by federal or state law at the
time such agency action is taken.
   B.    In the event that a court or agency of competent jurisdiction holds
that a federal or state law, rule, or regulation invalidates any clause,
sentence, paragraph, or section of this chapter or the application thereof to
any person or circumstances, it is the intent of the chapter that the court or
agency sever such clause, sentence, paragraph, or section so that the remainder
of this chapter remains in effect.
(Ord. 383, passed 9-23-2019)
CHAPTER 59: FAIR HOUSING
Section
   
59-1   Declaration of policy
   
59-2   Definitions
   
59-3   Prohibited acts
   
59-4   Penalty
Sec. 59-1. DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   A.   In furthering the policy of the State of Michigan as expressed in its
Constitution and other laws; in order that the safety and general welfare,
peace and health of all the inhabitants of the city may be ensured, it is
hereby declared the policy of the City of Plainwell, Michigan, to assure equal
opportunity to all residents, regardless of race, color, religion, national
origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or physical disability to live in decent,
sanitary, healthful, standard living quarters.
   B.   It is the policy of the City of Plainwell that no owner, lessee, sub-
lessee, assignee, managing agent, or other person, firm or corporation having
the right to sell, rent, lease (or otherwise control) any housing accommodation
and/or real property within the city, or any agent of these shall refuse to
sell, rent, lease, or otherwise deny to or withhold from any person or group of
persons such housing accommodations and/or real property because of race,
color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability of such
person or persons or discriminate against any person or persons because of
race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed or disability in
the conditions, terms, privileges of the sale, rental or lease of any housing
accommodation and/or real property or in the furnishing of facilities and/or
services in connection therewith.
   C.   Relocation shall be carried out in a manner that will promote maximum
choice within the community's total housing supply; lessen racial, ethnic, and
economic concentrations; and facilitate desegregation and racially inclusive
patterns of occupancy and use of public and private facilities.
(Ord. 391, adopted 6-13-2022)
Sec. 59-2. DEFINITIONS.
   Unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context, the following
terms shall have the meaning as described in this section and as used in this
chapter.
   DECENT, SANITARY, HEALTHFUL STANDARD LIVING QUARTERS. Housing which is in
sound, clean, and weather tight condition in conformance with applicable local,
state, and national codes.
   DISCRIMINATE or DISCRIMINATION. Any difference expressed in any way toward a
person or persons in the terms of the sale, exchange, lease, rental or
financing for housing accommodation and/or real property in regard to such
sale, exchange, rental, lease or finance because of race, color, religion,
national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability of such person.
   FINANCIAL INSTITUTION. Any person, institution or business entity of any
kind which loans money to persons and receives as security for said loans a
secured interest of any kind in the real property of the borrower.
   HOUSING ACCOMMODATION. Any building, structure, or portion thereof which is
used or occupied, maintained, arranged or designed to be used or occupied as a
home, residence or sleeping place of one or more human beings, or any real
estate so used, designed or intended for such use.
   OWNER. Any person/persons who hold legal or equitable title to, or own any
beneficial interest in any real property or who hold legal or equitable title
to shares of, or hold any beneficial interest in any real estate cooperative
which owns any real property and/or housing accommodations.
   REAL ESTATE BROKER. Any person, partnership, association, corporation and/or
agent thereof, who for a fee or other valuable consideration offers, sells,
purchases, exchanges or rents, or negotiates for the sale, purchase, exchange
or rental of a housing accommodation and/or real property of another, or
collects rental for the use of housing accommodation and/or real property of
another.
   REAL PROPERTY. Any real estate, vacant land, building, structure or housing
accommodations within the corporate limits of the city.
(Ord. 391, adopted 6-13-2022)
Sec. 59-3. PROHIBITED ACTS.
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any owner of real estate, lessee, sub-lessee,
real estate broker or salesman, financial institution or employee of the
financial institution, advertiser, or agent of any or all of the foregoing, to
discriminate against any person or persons because of their race, color,
religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability with regard to
the sale, exchange or rental, or any dealing concerning any housing
accommodation and/or real property.
   B.   In addition to the foregoing, it shall also be unlawful for any real
estate broker or employee thereof, owner or other person, or financial
institution dealing with housing or real property in the City of Plainwell,
Michigan:
      1.   To discriminate against any person in the availability of or the
price, terms, conditions, or privileges of any kind relating to the sale,
rental, lease, or occupancy of any housing accommodation or real property in
the city or in furnishing of any facilities or services in connection
therewith.
      2.   To publish or circulate, or cause to be published or circulated, any
notice, statement or advertisement, or to announce a policy, or to use any form
of application, for the purchase, lease, rental or financing of real property,
or to make any record of inquiry in connection with the prospective purchase,
rental or lease of such real estate, which expresses directly or indirectly any
discrimination as to race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex,
creed or disability of any person.
      3.   To discriminate in connection with lending money, guaranteeing
loans, accepting mortgages or otherwise obtaining or making available funds for
the purchase, acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair or maintenance
of any housing accommodation and/or real property.
      4.   To solicit for sale, lease, or listing for the sale or lease, of any
housing accommodation and/or real property on the grounds of loss of value
because of the present or prospective entry into any neighborhood of any person
or persons of any particular race, color, religion, national origin or
ancestry, sex, creed, or disability.
      5.   To distribute or cause to be distributed, written material or
statements designed to induce any owner or any housing accommodation and/or
real property to sell or lease his or her property because of any present or
prospective change in the race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry,
sex, creed, or disability of persons in the neighborhood.
      6.   To make any misrepresentations concerning the listing for sale or
the anticipated listing for sale or the sale of any housing accommodation and/
or real property for the purpose of inducing or attempting to induce the sale
or listing for sale of any housing accommodation and/or real property by
representing that the presence or anticipated presence of persons of any
particular race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or
disability in the area will or may result in the lowering of property values in
the block, neighborhood or area in which the property is located.
      7.   For an owner to solicit any real estate broker to sell, rent or
otherwise deal with such owner's housing accommodations and/or real property
with any limitation on its sale based on race, color, religion, national origin
or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability.
      8.   For an owner to refuse to sell, rent, or otherwise deal with any
housing accommodation and/or real property because of race, color, religion,
national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability of the proposed buyer or
tenant.
(Ord. 391, adopted 6-13-2022)
Sec. 59-4. PENALTY.
   Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be punished by a fine in the amount of $500 for each violation. Each day
a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. This section shall
in no way abrogate or impair the right of the city to specifically enforce, by
any legal means, any of the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 391, adopted 6-13-2022)
