WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP, MICHIGAN
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2023 S-5 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. passed 2-8-2023
 
Published by:
AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING
525 Vine Street, Ste. 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
      Chapter
         
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Rules of interpretation
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Reference to other sections
   
10.09   Reference to offices or officers
   
10.10   Errors and omissions
   
10.11   Official time
   
10.12   Reasonable time
   
10.13   Ordinances repealed
   
10.14   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.15   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.16   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.17   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.18   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.19   Authority to adopt code
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification of ordinances by and for the Township of Williamstown
shall be designated as the "Williamstown Township Code".
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code, other than the title, chapter and
section numbers, are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain,
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      BOARD. The Williamstown Township Board.
      CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This township code, as
modified by amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or
sections.
      COUNTY. Ingham County, Michigan.
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath and, in such cases, the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission or department of this township unless the context clearly
requires otherwise.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation, co-
partnership, trustee, lessee or receiver. Whenever used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER, as applied to
any unincorporated entity, shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as
applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE. The State of Michigan.
      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading
in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
      TOWNSHIP. The Township of Williamstown, Michigan.
      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
§ 10.06 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   The construction of all ordinances of this township shall be by the
following rules, unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of
the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance.
   (A)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
"and/or", if the sense requires it.
   (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be
done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, the
requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the act by an authorized
agent or deputy.
   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
   (D)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms
is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, the
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.09 REFERENCE TO OFFICES OR OFFICERS.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of this township exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.10 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   (A)   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of
any words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can
be attached; or the use of a word or words when use of another word or words
was clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and
the word or words shall be supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform
with the manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as
though the correct words were contained in the text, as originally published.
   (B)   No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists
regarding the nature or extent of the error.
§ 10.11 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state or federal laws, shall
be the official time within this township for the transaction of all township
business.
§ 10.12 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or
notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   (1)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided,
shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last.
      (2)   If the last day is a Sunday or a legal holiday, it shall be
excluded.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   (A)   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced.
   (B)   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.15 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   (A)   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication
shall take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided.
   (B)   Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from their
passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.
§ 10.16 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.17 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   (1)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a
new chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of
this code, the proper number of the chapter or section.
      (2)   In addition to the indication thereof as may appear in the text of
the proposed ordinance, a caption or title shall be shown in concise form above
the ordinance.
§ 10.18 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance and amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960;
Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example: (M.C.L.A. § 15.231) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-1980; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-
1985)
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a "statutory reference"
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information. Example:
   § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
      This township shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
   Statutory reference:
      Inspection of public records, see Public Act 442 of 1976, being M.C.L.A.
§§ 15.231 et seq.
§ 10.19 AUTHORITY TO ADOPT CODE.
   Pursuant to M.C.L.A. § 41.181, the township is authorized to adopt the code
of ordinances.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this code for any particular
provision or section, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of
this code or any rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof
shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500 and costs of prosecution or
by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both the fine and
imprisonment; unless there is a fine or penalty specifically set forth in the
ordinance which provides for a greater penalty and, in that event, the greater
penalty shall control. Each act of violation and every day upon which any such
violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided
by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to
the amendment of any section of this code whether or not the penalty is re-
enacted in the amendatory ordinance.
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
      Chapter
         
30.   RETIREMENT SYSTEM
CHAPTER 30: RETIREMENT SYSTEM
Section
   
30.01   Retirement system established
§ 30.01 RETIREMENT SYSTEM ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   The 457 Retirement Plan offered by Northwestern Mutual Life Insurance
Company as described to the Board is approved for adoption and implementation
by the township.
   (B)   The Supervisor and Clerk are authorized by this section to execute
those documents necessary for the implementation of the 457 Retirement Plan
offered by Northwestern Mutual Life Insurance Company and that the plan be
implemented.
   (C)   The Clerk is hereby authorized to immediately publish this ordinance
by inserting a true copy of this section once in a newspaper circulating within
the township, pursuant to M.C.L.A. § 41.184(3).
   (D)   This section shall take effect the day following the date of
publication of this section, pursuant to M.C.L.A. § 41.184(2)(b).
(Ord. 32, passed 9-5-1991)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
      Chapter
         
50.   SEWERS
CHAPTER 50: SEWERS
Section
General Provisions
   
50.001   Title
   
50.002   Definitions
   
50.003   Operation, maintenance and control
   
50.004   Contract between township and county
Use of Public Sewers Required
   
50.015   Mandatory connection requirement
   
50.016   Connection procedures
   
50.017   Enforcement of mandatory connect/on requirements
Private Sewage Disposal
   
50.030   Deposit of objectionable wastes
   
50.031   Discharge of polluted water
   
50.032   Construction of private systems
   
50.033   Where sewer not available
   
50.034   When sewer becomes available
   
50.035   Maintenance of systems
   
50.036   Abandoned systems
Building Sewers and Connection
   
50.050   Building sewer regulations
   
50.051   Connection regulations
Use of the Public Sewer
   
50.065   Storm, ground, unpolluted water and industrial cooling water
   
50.066   Prohibited discharges
   
50.067   Grease, oil and sand interceptors (traps)
   
50.068   Right of review by township
   
50.069   Review of high strength discharges
   
50.070   Right to exclude or require pretreatment
   
50.071   Right to contract available excess capacity
   
50.072   Right of entry
   
50.073   Industrial waste monitoring
Conditions of Service
   
50.085   Connections at time of original construction
   
50.086   Connections subsequent to original construction
   
50.087   Liability for interruptions of service
   
50.088   Inspection
System Charges and Rates
   
50.100   Charges
   
50.101   Table of unit factors
   
50.102   Rules for interpreting table of unit factors
   
50.103   Revision or modification of equivalent units
   
50.104   Review of the industrial user with meters
   
50.105   Meter charge
   
50.106   Connection fees
   
50.107   Capacity charge
   
50.108   Surcharge
   
50.109   Industrial sampling charges
   
50.110   Contractual rates
   
50.111   Establishing rates and charges
   
50.112   Deferring charges
   
50.113   Special assessments
   
50.114   Enforcement of charges
   
50.115   Benefit charges
Fiscal Year, Records and Funds
   
50.130   Fiscal year
   
50.131   Records and accounts
   
50.132   Establishment of funds
Miscellaneous Provisions
   
50.145   Protection from damage
   
50.146   Connection of privately constructed sanitary sewer systems to the
system
   
50.147   Administration
   
50.148   Power and authority of inspectors
   
50.149   Repealer clause
 
   
50.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.001 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the "Williamstown Township Sewer Use
Ordinance".
(Ord. 26, eff. 6-19-1982)
§ 50.002 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of
the terms used in this chapter shall be as follows.
      ATTORNEY. The Township Attorney of the Township of Williamstown, Ingham
County, Michigan.
      AVAILABLE PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM. A public sanitary sewer system
located in a right-of-way, easement, highway or public way which crosses,
adjoins, abuts or is contiguous to the realty involved and passes not more than
200 feet at the nearest point from a structure in which sanitary sewage
originates.
      B.O.D. (denoting BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biological oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams per liter.
      BUILDING DRAIN. That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge, soil, waste and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
      BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer
or other place of disposal.
      CAPACITY CHARGE. In addition to any other assessments, costs or levies
hereunder, a charge for capacity utilization and/or reservation shall be levied
for all connections to the sewer system; further and existing connections,
where the use is increased, shall be charged a capacity charge based on the
increased units.
      CITY. The City of Williamston.
      CLASSES OF USERS. The division of sanitary sewer customers into classes
by similar process or discharge flow characteristics, as follows:
         (a)   COMMERCIAL USER. Any retail or wholesale business engaged in
selling merchandise or a service and that discharges only segregated domestic
wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences.
         (b)   INDUSTRIAL USER. Any manufacturing establishment which produces
a product from raw or purchased material.
         (c)   INSTITUTIONAL USER. Any educational, religious or social
organization such as a school, church, nursing home, hospital or other similar
entity that discharges only segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary
conveniences.
         (d)   RESIDENTIAL USER. An individual home or dwelling unit including
mobile homes, apartments, condominiums or multi-family dwellings that discharge
only segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences.
      COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH and
fecal coliform bacteria, plus any additional pollutants identified in the NPDES
permit if the treatment works was designed to treat the pollutants and, in
fact, can remove the pollutants to a substantial degree. The term substantial
degree generally means removals in the order of 80% or greater.
      COMBINED SEWER. A sewer receiving both surface run-off and sewage.
      GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of
produce.
      INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Any pollutant that is not a compatible pollutant,
as defined herein.
      INFILTRATION. Any waters entering the system from the ground, through
such means as, but not limited to, defective pipes, pipe joints, connections or
manhole walls. INFILTRATION does not include and is distinguished from inflow.
      INFILTRATION/INFLOW. The total quantity of water from both infiltration
and inflow.
      INFLOW. Any waters entering the system through such sources as, but not
limited to, building downspouts, footing or yard drains, cooling water
discharges, seepage lines from springs and swampy areas and storm drain cross
connections.
      INSPECTOR. Any person or person authorized by the township to inspect and
approve the installation of building sewers and their connection to the public
sewer system.
      NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other
body of surface or ground water.
      NORMAL STRENGTH SEWAGE. A sanitary wastewater flow containing an average
daily BOD of not more than 200 mg/l or an average daily suspended solids
concentration of not more than 250 mg/l.
      NPDES PERMIT. The permit issued pursuant to the National Pollution
Discharge Elimination System for the discharge of wastewaters into the waters
of the state.
      OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE AND REPLACEMENT COSTS. All costs, direct and
indirect, (other than debt service) necessary to insure adequate wastewater
treatment on a continuing basis, conform with all related federal, state and
local requirements and assure optimal long term facility management (these O&M
and R costs include replacement costs).
      PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation
or group.
      pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions
in grams per liter of solution.
      PRETREATMENT. The treatment of extra strength industrial wastewater flows
in privately owned pretreatment facilities prior to discharge into the public
sewer.
      PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS. Any septic tanks, lagoons, cesspools or
other facilities intended or used for the disposal of sanitary sewage other
than via the public sanitary sewer.
      PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in dimension.
      PROPERTY OWNER. The person or persons having legal title to the premises
according to the township's tax records and shall include in the case of a land
contract sale the land contract vendee or vendees; provided that, the township
has been furnished with a copy of the land contract or assignment thereof.
      PUBLIC SEWER. The main collector sewer system in which all owners of
abutting properties have equal rights and is owned by the Township of
Williamstown.
      REPLACEMENT. Necessary expenditures made during the service life of the
treatment works to replace equipment and plant appurtenances required to
maintain the intended performance of the treatment works.
      RESIDENTIAL EQUIVALENTS or EQUIVALENT UNIT. The factor representing a
ratio of the estimated sewage generated by each user class to that generated by
the normal single-family residential user.
      SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface
and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
      SEWAGE. A combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, institutions and industrial establishments,
(including polluted cooling water) together with the ground, surface and storm
waters as may be present. The three most common types of sewage are:
         (a)   COMBINED SEWAGE. Wastes including sanitary sewage, industrial
sewage, storm water, infiltration and inflow carried to the wastewater
treatment facilities by a combined sewer.
         (b)   INDUSTRIAL SEWAGE. A combination of liquid and water carried
wastes, discharged from any industrial establishment, and resulting from any
trade or process carried on in that establishment (this shall include the
wastes from pretreatment facilities and polluted cooling water).
         (c)   SANITARY SEWAGE. The combination of liquid- and water-carried
wastes discharged from toilet and other sanitary plumbing facilities.
      SEWAGE TREATMENT FACILITY. Any arrangement of devices and structures used
for treating sewage.
      SEWER. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
      SEWERAGE WORKS. All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and
disposing of sewage.
      SHALL. Mandatory; MAY. Permissive.
      SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING. A residence in which only one family resides.
      SLUG. Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-
hours concentration or flows during normal operation.
      STORM DRAIN (sometimes termed STORM SEWER). A sewer which carries storm
and surface water and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes,
other than unpolluted cooling water.
      SUPERVISOR. The Supervisor of Williamstown Township or his or her
authorized agent or representative.
      SURCHARGE. The additional charge which a user discharging wastewater
having strength in excess of the limits set by the City of Williamston for
transmission and treatment within the sanitary sewage system will be required
to pay to meet the cost of treating the excessively strong wastewater.
      SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
      SYSTEM. The complete Township of Williamstown and City of Williamston
wastewater collection and treatment system, including all sewers, pumps, lift
stations, treatment facilities or other facilities and appurtenances used or
useful in the collection, transportation, treatment and disposal of domestic,
commercial or industrial wastes, and all easements, rights and land for same
and including all extension and improvements thereto which may hereafter be
acquired or constructed.
      TABLE OF UNIT FACTORS. That table which shall be adopted by the city and
utilized to identify the various classifications of sewer users and stating as
"residential equivalents" the ratio of the use of the system to that of a
single-family residence.
      TOWNSHIP. The Township of Williamstown, Ingham County, Michigan.
      TREATMENT WORKS. All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and
disposing of sewage, as defined herein.
      USER OM&R CHARGE. The charge levied on all users of the treatment works
for the cost of the operation and maintenance, including replacement, of the
treatment works.
      USER DEBT RETIREMENT CHARGE. The charge levied on all users of the
treatment works for the cost of any bond debt of which debt repayment is to be
met from the revenues of the works.
      WASTEWATER. Water which contains, or previous to treatment has contained,
pollutants such as sewage and/or industrial wastes.
      WASTEWATER DISPOSAL AGREEMENT. The agreement between the Township of
Williamstown and the City of Williamston for providing for collection and
disposal of wastewater originating in the township.
      WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
   (B)   Others to be added later as the township deems necessary.
(Ord. 26, eff. 6-19-1982)
§ 50.003 OPERATION, MAINTENANCE AND CONTROL.
   (A)   The operation and maintenance of the system shall be under the
supervision and control of the city.
   (B)   The city retains the right to establish, maintain and collect rates
and charges for sewage collection, treatment, transmission and debt service,
and in such capacity, the City Commission for the City of Williamston may
employ such person or persons in a capacity or capacities as it deems advisable
and may make such rules or regulations as it deems advisable and necessary to
assure the efficient establishment, operation and maintenance of the system to
comply with the terms of the NPDES permit and to discharge its financial
obligations, in accordance with terms outlined in the wastewater disposal
agreement.
(Ord. 26, eff. 6-19-1982)
§ 50.004 CONTRACT BETWEEN TOWNSHIP AND COUNTY.
   This chapter shall be subject to the contract between the County of Ingham
and the Township of Williamstown dated December 1, 1981, passed by Williamstown
Township.
(Ord. 26, eff. 6-19-1982)
USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED
§ 50.015 MANDATORY CONNECTION REQUIREMENT.
   Each and every owner of property on which is located a structure in which
sanitary sewage originates shall, at his or her own expense, install suitable
toilet facilities in the structure and shall cause the facilities to be
connected to the available public sanitary sewer system.
(Ord. 26, eff. 6-19-1982)
§ 50.016 CONNECTION PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The connection shall be completed promptly but in no case later than
90 days from the date of the occurrence of the last of the following events:
      (1)   Publication of a notice by the Township Clerk of the availability
of the public sanitary sewer system in a newspaper of general circulation
within the township, and the mailing of written notice indicating the
availability of the public sanitary sewer to the owner or anyone of the owners
in the case of co-ownership of the property in question;
      (2)   Modification of a structure so as to become a structure where
sanitary sewage originates; and
      (3)   Improvement of land with building or structures from which sanitary
sewage originates.
   (B)   If the owner of property on which is located a structure in which
sanitary sewage originates does not complete connection to an available
sanitary sewer within the 90-day period described in division (A) above, the
Township Clerk shall notify the person by written notice that connection to the
system is required forthwith. The giving of the notice shall be made by first
class mail to the owner of the property on which the structure is located and
by posting the notice on the property. Notice shall provide the owner with the
approximate location of the public sanitary sewer system which is available for
connection of the structure involved and shall advise the owner of the
requirements and the enforcement provisions of this chapter and Public Act 288
of 1972, being M.C.L.A. §§ 123.281—123.287, as amended.
   (C)   (1)   In the event the property owner is unable to connect to the
system within the time prescribed by this chapter due to or on account of
inclement or adverse weather conditions, the property owner may appeal to the
Supervisor to allow the person additional time in which to connect without
penalty and without civil and criminal proceedings being initiated against him
or her.
      (2)   The foregoing notwithstanding, this appeal shall be made in writing
within ten days of notice of sanitary sewer availability, as hereinbefore set
forth.
(Ord. 26, eff. 6-19-1982)
§ 50.017 ENFORCEMENT OF MANDATORY CONNECT/ON REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Failure or refusal to connect to the system within the time prescribed
herein shall result in the property being charged a penalty of $100 for each
single-family residential unit multiplied by the number of units and/or
multiplying factors as established by the Table of Residential Equivalents.
   (B)   Each day that a violation of this chapter shall continue shall be
construed to constitute a separate offense.
   (C)   Civil and/or criminal proceedings to compel connection are established
under §
50.999(A).
(Ord. 26, eff. 6-19-1982)
PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL
§ 50.030 DEPOSIT OF OBJECTIONABLE WASTES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited upon any public or private property within the township (or any area
under its jurisdiction) any human excrement, garbage or other objectionable
waste.
(Ord. 26, eff. 6-19-1982) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.031 DISCHARGE OF POLLUTED WATER.
   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet any sanitary sewage,
industrial waste or other polluted water, except where suitable treatment has
been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 26, eff. 6-19-1982) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.032 CONSTRUCTION OF PRIVATE SYSTEMS.
   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct any privy,
privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the
disposal of sewage or industrial waste.
(Ord. 26, eff. 6-19-1982) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.033 WHERE SEWER NOT AVAILABLE.
   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of §§
50.015 through
50.017, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sanitary sewer
disposal system which shall be approved by the Ingham County District Health
Department.
(Ord. 26, eff. 6-19-1982)
§ 50.034 WHEN SEWER BECOMES AVAILABLE.
   At such time as the public sanitary sewer system becomes available to
premises served by a private sanitary sewage disposal system, connection to the
public system shall be made in compliance with this chapter, and any septic
tank cesspools, and similar private disposal facilities located thereon, shall
be abandoned and discontinued for sanitary sewage disposal use.
(Ord. 26, eff. 6-19-1982)
§ 50.035 MAINTENANCE OF SYSTEMS.
   All private sanitary sewage disposal systems maintained in compliance with
this chapter shall be maintained in a sanitary manner at all times at the sole
expense of the owner thereof.
(Ord. 26, eff. 6-19-1982)
§ 50.036 ABANDONED SYSTEMS.
   (A)   (1)   All abandoned private sanitary sewage disposal systems shall be
completely filled with earth, sand, gravel, concrete or other approved
material.
      (2)   Upon the abandonment or discontinuation of use of a septic tank or
privy, the sewage and sludge contents thereof shall be completely removed and
disposed of by a septic tank cleaner who is duly licensed under provisions of
Act No. 243 of the Public Acts of 1951.
      (3)   The tank, or the pit in the instance of a privy, shall be treated
with at least ten pounds of chlorinated lime or other chemical disinfectant
acceptable to the Health Officer.
   (B)   Then, the tank or pit shall be completely backfilled with approved
material and made safe from the hazard of collapse or entrapment.
(Ord. 26, eff. 6-19-1982) Penalty, see §
50.999
BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTION
§ 50.050 BUILDING SEWER REGULATIONS.
   (A)   A separate and independent building sewer (lead) shall be provided for
every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer
from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole
considered as one building sewer. Other exceptions will be allowed only by
special permission granted by the Supervisor.
   (B)   All costs and expenses incident to the installation of the building
sewer and the connection of same to the public sewer shall be borne by the
property owner.
   (C)   All building sewers (leads) shall meet or exceed the requirements of
the ordinances of the City of Williamston or the requirements of this chapter,
whichever shall be most stringent.
   (D)   Building sewers hereinafter installed shall consist of pipes and
fittings of the following types and sizes.
      (1)   Pipe must be of sufficient diameter to carry the estimated volume
of discharge. Minimum pipe size permitted is four-inch ID.
      (2)   Pipe must be one of the following materials and cannot be mixed in
the connection lines to include the fittings:
         (a)   Cast iron with rubber-type gaskets or leaded joint;
         (b)   Cast iron NH pipe with neoprene stainless couplings;
         (c)   Ductile iron with rubber-type gaskets, slip joint or mechanical
joint;
         (d)   Vitrified clay tile with ASTM C425 joints;
         (e)   Reinforced concrete with ASTM C443 joints; and
         (f)   PVC plastic, Schedule 40 or better.
      (3)   No tees, double tees or crosses or double hub pipes shall be
permitted.
      (4)   Old building sewers or portions thereof may be used in connection
with new buildings only when they are found on examination and tested by the
Inspector to meet all requirements of this chapter.
      (5)   All changes in grades of direction shall be made with appropriate
fittings.
   (E)   Clean-outs shall be installed every 100 feet of straight run and at
each 90-degree direction change and all clean-outs shall be plugged.
   (F)   All lines shall be laid at a minimum slope of one-eighth inch per foot
grade and a maximum slope of one-half inch per foot grade for four-inch lines
and at a minimum of one-eighth inch per foot grade and a maximum one-half inch
per foot grade for six-inch lines.
   (G)   The method to be used in excavating, placing of pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling the trench shall conform to the requirements of the
Plumbing Code Rules (Part 7) issued by the Michigan Department of Labor
Construction Code Commission and the regulations of Williamstown Township where
applicable.
   (H)   All joints and connections shall be gastight and shall conform to the
requirements of the current building and plumbing codes.
   (I)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid
parallel to or within three feet of any bearing wall, which might thereby be
weakened. The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost. All
excavations required for the installation of a building sewer shall be open
trench work unless otherwise approved by the Inspector. Pipe laying and
backfill shall be performed in accordance with current ASTM Specifications
except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected by
the Inspector or his or her representative.
   (J)   No building sewer shall be laid within three feet of any bearing wall.
The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost.
   (K)   In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit
gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by the drain shall be
lifted by an approved pumping system and discharged to the building sewer.
   (L)   All excavations for building sewer installation and connection shall
be adequately guarded by barricades and lighting so as to protect the public
from hazards. Streets, sidewalks, alleys, parkways and other public property
disturbed in the course of the installation and connection work shall be
restored.
   (M)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be
made at the "Y" branch designated for that property, if the branch is available
at a suitable location. Any connection not made at the designated "Y" branch in
the main sewer shall be made only as directed by the Inspector and approved by
the Supervisor.
   (N)   The applicant for the building sewer shall notify the Inspector when
the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer.
The connection shall be made under the supervision of the Inspector or his or
her representative.
(Ord. 26, eff. 6-19-1982)
§ 50.051 CONNECTION REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenances thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the city. Before a permit may be
issued for excavating for plumbing in any public street, way or alley, the
person applying for the permit shall have executed unto the city and deposited
with the Treasurer a corporate surety bond in the sum of 51,000 conditioned and
that he or she will perform faithfully all work with due care and skill and in
accordance with the laws, rules and regulations established under the authority
or any ordinances of the city pertaining to plumbing. This bond shall state
that the persons will indemnify and save harmless the city and the township and
the owner of the premises against all damages, costs, expenses, outlays and
claims of every nature and kind arising out of unskillfulness or negligence on
his or her part in connection with plumbing or excavating for plumbing as
prescribed in this chapter. The bond shall remain in force and must be executed
for a period of one year; except that, on the expiration, it shall remain in
force as to all penalty claims and demands that may have accrued thereunder
prior to the expiration.
   (B)   The fee for the connection permit shall be an amount established by
the City of Williamston in accordance with the wastewater disposal agreement.
   (C)   The person applying for a connection permit will receive one copy of
the permit; one copy will be retained by the city; one copy will go to the
township; two copies will be retained by the Inspector. The copies retained by
the Inspector shall be returned to the city with a sketch of the actual
installation on the backs showing all dimensions, directions and other
pertinent information concerning the installation. The copies with the sketches
shall bear the signature of the Inspector and the date the inspection was made.
The city will then send one of these copies to the township.
   (D)   No connection to the system will be permitted unless there is capacity
available in all downstream sewers, lift stations, force mains and the sewage
treatment plant, including capacity for treatment of B.O.D. and suspended
solids.
   (E)   All connections to the system will be made by a licensed contractor or
plumber; provided, however, that, a property owner may make his or her own
installation and connection in accordance with the requirements of this chapter
and law so long as he or she has secured a connection permit. This does not
allow a property owner to hire an unlicensed contractor to do his or her work.
   (F)   All licensed contractors and plumbers making connections to the
systems shall file with the township and the city a copy of their plumbers' or
contractors' license from the State of Michigan and a copy of their liability
insurance prior to performing any connections to the system.
   (G)   No person shall connect roof downspouts, foundation drains, area way
drains or any sources of surface or ground water to a building sewer which, in
turn, is connected to the system.
   (H)   No building sewer shall be covered until after it has been inspected
and approved by authorized personnel of the township or its designee. No
building sewer shall be used until final approval after the trench is
backfilled; an air test may be required at the owner's expense.
(Ord. 26, eff. 6-19-1982) Penalty, see §
50.999
USE OF THE PUBLIC SEWER
§ 50.065 STORM, GROUND, UNPOLLUTED WATER AND INDUSTRIAL COOLING WATER.
   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water,
surface water, ground water or roof water to any sanitary sewer.
   (B)   Storm water, ground water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be
discharged into storm drains or to a natural outlet approved by the township.
   (C)   Industrial cooling water which is unpolluted and not contaminated with
oil, algaecides or other pollutants or unpolluted process waters may be
discharged, upon application to and approval of the township, to a storm drain
or natural outlet.
   (D)   Industrial cooling water containing only such pollutants as insoluble
oils or grease or other suspended solids shall be pretreated for removal of the
pollutants and then discharged to the storm water.
(Ord. 26, eff. 6-19-1982) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.066 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
   (A)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150°F;
   (B)   Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 milligrams per
liter, by weight, of fat, oil or grease;
   (C)   Any gasoline, benzine, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive, liquid, solid or gas;
   (D)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded;
   (E)   Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, metal shavings, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, woods, paunch manure or any other solid or viscous
substance capable of causing obstruction to flow in sewers or other
interference with the proper operation of the sewage works;
   (F)   Radioactive wastes or isotopes of a half-life or concentration which
may exceed limits established by applicable state and federal regulations shall
not be allowed;
   (G)   Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of a character and
quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle the materials
at the sewage treatment plant;
   (H)   Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a
public nuisance;
   (I)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than six or higher than nine or
having any other corrosive properties capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment and personnel of the wastewater system;
   (J)   Any waters or wastes which will interfere with any sewage treatment
process, or constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or creates a hazard in
the receiving waters of the treatment plant, or cause the wastewater treatment
plant to deviate from the NPDES permit requirements or any other state or
federal guidelines or regulations;
   (K)   Any waters or wastes exceeding the following characteristics:
      (1)   Three hundred mg/l BOD(5);
      (2)   Three hundred fifty mg/l S.S.; and
      (3)   Ten mg/l P.
   (L)   Reference is made to §
50.108, where provision is made for the city to charge a surcharge rate for
acceptance of wastes of a certain character.
(Ord. 26, eff. 6-19-1982)
§ 50.067 GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS (TRAPS).
   (A)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors (traps) shall be provided at the
expense of the property owner when liquid wastes contain grease in excessive
amounts, or other harmful ingredients, except that the interceptors shall not
be required for single-family and multi-family dwelling units. All interceptors
shall be of a type and capacity approved by the township and shall be located
as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Grease, oil
and sand interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of
withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of
substantial construction, watertight and equipped with easily removable covers
which when bolted into place shall be gastight and watertight.
   (B)   Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors (traps) shall
be maintained by the owner, at his or her expense, in continuously efficient
operation at all times.
(Ord. 26, eff. 6-19-1982)
§ 50.068 RIGHT OF REVIEW BY TOWNSHIP.
   The township may require each entity who applies for or receives sewer
service, or through the nature of the enterprise, creates a potential
environmental problem to:
   (A)   File a written statement setting forth the nature of the enterprise,
the source and amount of water used, the amount of water to be discharged with
its present or expected bacterial, physical, chemical, radioactive or other
pertinent characteristics of the wastes;
   (B)   Provide a plan map of the building, works or complex, with each
outfall to the surface waters, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, natural watercourse
or ground waters noted, described and the waste stream identified;
   (C)   Sample, test and file reports with the Supervisor and the appropriate
state agencies on appropriate characteristics of wastes on a schedule, at
locations and according to methods approved by the Supervisor;
   (D)   Place waste treatment facilities, process facilities, waste streams or
other potential waste problems under the specific supervision and control of
persons who have been certified by an appropriate state agency as properly
qualified to supervise the facilities;
   (E)   Provide a report on raw materials entering the process or support
system, intermediate materials, final product and waste byproducts as those
factors may affect waste control;
   (F)   Maintain records and file reports on the final disposal of specific
liquids, solids, sludges, oils, radioactive materials, solvents or other
wastes;
   (G)   If any industrial process is to be altered as to include or negate a
process waste or potential waste, provide written notification; and
   (H)   Require anyone to obtain a permit.
(Ord. 26, eff. 6-19-1982)
§ 50.069 REVIEW OF HIGH STRENGTH DISCHARGES.
   The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes containing a
five-day B.O.D. greater than 300 mg/l or containing more than 350 mg/l of
suspended solids; or containing any quantity of substances having the
characteristics described in §
50.066; or having any average daily flow greater than 2% of the average daily
flow of the city, shall be subject to review and approval of the city.
(Ord. 26, eff. 6-19-1982)
§ 50.070 RIGHT TO EXCLUDE OR REQUIRE PRETREATMENT.
   On direction of the city, an entity may be required to remove, exclude or
require pretreatment of any industrial waste in whole or in part for any
reasons deemed to be in the city's interest. Where preliminary treatment
facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained in
satisfactory and effective operation at no expense to the city and shall be
designed and operated to assure that wastewaters discharged meet the
characteristics set forth in §
50.066.
(Ord. 26, eff. 6-19-1982)
§ 50.071 RIGHT TO CONTRACT AVAILABLE EXCESS CAPACITY.
   (A)   The city reserves the right to contract with any industrial user to
allow the industry to use available excess capacity for discharging wastewaters
that exceed the limits of "normal strength sewage". If the waters or wastes
discharged by an industry under contract exhibits any of the characteristics
identified in §
50.066 at any time, the city may:
      (1)   Cancel the contract and reject the wastes;
      (2)   Require pretreatment to the level defined as "normal strength
sewage";
      (3)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable level for discharge to the
public sewers; and
      (4)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge.
   (B)   If the Supervisor permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject
to the review and approval of the Supervisor and subject to the requirements of
the agreement and all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
(Ord. 26, eff. 6-19-1982)
§ 50.072 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   Agents of the Township of Williamstown, City of Williamston, Michigan
Department of Natural Resources or U.S. Environmental Protection Agency shall
have the right to enter all properties for the purpose of inspecting,
measuring, sampling and testing the wastewater discharge.
(Ord. 26, eff. 6-19-1982)
§ 50.073 INDUSTRIAL WASTE MONITORING.
   (A)   When required by the township, the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the
wastes. The manhole, when required, shall be accessible and safely located and
shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Supervisor. The
manhole shall be installed by the owner at his or her expense and shall be
maintained by him or her so as to be safe and accessible at all times. In the
event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be
considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer from the
point at which the building sewer is connected.
   (B)   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the most recent edition of The Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Sewage and shall also conform with the Federal
Register reprint of October 16, 1973 (40 C.F.R. part 136) which establishes
guidelines for testing procedures for analysis of pollutants. All measurements,
tests and analyses shall be determined at the control manhole and upon suitable
samples taken at the manhole. It shall be the responsibility of the industrial
customer to provide flow measuring and monitoring equipment and sampling
equipment for each control manhole.
   (C)   Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to
reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the
existence of hazards to life, limb and property. The particular analyses
involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a
premises is appropriate or whether grab sample or samples should be taken.
(Ord. 26, eff. 6-19-1982)
CONDITIONS OF SERVICE
§ 50.085 CONNECTIONS AT TIME OF ORIGINAL CONSTRUCTION.
   At the time of original construction of the public sewer, the township shall
install, at its expense, that portion of the service from the main to the lot
or easement line of all occupied premises. The city shall maintain, at its
expense, the public sewer. Those customers making connections at the time of
original construction of the public sewer shall install, at their expense, that
portion of the service from the lot or easement line to their premises. The
customer shall maintain, at his or her expense, the building drain and building
sewer.
(Ord. 26, eff. 6-19-1982)
§ 50.086 CONNECTIONS SUBSEQUENT TO ORIGINAL CONSTRUCTION.
   Those customers making connections subsequent to the time of original
construction of the public sewer shall install, at their expense, that portion
of the service from the main to the lot or easement line in addition to that
portion of the service from the lot or easement line to their premises.
(Ord. 26, eff. 6-19-1982)
§ 50.087 LIABILITY FOR INTERRUPTIONS OF SERVICE.
   The township shall, in no event, be held responsible for claims made against
it by reason of the breaking of any mains or service pipes or by reason of any
other interruption of the service caused by the breaking of machinery or
stoppage for necessary repairs; and no person shall be entitled to damage nor
have any portion of a payment refunded for any interruption.
(Ord. 26, eff. 6-19-1982)
§ 50.088 INSPECTION.
   The premises receiving sanitary sewer service shall, at all reasonable
hours, be subject to inspection by duly authorized personnel of the city.
(Ord. 26, eff. 6-19-1982)
SYSTEM CHARGES AND RATES
§ 50.100 CHARGES.
   From and after the effective date of this chapter, charges for sewage
transmission and treatment and disposal and debt service to each user connected
to the system shall be as follows.
   (A)   Residential, commercial, institutional, governmental and industrial
users within the township shall pay rates and charges based on the amount of
water used and actually metered in accordance with following schedule of
charges:
      (1)   A base charge to cover certain fixed operating expenses;
      (2)   The amount of the base charge shall be the minimum charge,
regardless of water use; and
      (3)   A volume charge per 1,000 gallons of water used for all flow.
   (B)   The base charges to be charged, per connection, shall be established
by resolution of the City of Williamston, pursuant to the wastewater disposal
agreement.
      (1)   The volume or commodity charge shall be in addition to the base
charge and shall be based on water use and established by resolution of the
City of Williamston.
      (2)   For customers with multiple meters, each meter shall be treated as
a separate customer for calculation of charges.
      (3)   The city may require metering of water and/or sewage flows
according to the wastewater disposal agreement to determine the adequacy of
charges.
      (4)   A debt service charge shall be allocated to all users for the
purpose of generating revenues for retirement of outstanding bond issues,
issued for construction of the wastewater facilities. The debt service charge
shall be a base charge established by resolution of the City of Williamston.
   (C)   The township will collect from township residents a debt service
charge allocated to all users for the purpose of generating revenues for
retirement of the bond issue, issued for construction of the township sewers
and pump station. The charge shall be $125 and collected as a connection fee in
addition to the fee regulated hereunder.
(Ord. 26, eff. 6-19-1982)
§ 50.101 TABLE OF UNIT FACTORS.
   For users of the system not connected to city water or otherwise metered,
and except as otherwise provided herein, the township does hereby adopt a table
of units, the same being entitled "Table of Unit Factors" for the Williamstown
Township Wastewater Collection System. Per the wastewater disposal agreement,
the table shall be the same as the city adopts. The table shall set forth and
identify the user class and all applicable factors to be multiplied by the
bimonthly charge established for single-family residential premises. The table
may be modified or amended from time to time by resolution of the City of
Williamston.
(Ord. 26, eff. 6-19-1982)
§ 50.102 RULES FOR INTERPRETING TABLE OF UNIT FACTORS.
   (A)   The minimum equivalent factor for commercial and industrial users
shall be one.
   (B)   Equivalent units for users not originally contained in the table may
be added thereto from time to time by resolution of the City of Williamston.
   (C)   Where multiple businesses exist at one location, the various
businesses shall be combined for determining the equivalent units at the
location unless the various businesses have individual meters.
(Ord. 26, eff. 6-19-1982)
§ 50.103 REVISION OR MODIFICATION OF EQUIVALENT UNITS.
   The equivalent units of users having an equivalent unit factor of more than
one shall be reviewed by the township at least once each year. Unless the
equivalent unit factor of the user is changed by resolution of the township on
or before the fifteenth day of the last month preceding the commencement of the
system fiscal year, the equivalent unit factor of the user shall remain the
same as it was for the preceding fiscal year. Failure to specifically review as
provided herein shall not cause the factor to be omitted and shall not be
considered grounds for discontinuance of the factor.
(Ord. 26, eff. 6-19-1982)
§ 50.104 REVIEW OF THE INDUSTRIAL USER WITH METERS.
   Where the industrial user has been required by agreement to install a meter
to register flow, the equivalent unit factor for purposes of determining the
service charge of the user shall be reviewed and adjusted yearly to assure the
equivalent unit factor assigned to the user is compatible with use. The formula
for determining the equivalent unit factor for the users for the purposes of
determining the service charge for the next fiscal year shall be as follows.
Average monthly flow during previous year/10 CCF = Equivalent Unit Factor
(Ord. 26, eff. 6-19-1982)
§ 50.105 METER CHARGE.
   For any premises not currently metered, there shall be a meter charge to
defray the cost of the meter and installation which shall be the current charge
as established under the Water Ordinance.
(Ord. 26, eff. 6-19-1982)
§ 50.106 CONNECTION FEES.
   A connection fee or fees shall be levied for all connections to the sewer
system. Services rendered by the township and city shall be inspected to ensure
acceptable connection to the public system. This inspection shall include, but
not be limited to, the following.
   (A)   Direct connection.
      (1)   Tap to main sewer;
      (2)   Service line materials and installation; and
      (3)   Connection of service line within right-of-way to service line on
private property.
   (B)   Indirect connection. Connection of service line within right-of-way to
service line on private property.
   (C)   Existing sewers. Direct connections are those which are made to an
existing public sanitary sewer.
   (D)   Existing service leads. Indirect connections are those which are made
to an existing service lead, which meets all ordinance requirements.
   (E)   Connection fees. Fees for connections shall be established by
resolution of the city subject to provisions of the wastewater disposal
agreement.
(Ord. 26, eff. 6-19-1982)
§ 50.107 CAPACITY CHARGE.
   The capacity charge shall be established by resolution of the city subject
to provisions of the wastewater disposal agreement.
(Ord. 26, eff. 6-19-1982)
§ 50.108 SURCHARGE.
   The rates and charges set forth herein notwithstanding, if the character of
the sewage of any user shall impose an unreasonable additional burden upon the
sewage disposal and transmission system of the township and city, then and in
that event an additional charge shall be made over and above the rates herein
established. Effluent in excess of the maximum limitations imposed by this
chapter shall be deemed prima facie subject to surcharge. If necessary to
protect the system or any part thereof, the township shall deny the right of
any user to empty such sewage into the system. Surcharges required by this
section shall be computed as a percentage of the annual cost of operation and
maintenance, including replacement, multiplied by the ratio of weight of
surchargeable excess of the discharged substance to the total weight of the
substance that is treated in that year. This amount shall be collected, on the
basis of estimated surchargeable amounts, with each periodic billing and shall
be adjusted annually to reflect actual operation, maintenance and replacement
costs. Surcharge rates shall be established by resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. 26, eff. 6-19-1982)
§ 50.109 INDUSTRIAL SAMPLING CHARGES.
   There shall be an additional charge for any necessary flow monitoring or
laboratory testing of industrial wastewaters. In addition, in the event of
failure by the customer to provide proper data as required under applicable
sections of this chapter, the township may perform the monitoring and
laboratory testing and charge the customer for the service.
(Ord. 26, eff. 6-19-1982)
§ 50.110 CONTRACTUAL RATES.
   The foregoing provisions relating to rates shall not be construed as
prohibiting any special agreement or arrangement between the township and the
users or class of users whereby the sanitary wastes of unusual flows, strength
or character of the user or class of users may be accepted into the system,
subject to payment therefor by the user or class of users.
(Ord. 26, eff. 6-19-1982)
§ 50.111 ESTABLISHING RATES AND CHARGES.
   Rates shall be established by resolution of the City of Williamston
following consultation with the township and shall be revised from time to time
as required to maintain the fiscal integrity of the system and the same may be
revised and fixed by resolution of the City of Williamston, as may be necessary
to produce the amounts required to pay the charges and expenditures and provide
the funds necessary for the maintenance of the financial integrity of the
system.
(Ord. 26, eff. 6-19-1982)
§ 50.112 DEFERRING CHARGES.
   No free service shall be furnished to any user of the system and there shall
be no waiver or forgiveness of charges levied pursuant to the terms hereof. The
foregoing notwithstanding, any resident eligible for deferment of payment of
the fees pursuant to the laws of the State of Michigan shall be afforded ample
opportunity to request deferment or partial payment in accordance therewith.
(Ord. 26, eff. 6-19-1982)
§ 50.113 SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
   The foregoing notwithstanding, nothing contained in this chapter shall be
construed as limiting, modifying or amending any special assessments levied
against certain properties within the township in connection with the
construction of sanitary sewers.
(Ord. 26, eff. 6-19-1982)
§ 50.114 ENFORCEMENT OF CHARGES.
   (A)   Nonpayment of the special assessment and/or connection and operation,
maintenance and replacement charges. Nonpayment of the charges shall subject
the property owner to a liability for the charges and penalties as herebefore
provided for a late or delayed connection.
   (B)   Nonpayment of service charge.
      (1)   Discontinuance of service. In the event that a service charge
established pursuant to this section hereof remains delinquent for a period in
excess of 180 days, the township shall have the right to shut off and
discontinue sewer service to the user. The service shall not be reestablished
until all delinquent charges, penalties and a charge for the reestablishment of
the service shall be paid. The turn-on charge shall be established by
resolution of the City Council.
      (2)   Collection by litigation. In addition to discontinuing service to
the user, the township shall have the option of collecting all such
delinquencies and penalties due hereunder by legal proceedings in a court of
competent jurisdiction.
      (3)   Collection by enforcement of lien. Service charges, including
penalties due thereon which remain delinquent for a period in excess of 180
days shall constitute a lien on the premises serviced thereby, unless the city
is served with written notice that a tenant is responsible for the charges.
Such a lien shall be perfected by the township official or officials in charge
of the collection thereon, by certifying annually not later than September 1 of
each year to the Tax Assessing Officer the fact and the amount of the
delinquency. Thereupon, the charge shall be entered by the Tax Assessing
Officer of the township upon the next tax roll as a charge against the premises
and shall be collected and the lien thereof enforced in the same manner as
general taxes against the premises are collected, and the lien thereof
enforced. If the city is provided with notice in writing, including a copy of
the lease of the affected premises, that a tenant is responsible for the sewer
charge, the city may require as a condition to rendering sewer services to the
premises a cash deposit equal to service charges at current rates for three
months as security for the payment of service charges.
(Ord. 26, eff. 6-19-1982)
§ 50.115 BENEFIT CHARGES.
   Those persons owning land in direct proximity to a township sanitary sewer
whose lands have not been subjected to a special assessment to pay for the
construction of the sewer, and who desire to make connection to the sewer,
shall pay a benefit charge for the privilege of each connection to the sewer.
The benefit charge shall be as established from time to time by resolution of
the Township Board of the Township of Williamstown. The benefit charge shall be
paid in cash or in installments, with interest and penalties, all as shall be
established and provided from time to time by resolution of the Township Board
of the Township of Williamstown. No additions by other than the township shall
be allowed to the public sewer system except by prior contract with the
Township of Williamstown. Where the township contracts with a developer to
extend the sewer system with private funds, then the developer shall not be
levied a benefit charge on the privately funded sewer system specifically
covered by the contract.
(Ord. 26, eff. 6-19-1982; Ord. rev. 9-5-1989)
FISCAL YEAR, RECORDS AND FUNDS
§ 50.130 FISCAL YEAR.
   The fiscal year of the system shall commence on July 1 and end on June 30 in
each year.
(Ord. 26, eff. 6-19-1982; Ord. rev. 9-5-1989)
§ 50.131 RECORDS AND ACCOUNTS.
   The city shall keep and maintain proper books and records and accounts
separate from all other records and accounts of the city in which shall be made
full and correct entries of all transactions relating to the system. Books and
records and accounts pertaining to collection of township charges shall be
separate from those of the city, and the township shall have access to them.
The city shall cause an annual audit of the books and records and accounts of
the preceding operating year to be made by a recognized independent certified
public accountant and will supply the audit to authorized public officials upon
proper request as required by Public Act 2 of 1972, being M.C.L.A 117.5e. The
city shall use the results of the audit to make adjustments in funds with
deficiencies or surpluses. Any adjustments necessary for operation and
maintenance costs shall be passed on to users of the system.
(Ord. 26, eff. 6-19-1982; Ord. rev. 9-5-1989)
§ 50.132 ESTABLISHMENT OF FUNDS.
   (A)   Receiving Fund. The revenues of the system shall be set aside as
collected and deposited in a separate depository account at a bank qualified to
do business in the State of Michigan and designated by resolution of the
Township Board. The account shall be designated as the "Receiving Fund" and the
revenues so deposited shall be transferred from the Receiving Fund periodically
in the manner and at the times hereinafter specified.
   (B)   Debt Retirement Fund. Out of the revenues of the Receiving Fund, there
shall be set aside a fund designated as the "Debt Retirement Fund" a sum
sufficient to provide for the retirement of debt due.
   (C)   Replacement Fund. The township shall verify annually that the city has
established and maintained a fund designated as "Wastewater Plant Replacement
Fund" which shall be used solely for replacement of equipment at the new
pumping stations. The amount set aside each year shall conform to the
established schedule. The Replacement Fund shall be collected and deposited in
a depository bank account separate from the Receiving Fund account.
   (D)   Improvement Fund. There shall be next established and maintained a
fund designated as the "Improvement Fund" which shall be used solely for the
purpose of making improvements, extensions and enlargements to the system.
There shall be deposited into the fund the revenues as collected from the
Improvement Fund charges. The charges shall be determined by the Township
Board.
   (E)   Surplus Fund. Monies remaining in the Receiving Fund at the end of any
operating year after full satisfaction of the foregoing funds shall be
hereafter used in connection with any other project of the township directly
related to the purposes of the system.
   (F)   Bank accounts. All monies belonging to any of the foregoing funds or
accounts may be kept in one bank account in which event the money shall be
allocated on the books and records of the township within the single bank
account in the manner set forth above.
   (G)   Deficiencies in funds. In the event the monies in the Receiving Fund
are insufficient to provide for the full satisfaction of the foregoing funds,
any monies and/or securities or other funds of the system may be transferred to
such fund, to the extent of any deficiency therein.
   (H)   Investment of funds. Monies in any fund or account established by the
provisions of this chapter may be invested or deposited in any lawful
investments or deposits and may be invested in obligations of the United States
of America in a manner and subject to any limitations set forth in the laws of
the State of Michigan. Income received from the investments shall be credited
to the fund from which the investments were made or pro rata in the case of a
single bank account.
   (I)   Insurance. The township shall maintain and carry insurance on all
physical properties of the system which the township owns, of a kind and in the
amounts normally carried by public utility companies and municipalities engaged
in the operation of sanitary sewage disposal systems. All monies received from
losses under the insurance policy shall be applied solely to the replacement
and restoration of the property damaged or destroyed.
(Ord. 26, eff. 6-19-1982; Ord. rev. 9-5-1989)
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
§ 50.145 PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE.
   No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with the system or any component thereof.
(Ord. 26, eff. 6-19-1982) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.146 CONNECTION OF PRIVATELY CONSTRUCTED SANITARY SEWER SYSTEMS TO THE
SYSTEM.
   Before any sanitary sewer system constructed by private, as distinguished
from public, funding, hereinafter referred to as the "private sanitary sewer",
shall be permitted to connect to the system, the owner of the system,
hereinafter referred to as the developer, shall do and provide the township and
the city with the following:
   (A)   Provide the township and the city with the developer's plans and
specifications for construction, an estimate of the cost of construction and a
performance bond and deposit with the township the estimated cost of review of
construction plans covering the cost of hiring a registered professional
engineer to review plans and specifications, which monies shall be placed by
the township in an escrow account in the name of the developer;
   (B)   Obtain approval of the township and the city of the plans and
specifications;
   (C)   Secure all necessary permits for construction;
   (D)   Upon commencement of construction of the private sanitary sewer,
deposit with the township in the escrow account referred to herein of this
section a sum of not less than 10% of the cost of construction of the
wastewater system improvements to cover the anticipated cost of inspection of
construction and payment of connection charges;
   (E)   Upon completion of connection of the private sanitary sewer to the
system, the performance bond, upon recommendation of the township's Engineer
and approval of the Township Board, shall be released and any monies remaining
in the developer's escrow account shall be returned to the developer. Any
additional expenses incurred by the township in assuring the township that the
private sanitary sewer is properly operating shall be deducted therefrom or
charged directly to the developer, at the option of the township. An accounting
of expenditures shall be made to the developer by the township;
   (F)   Thereafter, in accordance with
Chapter 155 of this code of ordinances, any accepted privately constructed main
collector sewer system within a publicly dedicated right-of-way shall become a
public sewer; and
   (G)   The township, by contract with a developer, as approved by resolution
of the Township Board, may agree to collect benefit charges from third parties
connecting to any privately constructed sanitary sewer system dedicated to the
township system and rebate all or a portion of the charges to the developer to
defray the developer's cost of construction of sewer system extensions
constructed for the township.
(Ord. 26, eff. 6-19-1982; Ord. rev. 9-5-1989)
§ 50.147 ADMINISTRATION.
   The Supervisor of Williamstown Township is charged with the responsibility
of administering the system and causing the enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 26, eff. 6-19-1982)
§ 50.148 POWER AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.
   (A)   Duly authorized representatives of the township bearing proper
credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties
for the purpose of inspection, observations, measurement sampling and testing
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Duly authorized representatives of the township may enter at all
reasonable times in or upon private or public property for the purpose of
inspecting and investigating conditions or practices which may be in violation
of this chapter or detrimental to the system.
   (C)   (1)   Duly authorized representatives of the township shall inspect
the on-site work occurring by reason of any system permit. The person shall
have the right to issue a cease and desist order on the site upon finding a
violation of the permit or this chapter.
      (2)   The order shall contain a statement of the specific violation and
the appropriate means of correcting the same and the time within which
correction shall be made.
(Ord. 26, eff. 6-19-1982)
§ 50.149 REPEALER CLAUSE.
   All other ordinances, resolutions, orders or parts thereof in conflict with
the provisions of this chapter are, to the extent of the conflict, hereby
expressly repealed, subject to the provisions of §
50.004 as of the date this chapter becomes effective.
(Ord. 26, eff. 6-19-1982)
§ 50.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   What constitutes a violation. Whenever, by the provisions of this
chapter, the performance of any act is required or the performance of any act
is prohibited, a failure to comply with such provisions shall constitute a
violation of this chapter. In addition, the failure, neglect or refusal to
comply with a cease and desist order of the enforcing agency shall constitute a
violation of this chapter.
   (B)   Criminal proceedings to punish violations. A violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of not to exceed $500
and costs of prosecution, by confinement in the county jail for a period not
exceeding 90 days, or both the fine and confinement in the discretion of the
court. Each day that a violation of this chapter is continued or is permitted
to continue to exist shall constitute a separate offense; provided that, no
person shall be confined or jailed for a single, but continuing, violation for
a period longer than 90 days.
   (C)   Civil procedures to compel compliance. Any violation of this chapter
shall be deemed to be a nuisance, per se; the township may bring a civil
proceeding for a mandatory injunction or injunctive order or for such other
remedial relief as will correct or remedy the violation, including damages for
the costs or expenses thereof. The township may join in the action or actions
any number of property owners or users of the system. The provision of the
civil procedures shall be in addition to any criminal penalties provided
hereinabove.
(Ord. 26, eff. 6-19-1982)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
      Chapter
         
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
70.01   State Uniform Traffic Code adopted by reference
§ 70.01 STATE UNIFORM TRAFFIC CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The 1981 State Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages is
hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if set out in full.
Editor's note:
   The complete text of the ordinance adopting the traffic code is available at
the Township Office, 4990 N. Zimmer Road, Monday through Friday, 10:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
      Chapter
         
90.   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
         
91.   NUISANCES; BLIGHT CONTROL; DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
         
92.   OPEN BURNING; FIRE SAFETY; FIREWORKS
         
93.   SIDEWALKS
CHAPTER 90: HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
Section
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Cleanup of hazardous material, substance or waste
   
90.03   Authorization for cleanup; liability for costs
   
90.04   Payment of costs
   
90.05   Lien upon property
   
90.06   Court proceedings
   
90.07   Effective date
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings set
forth as follows.
   COST or COSTS.
      (1)   Any cost directly or indirectly incurred by Williamstown Township
or the Fire Department and includes, but is not limited to, the following:
actual labor costs of Williamstown Township personnel or Fire Department
personnel, including workers' compensation benefits, fringe benefits and
administrative overhead; costs of equipment, operation, materials obtained by
Williamstown Township or the Fire Department; costs of any contract labor or
materials which are necessitated for the cleanup of hazardous substances; and
costs incurred by Williamstown Township or the Fire Department not recovered
through the Hazardous Waste Service Fund by the Hazardous Waste Management Act
of Michigan, Public Act 64 of 1979, being M.C.L.A. §§ 324.11101 – 324.11153, as
amended, or through § 123 of CERCLA.
      (2)   COST or COSTS does not include actual fire suppression activities
normally or usually provided by the Fire Department.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIAL, SUBSTANCE OR WASTE.
      (1)   Any material, waste or substance, or a combination thereof
including solid, liquid, semi-solid or contained gaseous material which,
because of its quantity, quality, concentration or other physical, chemical or
general characteristics, pose a substantial present or potential hazard to
human health or the environment because of the material's use, treatment,
storage, transportation, disposal of or otherwise management; or
      (2)   HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE, as defined by § 101(14) of the United States
Comprehensive Environmental Response Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA),
and "hazardous waste" as defined in M.C.L.A. § 324.11103(3) of the Michigan
Waste Management Act, and "regulated substance" as that term is defined in
M.C.L.A. § 324.21101(g) of the Michigan Underground Storage Tank Act.
   PERSON or PERSONS. An individual, partnership, corporation, State of
Michigan, any trust, firm, joint stock company, federal agency, governmental
corporation, association, municipality, joint venture, limited partnership,
commission, political subdivision of the state, any interstate body, or any
public body created by or pursuant to state law.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY or RESPONSIBLE PARTIES. Any person who is a user,
producer, transporter or consumer of hazardous material, substance or waste, or
any person who has an ownership or other interest in the property, or part of
the property, upon which the hazardous material, substance or waste is located.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY includes, but is not limited to, any person who causes or
contributes to a condition or a deposit of hazardous material, substance or
waste or is otherwise responsible for a condition or deposit.
   TOWNSHIP ADMINISTRATOR. The Township Supervisor or his or her designee.
(Ord. passed - -1995)
§ 90.02 CLEANUP OF HAZARDOUS MATERIAL, SUBSTANCE OR WASTE.
   The cleanup of hazardous material, substance or waste shall be the
responsibility of all responsible parties. Hazardous material, substance or
waste shall not be disposed of, collected, stored, or transported within
Williamstown Township without written approval of the Township Administrator or
the Fire Chief.
(Ord. passed - -1995)
§ 90.03 AUTHORIZATION FOR CLEANUP; LIABILITY FOR COSTS.
   (A)   The Fire Department, or a contractor working at the direction of the
Fire Department or Williamstown Township, is authorized to clean up or abate
the effects of hazardous material, substance or waste, including, but not
limited to, deposits on property or facilities located totally or partially
within Williamstown Township. Any and all responsible parties shall be jointly
and severally liable for payment of all costs incurred by Williamstown Township
or the Fire Department as a result of the cleanup or abatement activity.
   (B)   The remedy provided in this chapter shall be in addition to any other
remedy available to Williamstown Township or the Fire Department provided by
law including, but not limited to, remedial activities as mandated by state or
federal law.
(Ord. passed - -1995)
§ 90.04 PAYMENT OF COSTS.
   (A)   The Williamstown Township Treasurer shall bill a responsible party for
costs Williamstown Township or the Fire Department incurs.
   (B)   Payment of the bill by the responsible party is due within 30 days
from the date of the postmark of the bill.
(Ord. passed - -1995)
§ 90.05 LIEN UPON PROPERTY.
   (A)   Costs incurred by Williamstown Township or the Fire Department
pursuant to this chapter shall constitute a lien upon the property for which
costs are incurred, including both real and personal property if the owner or
owner's lessee or licensee causes or contributes to the deposit of hazardous
material, substance or waste upon the property.
   (B)   If the cost of cleanup is not paid to Williamstown Township within
three months after the same is due, the Williamstown Township Treasurer or his
or her designee, prior to May 1 of each year, shall certify to the Tax
Assessing Officer of Williamstown Township the total amount of the delinquent
charges.
   (C)   The Williamstown Township Treasurer shall enter the delinquent charges
upon the next general township tax roll as a charge against the premises and
the liens thereon shall be enforced in the same manner as provided by law for
delinquent and unpaid taxes.
(Ord. passed - -1995)
§ 90.06 COURT PROCEEDINGS.
   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, Williamstown Township shall be
empowered to maintain proceedings in any court of competent jurisdiction to
collect the charges as a matured debt of Williamstown Township.
(Ord. passed - -1995)
§ 90.07 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall take effect upon its passage, approval and publication.
(Ord. passed - -1995)
CHAPTER 91: NUISANCES; BLIGHT CONTROL; DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
Section
General Provisions
   
91.01   Public nuisance defined and prohibited
   
91.02   Nuisances per se
   
91.03   Abatement; notice, authority of officers
   
91.04   Hearing
   
91.05   Abatement; costs
   
91.06   Junk or abandoned motor vehicles
   
91.07   Unlawful noise prohibited
   
91.08   Public nuisances; emergency abatement; costs
   
91.09   Appearance tickets
   
91.10   Effective date
   
91.11   Weeds, grasses, brush or other vegetation
Dangerous Buildings
   
91.20   Title
   
91.21   Definitions
   
91.22   Prohibition of dangerous buildings
   
91.23   Notice of dangerous building; hearing
   
91.24   Dangerous building hearing officer; duties; hearing; order
   
91.25   Enforcement hearing before the Dangerous Building Board of Appeals
   
91.26   Implementation and enforcement of remedies
   
91.27   Sanction for nonconformance with order
   
91.28   Dangerous Building Board of Appeals
   
91.29   Appeal of Township Board or Board of Appeals decision
   
91.30   Effective date
 
   
91.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.01 PUBLIC NUISANCE DEFINED AND PROHIBITED.
   (A)   (1)   Whatever annoys, injures or endangers the safety, health,
welfare, comfort or repose of the public; offends public decency or aesthetic
sensibilities; interferes with, obstructs or renders dangerous any street,
highway, navigable lake or stream; or in any way renders the public insecure in
life or property is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
      (2)   Public nuisances shall include, but not be limited to, whatever is
forbidden by any provision of this chapter.
   (B)   No person shall commit, create or maintain any public nuisance.
(Res. eff. 3-21-1990; Ord. rev. 9- -1993) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.02 NUISANCES PER SE.
   The following acts, apparatus, accumulations and activities are hereby
declared to be public nuisances:
   (A)   No person shall maintain or permit to remain on premises owned or
occupied by him or her; or throw, place or leave; or permit the throwing,
placing or leaving on the premises of another any of the following substances:
organic refuse, food wastes, ashes, dead animals, fish, animal bones, hides,
rotten soap, grease, tallow, offal, shell, food containers or wrappings, cans,
bottles, jars, crockery, garbage, discarded furniture, cartons, boxes, crates,
rags, discarded clothing, bedding, floor covering, wallpaper, sweepings, waste
paper, newspapers or magazines, discarded appliances, rubbish, excrement, rot,
construction debris including, but not limited to, lumber, bricks, block,
plumbing or heating materials, roofing materials, concrete, cement, electrical
materials or siding yard debris or rubbish including, but not limited to, grass
clippings, clippings from hedges or shrubs, or detached tree branches,
industrial waste, unclean or nauseous fluids or gases, in any of the following
locations:
      (1)   Any public street, highway, lane, road, alley, public place,
square, sidewalk or any lands within the boundaries of Williamstown Township
owned by the Township of Williamstown, County of Ingham, State of Michigan, or
other municipal corporation;
      (2)   Any river, lake, stream, drainageway, wetland or other body of
water; and
      (3)   Any private place or premises where, in the opinion of the Township
Supervisor or his or her duly authorized agent, the specified substances
constitute a dangerous condition; or are detrimental to the public health,
safety or welfare; or offend aesthetic sensibilities; or may cause sickness; or
attract flies, insects, rodents or vermin.
   (B)   The emission of noxious fumes to include, but not be limited to, those
foul odors mentioned in Ord. 217, § 4, of the Williamstown Township Code of
Ordinances, or gas, smoke, ashes or soot in such quantities as to render
occupancy of property dangerous or uncomfortable to a person of ordinary
sensibilities;
   (C)   The keeping of explosives, inflammable liquids or other dangerous
substances stored in any manner or in any amount contrary to the provisions of
any statute or applicable administrative regulation of the State of Michigan;
   (D)   All dangerous, unguarded excavations or dangerous, unguarded machinery
in any public place, or so situated, left or operated on private property as to
attract the public, except on a seasonal basis for the purpose of performing
the duties associated with a typical commercial farming operation;
   (E)   The owning, driving or moving upon the public streets and alleys of a
truck or other motor vehicle which is constructed or loaded so as to permit any
part of its load or contents to be deposited upon any street, alley, sidewalk
or other public or private place, or which deposits from its wheels, tires,
other parts onto the street, alley, sidewalk or other public or private place
dirt, grease, sticky substances or foreign matter of any kind. Provided,
however, that, under circumstances determined by the Township Supervisor, or
his or her agent, to be in the public interest, the Supervisor, or his or her
agent, may grant persons temporary exemption from the provisions of this
division conditioned upon cleaning and correcting the violating condition as
specified by the Township Supervisor, or his or her agent, and execution of any
agreement by the person to reimburse the township for any extraordinary
maintenance expenses incurred by the township in connection with the violation;
   (F)   The keeping of bees, when the keeping results in the disturbance of
the safety of one or more persons, or shall render one or more persons
reasonably insecure in the use of his or her property;
(Ord. rev. 9- -1993)
   (G)   The keeping of horses or livestock unless permitted by
Chapter 156 of this code or the failure to keep horses or livestock within
sufficient fences, barricades or restraints to keep the animals from entering
the public way or the property of another;
   (H)   The keeping, either inside or outside of any building, structure or
dwelling, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended, unused
or discarded icebox, refrigerator or any air-tight container of any kind which
has a snap latch or other locking device thereon, without first removing the
snap latch or other locking device, or the doors from the icebox, refrigerator
or other air-tight container; and/or
   (I)   Abandon, leave, keep or maintain a junk or abandoned motor vehicle, as
provided in §
91.06.
(Res. eff. 3-21-1990; Ord. rev. 9- -1993) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.03 ABATEMENT; NOTICE, AUTHORITY OF OFFICERS.
   (A)   Whenever any public nuisance described in §§
91.01 and
91.02 shall exist upon township property or upon the property of another
municipal corporation within the boundaries of the township, the public
nuisance may be abated by the Township Supervisor, or his or her agent, without
notice and the cost of abatement charged as provided in §
91.05. Except as provided in §
91.06 for junk or abandoned motor vehicles, whenever any public nuisance shall
exist on private premises within the township, the Township Supervisor, or his
or her agent, shall give notice in writing by certified mail, return receipt
requested, addressed to the owner or occupant of the property where the public
nuisance exists or to the person(s) otherwise responsible for the public
nuisance. The notice shall specify the location and nature of the public
nuisance and shall indicate that the owner or occupant or person otherwise
responsible is required to repair, tear down, abate or otherwise remove the
public nuisance within ten days of the receipt of the notice or request a
hearing within the ten days. The notice shall further state that if the public
nuisance is not repaired, torn down, abated or otherwise removed or a hearing
requested within the period, the nuisance will be repaired, torn down, abated
or otherwise removed by the Township Supervisor, or his or her agent, and the
cost thereof charged as provided in §
91.05. If the actual owner or occupant of the premises is unknown or cannot be
located, notice may be given by posting a copy of the notice upon a conspicuous
part of the property where the public nuisance is located and by mailing a copy
of the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the
owner or party in interest at the address shown on the township tax records, at
least 12 days before further action by the Supervisor, or his or her agent.
   (B)   Express authority to enter upon lands and investigate and repair, tear
down, abate or otherwise remove public nuisances is hereby conferred upon the
Township Supervisor, or his or her agent. If, after due notice is hereinabove
specified, the owner or occupant or other interested person fails to repair,
tear down, abate or otherwise remove the public nuisance or request a hearing
as herein provided, the Supervisor, or his or her agent, is empowered to enter
upon the lands where the public nuisance is located and repair, tear down,
abate or otherwise remove the public nuisance and charge the cost therefor as
provided in §
91.05.
(Res. eff. 3-21-1990; Ord. rev. 9- -1993)
§ 91.04 HEARING.
   (A)   If, after notice provided under §
91.03, the recipient of the notice shall request a hearing as therein provided,
a hearing shall be held before the Township Supervisor, or a hearing officer
appointed by the Supervisor, to determine the applicability of this chapter to
the property in question.
   (B)   The Township Supervisor, or his or her appointed hearing officer,
shall make a decision with written findings of fact based upon his or her
investigation and evidence presented at the hearing as to whether the condition
in question violates the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   If the Township Supervisor, or his or her appointed hearing officer,
determines that the condition violates the provisions of this chapter, he or
she shall order the person requesting the hearing or owner or occupant of the
premises in question to repair, tear down, abate or otherwise remove the
nuisance in question within a reasonable time but not less than five days.
   (D)   If the public nuisance is not repaired, torn down, abated or otherwise
removed within the period allowed in the order, the Township Supervisor, or his
or her agent, may repair, tear down, abate or otherwise remove the public
nuisance and charge the cost thereof as provided in §
91.05.
(Res. eff. 3-21-1990; Ord. rev. 9- -1993)
§ 91.05 ABATEMENT; COSTS.
   (A)   All expenses incurred by the Township Supervisor, or his or her agent,
in repairing, tearing down, abating or otherwise removing a public nuisance
under this chapter shall be charged to the person responsible therefor, the
occupant of the land in question or the person who appears as owner or party in
interest upon the last local tax assessment records of the township.
   (B)   If the person fails to pay the charge within 30 days after a statement
therefor is mailed to him or her, the amount of expenses incurred by the
township in repairing, tearing down, abating or otherwise removing the public
nuisance may be paid from the township's General Fund and the amount thereof
assessed against the lands on which the expenditures were made on the next
general assessment roll of the township and shall be collected in the same
manner as other taxes are collected.
   (C)   The township shall have a lien upon the lands for the expense, the
lien to be enforced in the manner prescribed by the general laws of the state
providing for the enforcement of tax liens.
(Res. eff. 3-21-1990; Ord. rev. 9- -1993)
§ 91.06 JUNK OR ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   A MOTOR VEHICLE is hereby defined as any wheeled vehicle which is
self-propelled or intended to be self-propelled. JUNK OR ABANDONED MOTOR
VEHICLES, for purposes of this section, shall include:
      (1)   Any motor vehicle which has remained on the premises of another for
a period of 48 continuous hours, or more, without the consent of the owner or
occupant of the property or for a period of 48 continuous hours or more after
the consent of the owner or occupant of the property has been revoked;
      (2)   Any motor vehicle or portion thereof which, for a period of 30
consecutive days or more does not have an engine in running condition, four
inflated tires and a battery;
      (3)   Any motor vehicle which, for a period of 72 hours or more, does not
have attached current license plates and current insurance;
      (4)   Any motor vehicle which is in fact abandoned by its owner; and/or
      (5)   Any motor vehicle which is for any reason not operable and not
repairable.
   (B)   No person shall abandon a motor vehicle or part thereof on the
premises of another.
   (C)   No person shall store, maintain, keep, leave or authorize the storage,
maintenance, keeping or leaving of any abandoned or junk motor vehicle or part
thereof on any private property under his or her ownership, tenancy or control.
   (D)   (1)   The following motor vehicles shall not be deemed junk or
abandoned vehicles for purposes of this section: vehicles stored within a
fully-enclosed building, vehicles kept in stock in trade by a regularly
licensed dealer in motor vehicles or vehicles stored by a licensed junk dealer.
      (2)   The Township Supervisor may, upon written application, exempt from
this section for any reasonable period of time any historic or classic vehicle,
any vehicle in a process of restoration or repair, or any vehicle which by
reason of special circumstances is deemed by him or her not to be a junk or
abandoned vehicle.
   (E)   Except as provided in §
91.03 with respect to nuisances existing on township property or upon the
property of another municipal corporation within the boundaries of the
township, if a motor vehicle has been deemed to be abandoned under the
definitions of abandoned vehicles in division (A) above, then the Township
Supervisor, or his or her agent, may do one of the following:
      (1)   Remove, or cause to be removed, any junk or abandoned motor vehicle
or part thereof from the property of the township or other municipal
corporation within the boundaries of the township without notice and may
dispose of the vehicle by authorizing the Ingham County Sheriff to take the
vehicle or part thereof into custody and dispose of the vehicle according to
their procedures for abandoned vehicles; or
      (2)   Remove, or cause to be removed, any junk or abandoned vehicle or
part thereof from any unenclosed private property after having notified the
vehicle owner and/or lienholder, if known, and the property owner or occupant
of the property in writing of his or her intention to do so at least 48 hours
prior to the removal. If the vehicle owner and/or lien-holder cannot be
determined, a copy of the notice shall be placed upon the vehicle at least 48
hours prior to removal. If the vehicle is not removed within 48 hours after the
date the notice was delivered or affixed, the vehicle is deemed abandoned and
the Township Board may authorize the Ingham County Sheriff to take the vehicle
into custody and dispose of the vehicle according to its procedures.
(Res. eff. 3-21-1990; Ord. rev. 9- -1993) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.07 UNLAWFUL NOISE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful, and it shall be deemed a public nuisance, for
any person to unreasonably make, continue or cause to be made or continue any
noise that annoys or disturbs the quiet, comfort or repose of a reasonable
person of normal sensitivities, or that injures or endangers the health, peace
or safety of the public within the township. The following acts, among others,
are declared to be unlawful noises in the violation of this section, and are
deemed to be public nuisances per se, but this enumeration shall not be deemed
to be exclusive, namely:
      (1)   Radios, phonographs and musical instruments. Operating, playing or
permitting the operating or playing of any radio, phonograph, television set,
amplified or unamplified musical instrument, drum, loudspeaker, tape recorder
or other sound-producing device, in such a manner or with such volume at any
time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of a
reasonable person of normal sensitivities in any office, dwelling, hotel,
hospital or residence. The operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph,
machine or device in such a manner as to be plainly audible on real property or
in a dwelling unit other than that from which the noise originates or emanates
shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section;
      (2)   Shouting and whistling. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling,
singing or making any other loud noises on the public streets, sidewalks, bike
pathways or other streets or paths located within the township, between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day, or the making of any such
noise at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or
repose of a reasonable person of normal sensitivities in any office, dwelling,
hotel, hospital or residence;
      (3)   Animals and birds. Owning, possessing or harboring any animal or
bird that frequently or for continued duration howls, barks, meows, squawks or
makes other sounds at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet,
comfort or repose of a reasonable person of normal sensitivities in any office,
dwelling, hotel, hospital or residence;
      (4)   Construction. Operating or permitting the operation of any tools or
equipment used in construction, excavation, demolition, alteration or repair of
any building, street or highway, between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
the following day, such that the sound therefrom is plainly audible in any
dwelling, hotel, hospital, office or residence, or on any residential property
other than the property from which the noise emanates or originates, unless a
variance therefor is first obtained from the Township Building Inspector after
approval is given by the Township Board; and
      (5)   Engines. Operating or permitting the operation of any steam engine
or internal combustion engine, whether stationary or mobile, so as to annoy or
disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of a person of normal sensitivities in any
office, dwelling, hotel, hospital or residence. This division shall not
prohibit the operation of any mechanically-powered saw, sander, drill, grinder,
lawn or garden tool, snowblower or similar device used outdoors in residential
areas between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. the same day, nor shall it
prohibit the operation of a state-licensed motor vehicle in a manner expressly
permitted by state law.
   (B)   In addition to its normal meaning, the term PERSON, as used in this
section, means a person who causes or makes an unlawful noise; or a person who
is in control of the property or premises from which an unlawful noise
originates or emanates; or a person who owns the property or premises from
which an unlawful noise originates or emanates.
   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to the emission of
sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of emergency work.
   (D)   The Township Building Inspector may provide, with the authorization of
the Township Supervisor, an applicant a variance of this section to permit
construction noises during hours otherwise prohibited hereunder, after notice
and hearing before the Township Supervisor, upon a showing that compliance with
this section would constitute an unreasonable hardship on the applicant, on the
community or other persons.
(Res. eff. 3-21-1990; Ord. rev. 9- -1993) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.08 PUBLIC NUISANCES; EMERGENCY ABATEMENT; COSTS.
   (A)   The Township Supervisor, or his or her agent, may act to abate a
public nuisance without giving notice, as specified in §
91.03, if the public health, safety or welfare requires immediate action.
   (B)   The cost of abating the nuisance shall be charged as specified in §
91.05.
(Res. eff. 3-21-1990; Ord. rev. 9- -1993)
§ 91.09 APPEARANCE TICKETS.
   In all arrests and prosecutions for violation of this chapter, appearance
tickets and the appropriate procedures set forth in Public Act 147 of 1968,
being M.C.L.A. § 764.9, as amended, may be used whenever appropriate.
(Res. eff. 3-21-1990; Ord. rev. 9- -1993)
§ 91.10 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall be effective after legal publication.
(Res. eff. 3-21-1990; Ord. rev. 9- -1993)
§ 91.11 WEEDS, GRASSES, BRUSH AND OTHER VEGETATION.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the owner, or occupant, or any person or
persons, agent, firm, or corporation having control and/or management of any
parcel of property zoned either R-l, R-l-S, RR or in a platted subdivision, to
prevent weeds, grasses, brush or other vegetation from growing to a height of
greater than 12 inches within 50 feet of principal dwelling, nor shall such
owner, agent, or occupant permit an accumulation of dead weeds, grasses, brush
or other vegetation of a height greater than 12 inches on any such properties.
Nothing in this section shall apply to trees, flower gardens, vegetation
planted for ornamental purposes, or vegetation in vegetable gardens. The
presence of such weeds upon any such parcel of property is hereby declared to
be a public nuisance.
   (B)   The Township Supervisor or his/her designated agent shall notify by
personal delivery or by posting on the premises, the owner, agent or occupant
of any of the lands on which prohibited grasses, weeds, vegetation or brush is
found. Such notice shall contain a description of the prohibited condition and
a summary of the provisions of this section. If the owner, agent or occupant of
such land has failed within seven days after such notice is received to cut,
destroy or remove the prohibited condition, the Township Supervisor or his/her
designated agent may enter upon such land and destroy and/or otherwise remove
the prohibited weeds, grasses, brush or other vegetation. Express power to so
enter such lands and perform such duties is hereby conferred upon the Township
Supervisor or his/her designated agent. All expenses incurred in such
destruction and/or removal shall be billed to and paid by the owner, agent, or
occupant of such lands. If such owner, agent, or occupant shall not pay such
statement when due, the amount of expenses incurred by the township in
destroying and/or removing such condition shall be paid from the township
general fund and the amount thereof assessed against the lands on which such
expenditures were made on the next general assessment roll of the township and
shall be collected in the same manner as other taxes are collected. The
township shall have a lien upon such lands for such expense, such lien to be
enforced in the manner prescribed by the general laws of the state providing
for the enforcement of tax liens.
   (C)   In addition to the above, any owner or occupant, or person or persons,
agent, firm, or corporation having control and/or management of any parcel of
land who shall violate any of the provisions of this section or fails to comply
therewith, may be responsible for a municipal civil infraction, at the
discretion of the Township Supervisor or his/her designated agent. Upon being
found responsible of such violation, such owner or occupant, or person or
persons, agent, firm or corporation shall be assessed a fine not to exceed
$100. The imposition of a municipal civil infraction fine for any violation
shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue. The imposition of the
above fine shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited
conditions. Further violations subject the owner or occupant, or person or
persons, agent, firm or corporation to subsequent municipal civil infraction
violations. The Township Supervisor or his/her designated agent is hereby
authorized to write and serve municipal civil infraction tickets. This
municipal civil infraction ticket shall serve as notice of the alleged
violation. Proceedings for the municipal civil infraction shall proceed as
provided in the Townsliip Municipal Civil Infractions Ordinance.
(Ord. 60, passed 7-8-2015)
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
§ 91.20 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and cited as the “Williamstown Township
Dangerous Buildings Ordinance”.
(Ord. passed 11-13-2019)
§ 91.21 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this subchapter, including in this section, the following words
and terms shall have the meanings stated herein.
   DANGEROUS BUILDING. Any building or structure, residential or otherwise,
that has one or more of the following defects or is in one or more of the
following conditions:
      (1)   A door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit does not
conform to the Township Fire Code or Township Building Code.
      (2)   A portion of the building or structure is damaged by fire, wind,
flood or other cause so that the structural strength or stability of the
building or structure is appreciably less than it was before the catastrophe,
and does not meet the minimum requirements of the Housing Law of Michigan,
Public Act 167 of 1917 (M.C.L.A. §§ 125.401 et seq.), as amended, or the
Township Building Code for a new building or structure, purpose or location.
      (3)   A part of the building or structure is likely to fall, become
detached or dislodged, or collapse, and injure persons or damage property.
      (4)   A portion of the building or structure has settled to such an
extent that walls or other structural portions of the building or structure
have materially less resistance to wind than is required in the case of new
construction by the Housing Law of Michigan, Public Act 167 of 1917, as
amended, or the Township Building Code.
      (5)   The building or structure, or a part of the building or structure,
because of dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction, or the
removal or movement of some portion of the ground necessary for the support, or
for other reason, is likely to partially or completely collapse, or some
portion of the foundation or underpinning of the building or structure is
likely to fall or give way.
      (6)   The building or structure, or a part of the building or structure,
is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is used.
      (7)   The building or structure is damaged by fire, wind or flood, or is
dilapidated or deteriorated and becomes an attractive nuisance to children who
might play in the building or structure to their danger, or becomes a harbor
for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons, or enables persons to resort to the
building or structure for committing a nuisance or an unlawful or immoral act.
      (8)   A building or structure used or intended to be used for dwelling
purposes, including the adjoining grounds, because of dilapidation, decay,
damage, faulty construction or arrangement, or otherwise, is unsanitary or
unfit for human habitation, is in a condition that the health officer of the
township or county determines is likely to cause sickness or disease, or is
likely to injure the health, safety or general welfare of people living in the
dwelling.
      (9)   A building or structure is vacant, dilapidated and open at door or
window, leaving the interior of the building exposed to the elements or
accessible to entrance by trespassers.
   ENFORCING AGENCY. This township, through the Township Building Official and/
or such other official(s) or agency as may be designated by the Township Board
to enforce this subchapter.
   TOWNSHIP BUILDING CODE. The building code administered and enforced in the
township pursuant to the Stille-DeRossett-Hale Single State Construction Code
Act, Public Act 230 of 1972 (M.C.L.A. § 125.1501 et seq.), as amended.
(Ord. passed 11-13-2019)
§ 91.22 PROHIBITION OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS.
   It shall be unlawful for any owner or agent thereof to keep or maintain any
building or part thereof that is a dangerous building as defined in §
91.21.
(Ord. passed 11-13-2019)
§ 91.23 NOTICE OF DANGEROUS BUILDING; HEARING.
   (A)   Notice requirement. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
subchapter, if a building or structure is found to be a dangerous building, the
enforcing agency shall issue a notice that the building or structure is a
dangerous building.
   (B)   Parties entitled to notice. The notice shall be served on each owner
of or party in interest in the building or structure in whose name the property
appears on the last local tax assessment records of the township.
   (C)   Contents of notice. The notice shall specify the time and place of a
hearing on whether the building or structure is a dangerous building, and state
that the person to whom the notice is directed shall have the opportunity at
the hearing to show cause why the hearing officer should not order the building
or structure to be otherwise made safe, properly maintained, or demolished.
   (D)   Service of notice. The notice shall be in writing and shall be served
upon the person to whom the notice is directed, either personally or by
certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the owner or party in
interest at the address shown on the tax records. If a notice is served upon a
person by certified mail, a copy of the notice shall also be posted upon a
conspicuous part of the building or structure. The notice shall be served upon
the owner or party in interest at least ten days before the date of the hearing
included in the notice.
(Ord. passed 11-13-2019)
§ 91.24 DANGEROUS BUILDING HEARING OFFICER; DUTIES; HEARING; ORDER.
   (A)   Appointment of hearing officer. The hearing officer shall be appointed
by the Township Supervisor to serve at his or her pleasure. The hearing officer
shall be a person who has expertise in housing matters, including, but not
limited to, an engineer, architect, building contractor, building inspector, or
member of a community housing organization. An employee of the enforcing agency
shall not be appointed as a hearing officer.
   (B)   Filing dangerous building notice with hearing officer. The enforcing
agency shall file a copy of the notice of the dangerous condition of any
building with the hearing officer.
   (C)   Hearing testimony and decision. At a hearing prescribed by this
subchapter, the hearing officer shall take testimony of the enforcing agency,
the owner of the property, and any interested party. Not more than five days
after completion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall render a decision,
either closing the proceedings or ordering the building or structure otherwise
made safe, properly maintained, or demolished.
   (D)   Compliance with hearing officer order. If the hearing officer
determines that the building or structure should be otherwise made safe,
properly maintained, or demolished, the hearing officer shall so order, fixing
a time in the order for the owner, agent or lessee to comply with the order.
   (E)   Noncompliance with hearing officer order or request to enforce order.
If the owner, agent or lessee fails to appear or neglects or refuses to comply
with the order issued under §
91.24(D), the hearing officer shall file a report of the findings and a copy of
the order with the Township Board, not more than five days after noncompliance
by the owner, and request that necessary action be taken to enforce the order.
The hearing officer shall also file the report of the findings and a copy of
the order with the Dangerous Building Board of Appeals and request that
necessary action be taken to enforce the order. A copy of the findings and
order of the hearing officer shall be served on the owner, agent or lessee in
the manner prescribed in §
91.23(D).
(Ord. passed 11-13-2019)
§ 91.25 ENFORCEMENT HEARING BEFORE THE DANGEROUS BUILDING BOARD OF APPEALS.
   The Dangerous Building Board of Appeals, as applicable, shall fix a date not
less than 30 days after the hearing prescribed in §
91.24(C) for a hearing on the findings and order of the hearing officer, and
shall give notice to the owner, agent or lessee in the manner prescribed in §
91.23(C) of the time and place of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner, agent
or lessee shall be given the opportunity to show cause why the order should not
be enforced. The Board of Appeals shall either approve, disapprove or modify
the order. If the Board of Appeals approves or modifies the order, the Township
Board shall take all necessary action to enforce the order. If the order is
approved or modified, the owner, agent or lessee shall comply with the order
within 60 days after the date of the hearing under this section. In the case of
an order of demolition, if the Board of Appeals determines that the building or
structure has been substantially destroyed by fire, wind, flood or other
natural disaster, and the cost of repair of the building or structure will be
greater than the state-equalized value of the building or structure, the owner,
agent or lessee shall comply with the order of demolition within 21 days after
the date of the hearing under this section.
(Ord. passed 11-13-2019)
§ 91.26 IMPLEMENTATION AND ENFORCEMENT OF REMEDIES.
   (A)   Implementation of order by township. In the event of the failure or
refusal of the owner or party in interest to comply with the decision of the
Board of Appeals, the Township Board may, in its discretion, contract for
making the building safe; for maintaining the exterior of the building or
structure or grounds adjoining the building or structure; or for demolishing
the building or structure.
   (B)   Reimbursement of costs. The costs of making the building safe, or of
maintaining the exterior of the building or structure or its adjoining grounds,
or of its demolition, incurred by the township to bring the property into
conformance with this subchapter, shall be reimbursed to the township by the
owner or party in interest in whose name the property appears.
   (C)   Notice of costs. The owner or party in interest in whose name the
property appears upon the last local tax assessment records shall be notified
by the Township Assessor of the amount of the costs of making the building
safe, or of maintaining the exterior of the building or structure or its
adjoining grounds, or of its demolition, by first class mail at the address
shown on the township records.
   (D)   Lien for unpaid costs. If the owner or party in interest fails to pay
the costs within 30 days after the Assessor has mailed of the notice of the
amount of the cost, in the case of a single-family dwelling or a two-family
dwelling, the township shall have a lien for the costs incurred by the township
to bring the property into conformance with this subchapter. The lien shall not
take effect until notice of the lien has been filed or recorded as provided by
law. A lien provided for in this division does not have priority over
previously filed or recorded liens and encumbrances. The lien for the costs
shall be collected and treated in the same manner as provided for property tax
liens under the General Property Tax Act, Public Act 206 of 1893, as amended,
(M.C.L.A. §§ 211.1 et seq.).
   (E)   Court judgment for unpaid costs. In addition to other remedies under
this subchapter, the township may bring an action against the owner of the
building or structure for the full cost of making the building safe, or of
maintaining the exterior of the building or structure or its adjoining grounds,
or of the demolition. In the case of a single-family dwelling or a two-family
dwelling, the township shall have a lien on the property for the amount of a
judgment obtained pursuant to this division. The lien provided for in this
division shall not take effect until notice of the lien is filed and recorded
as provided for by law. The lien does not have priority over previously filed
or recorded liens and encumbrances.
   (F)   Enforcement of judgment. A judgment in an action brought pursuant to §
91.26(E) may be enforced against assets of the owner other than the building or
structure.
   (G)   Lien for judgment amount. In the case of a single-family dwelling or a
two-family dwelling, the township shall have a lien for the amount of a
judgment obtained pursuant to §
91.26(E) against the owner’s interest in all real property located in this
state that is owned, in whole or in part, by the owner of the building or
structure against which the judgment is obtained. A lien provided for in this
division does not take effect until notice of the lien is filed or recorded as
provided by law, and the lien does not have priority over previously filed or
recorded liens and encumbrances.
(Ord. passed 11-13-2019)
§ 91.27 SANCTION FOR NONCONFORMANCE WITH ORDER.
   Any person or other entity who fails or refuses to comply with an order
approved or modified by the Township Board or Board of Appeals, as applicable
under § 91.25, within the time prescribed by that section, is responsible for a
municipal civil infraction as defined by state law and subject to a civil fine
of not more than $500, plus costs, which may include all direct or indirect
expenses to which the township has been put in connection with the violation. A
violator of this subchapter shall also be subject to such additional sanctions,
remedies, and judicial orders as are authorized under state law. Each day a
violation of this subchapter continues to exist constitutes a separate
violation.
(Ord. passed 11-13-2019)
§ 91.28 DANGEROUS BUILDING BOARD OF APPEALS.
   (A)   Establishment and duties. The Township Board hereby establishes a
Dangerous Building Board of Appeals to hear all of the cases and carry out all
of the duties of the Township Board described in §
91.25. The establishment and operation of the Board of Appeals shall be
controlled by the following provisions of this section.
   (B)   Membership.
      (1)   The Board of Appeals shall be appointed by the Township Board
      (2)   The Board of Appeals shall consist of the following members:
         (a)   A building contractor;
         (b)   A registered architect or engineer;
         (c)   Two members of the general public;
         (d)   An individual registered as a building official, plan reviewer
or inspector under the Building Officials and Inspectors Registration Act,
Public Act 54 of 1986, (M.C.L.A. §§ 338.2301 et seq.).
      (3)   Members of the Board of Appeals shall not be employees of the
enforcing agency.
   (C)   Terms. Board of Appeals members shall be appointed for three years,
except that of the members first appointed, two members shall serve for one
year, two members shall serve for two years, and one member shall serve for
three years. A vacancy created other than by expiration of a term shall be
filled for the balance of the unexpired term in the same manner as the original
appointment. A member may be reappointed for additional terms.
   (D)   Officers. The Board of Appeals annually shall select a chairperson,
vice chairperson and other officers that the Board of Appeals considers
necessary.
   (E)   Quorum and final action votes. A majority of the Board of Appeals
members appointed and serving constitutes a quorum. Final action of the Board
of Appeals shall be only by affirmative vote of a majority of the Board members
appointed and serving.
   (F)   Compensation and expenses. The Township Board shall fix the amount of
any per diem compensation provided to the members of the Board of Appeals.
Expenses of the Board of Appeals incurred in the performance of official duties
may be reimbursed as provided by law for employees of the Township Board.
   (G)   Open Meetings Act applicable. A meeting of the Board of Appeals shall
be held pursuant to the Open Meetings Act, Public Act 267 of 1976 (M.C.L.A. §§
15.261 et seq.), as amended. Public notice of the time, date and place of the
meeting shall be given in the manner required by the Open Meetings Act.
   (H)   Freedom of Information Act applicable. A writing prepared, owned,
used, in the possession of, or retained by the Board of Appeals in the
performance of an official function shall be made available to the public
pursuant to the Freedom of Information Act, Public Act 442 of 1976 (M.C.L.A. §§
15.231 et seq.), as amended.
(Ord. passed 11-13-2019)
§ 91.29 APPEAL OF TOWNSHIP BOARD OR BOARD OF APPEALS DECISION.
   An owner aggrieved by any final decision or order of the Township Board or
the Board of Appeals, as applicable under §
91.25, may appeal the decision or order to the circuit court by filing a
petition for an order of superintending control within 20 days from the date of
the decision.
(Ord. passed 11-13-2019)
§ 91.30 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall take effect 30 days after publication as required by
law.
(Ord. passed 11-13-2019)
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   In addition to the civil rights and remedies herein provided to the
township, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor or municipal civil infraction, as determined
within the township's discretion. Any person who is convicted of a misdemeanor
under this chapter shall be subject to punishment by an amount not exceeding
$500 or be imprisoned for a period not exceeding 90 days or both so fined and
imprisoned. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. If
instead a municipal civil infraction is imposed, the penalty shall be a fine
not to exceed $500. Upon notice of a violation, the appropriate township
employee shall investigate any violation and then make a determination as to
whether the penalty shall be imposed. The Township Supervisor or his/her
designated agent is hereby authorized to write and serve municipal civil
infraction tickets. This municipal civil infraction ticket shall serve as
notice of the alleged violation. Proceedings for the municipal civil infraction
shall proceed as provided in the Township Municipal Civil Infractions
Ordinance. The imposition of a municipal civil infraction fine for any
violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue. Further
violations subject the owner or occupant, or person or persons, agent, firm or
corporation to subsequent municipal civil infraction violations.
(Res. eff. 3-21-1990; Ord. rev. 9- -1993; Ord. 58, passed 8-13-2014)
CHAPTER 92: OPEN BURNING; FIRE SAFETY; FIREWORKS
Section
General Provisions
   
92.01   Title
   
92.02   Legislative determination
   
92.03   Scope of application
   
92.04   Other applicable laws
   
92.05   Adoption of Fire Code
   
92.06   Definitions
   
92.07   Separability
   
92.08   Repeal
   
92.09   Effective date
Burning Regulations
   
92.20   General requirements
   
92.21   Annual burn permits
   
92.22   Conditions under which burning is always prohibited
   
92.23   Daily starting and ending times
   
92.24   Separation of fires from buildings and structures
   
92.25   Incinerators for commercial and industrial fires
   
92.26   Incinerators for domestic use
   
92.27   Monitoring the fire
   
92.28   Exceptions
   
92.29   Disposal of ash and burning on a road
Fireworks
   
92.40   Title
   
92.41   Definitions
   
92.42   Consumer fireworks regulations
   
92.43   Articles pyrotechnic, display fireworks, and special effects
regulations
   
92.44   Enforcement
   
92.45   Effective date
 
   
92.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 92.01 TITLE.
   This chapter is hereby designated as the "Williamstown Township Ordinance to
Regulate Open Burning and Establish Fire Safety Regulations" and may be
referred to as the "Township Fire Ordinance".
(Ord. 41, passed 10-1-2002; Ord. passed 8-5-2003)
§ 92.02 LEGISLATIVE DETERMINATION.
   In the interest of protecting the public health, safety and welfare, the
Board of Trustees of Williamstown Township finds that the adoption of a fire
code prescribing fire safety regulations is necessary to minimize hazard to
life and property from fire or explosion. This chapter is adopted pursuant to
Michigan Public Act 246 of 1945, being M.C.L.A. §§ 41.181 - 41.187, as amended
(the Township Ordinances Act), and Michigan Public Act 33 of 1951, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 41.801 - 41.813, as amended (the Police and Fire Protection Act).
(Ord. 41, passed 10-1-2002; Ord. passed 8-5-2003)
§ 92.03 SCOPE OF APPLICATION.
   It shall be unlawful for a person to undertake open burning of any kind or
engage in any activity related to fire except in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter and the Fire Code adopted by reference, pursuant to §
92.05.
(Ord. 41, passed 10-1-2002; Ord. passed 8-5-2003)
§ 92.04 OTHER APPLICABLE LAWS.
   (A)   The requirements of this chapter shall be in addition to other
applicable federal, state and local laws, ordinances and regulations, including
M.C.L.A. §§ 324.51501 – 324.51906, which provides for the prevention and
suppression of forest fires.
   (B)   Burning activities covered by this chapter are also subject to air
quality standards and permit requirements enforced by the Michigan Department
of Environmental Quality (MDEQ) and other governmental agencies, where
applicable.
(Ord. 41, passed 10-1-2002; Ord. passed 8-5-2003)
§ 92.05 ADOPTION OF FIRE CODE.
   Williamstown Township hereby adopts, by reference, the International Fire
Code, except as herein modified, and as updated from time to time by the
International Code Council. Copies of the International Fire Code, together
with amendments thereto, will be kept on file for public use at the offices of
the Township Clerk. Copies will be made available for public distribution at a
charge at the office of the Township Clerk.
(Ord. 41, passed 10-1-2002; Ord. passed 8-5-2003)
§ 92.06 DEFINITIONS.
   Whenever used in this chapter or in the Fire Code adopted by reference, the
following words and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to them.
   ADMINISTRATOR. The Township Supervisor of Williamstown Township, Ingham
County, Michigan.
   BARBECUE. A grill, pit, chiminea, outdoor fireplace or similar metal or
masonry container, within which a fire is set under controlled conditions for
preparing food and/or generating warmth.
   BONFIRE.
      (1)   Any outdoor fire that is larger than a campfire.
      (2)   BONFIRES are often created for ceremonial purposes.
   CAMPFIRE. An outdoor fire which is created for pleasure, religious,
ceremonial, cooking, warmth or similar purposes; which burns materials other
than rubbish, grass and leaves; where the fuel being burned is not contained in
an incinerator, outdoor fireplace, barbecue grill or barbecue pit; and, where
the total fuel area is three feet or less in diameter and two feet or less in
height (height measured from ground level). CAMPFIRES are subject to the
requirements in §
92.20.
   CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS. Waste material generated during the construction or
demolition of a building or structure or during salvage operations.
   EXECUTIVE BODY. The Board of Trustees of Williamstown Township, Ingham
County, Michigan.
   FIRE CHIEF. The chief officer of the Northeast Ingham Emergency Service
Authority (NIESA) Fire Department, which is responsible for providing fire
protection services to Williamstown Township.
   HOUSEHOLD TRASH. As used in this chapter, HOUSEHOLD TRASH is combustible
waste material (such as waste paper, cardboard, rags, cartons and the like)
produced in or around a residence.
   OPEN BURNING. The burning of materials wherein products of combustion are
emitted directly into the ambient air without passing through a stack or
chimney from an enclosed chamber (for example, burning yard waste). For the
purposes of this definition, a "chamber" shall be regarded as enclosed when,
during the time combustion occurs, only apertures, ducts, stacks, flues or
chimneys necessary to provide combustion air and permit the escape of exhaust
gas are open.
   PERSON. An individual, trustee, executor, other fiduciary, corporation,
firm, partnership, association, organization or other legal entity acting as a
unit.
   RUBBISH. Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, including but not
limited to garbage, waste paper, residue from the burning of coal, wood, coke
or other combustible material, paper, rags, cartons, tin cans, metals, mineral
matter, glass crockery, dust, discarded refrigerators and heating, cooking or
incinerator-type appliances.
   SILVICULTURE. The care and cultivation of forest trees.
   STATE. The State of Michigan.
   SUBDIVISION. A development consisting of subdivided lots on which houses or
other structures may be constructed. As used in this chapter, SUBDIVISION
includes developments created under the Land Division Act (Public Act 288 of
1967, being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101—560.293, as amended) or the Condominium Act
(Public Act 59 of 1978, being M.C.L.A. §§ 559.101—559.272, as amended).
   TOWNSHIP. Williamstown Township, Ingham County, Michigan.
   ZONING ORDINANCE. The ordinance adopted by the Township Board of Trustees
pursuant to the Township Zoning Act, Public Act 184 of 1943, being M.C.L.A. §§
125.271—125.301, as amended, which divides all of the land in the Township into
Zoning Districts, and which contains regulations to guide development of land
in each District.
(Ord. 41, passed 10-1-2002; Ord. passed 8-5-2003)
§ 92.07 SEPARABILITY.
   Should any section, clause or provision of this chapter be declared by a
court to be invalid, such a declaration shall not affect the chapter as a whole
or part thereof, other than the part so declared to be invalid.
(Ord. 41, passed 10-1-2002; Ord. passed 8-5-2003)
§ 92.08 REPEAL.
   Township Ord. 27, the Township Fire Ordinance, is hereby repealed when this
chapter takes effect. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with
any of the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed only to the extent
necessary to give this chapter full force and effect.
(Ord. 41, passed 10-1-2002; Ord. passed 8-5-2003)
§ 92.09 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall take effect 30 days after publication subsequent to final
adoption.
(Ord. 41, passed 10-1-2002; Ord. passed 8-5-2003)
BURNING REGULATIONS
§ 92.20 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Table of regulations. No person shall, at any time, undertake or allow
to continue any open burning or other fire-related activity except in full
accordance with the regulations in the table following this section.
   (B)   Intent.
      (1)   Burning is generally most restricted in the parts of the township
where the greatest amount of residential development has occurred or is
expected to occur.
      (2)   In these areas burning is most apt to offend or affect the health
of residents or endanger residents and property.
   (C)   Petition to permit or ban burning in a subdivision. Residents of a
subdivision may seek to obtain a ban on types of burning that are otherwise
permitted in the subdivision by obtaining the signatures of residents of the
affected subdivision on a petition proposing such a ban. If burning is banned,
residents of a subdivision may seek to obtain permission to allow burning in
the subdivision by obtaining the signatures of residents of the affected
subdivision on a petition proposing to allow burning, provided that the desired
types of burning are permitted in the table following this section. Any such
petition should satisfy the following requirements.
      (1)   The petition should specify the types of burning covered by the
petition and should not propose a type of burning that is otherwise prohibited
throughout the township.
      (2)   The petition should specify the area of the township covered by the
petition. The area covered by a petition should be limited to the boundaries of
a single subdivision, except where a subdivision has been developed in phases,
all phases should be represented on a single petition. (For example,
Pebblebrook Estates, Pebblebrook No. 2, 3, 4 and 5, and Pebblebrook Place would
be represented on one petition.) Where lots created by land division are
enveloped on two or more sides by a subdivision, or where the lots adjoin and
are commonly considered part of a subdivision, then the lots should be included
and counted in the petition for the surrounding subdivision.
      (3)   The petition should be consistent with general policies of the
township regarding format and content of petitions.
      (4)   The petition should be submitted to the Township Board. The
petition shall be considered advisory and non-binding upon the Township Board.
Upon receipt of a petition, the Township Board shall proceed with any further
investigation it deems necessary to determine if the action sought would be
appropriate and reasonable. Action to change the burning status of an area
shall be by majority vote of the Township Board.
      (5)   Burning that is permitted by the Township Board pursuant to this
section shall comply with all applicable conditions specified in this chapter.
(Ord. 41, passed 10-1-2002; Ord. passed 8-5-2003)
Zoning District R-1 R-1-S RR RE AG-SF RM-1 AG-C MHP, OS-1, B-1, B-2, I-1 PD
                                                               MHP,
Zoning        R-1    R-1-S  RR     RE     AG-SF  RM-1   AG-C   OS-1,   PD
District                                                       B-1, B-
                                                               2, I-1
              X      X      X      OK     OK     X      OK     X       X
Leaf and                    Except
grass burning               as in
                            note 1
Burning yard  OK     OK     OK     OK     OK     X      OK     X       OK
debris other
than leaves
and grass     See    See    See                                        See note
(i.e., brush, note 4 note 4 note 4                                     4
limbs, dead
plant growth)
Burning
construction  X      X      X      X      X      X      X      X       X
waste
              OK     OK     OK     OK     OK     X      OK     X       OK
Campfires     See    See    See    See    See           See            See note
              note 2 note 2 note 2 note 2 note 2        note 2         2
Barbecues,    OK     OK     OK     OK     OK     OK     OK     OK      OK
fireplaces    See    See    See    See    See    See    See    See     See note
and similar   note 3 note 3 note 3 note 3 note 3 note 3 note 3 note 3  3
facilities
Burning       X      X      X      OK     OK     X      OK     X       X
household                   See    See    See           See
trash                       note 1 note 7 note 7        note 7
Controlled    X      X      X      OK     OK     X      OK     X       OK
burn for
silviculture,
range and
wildlife
management,
wildflower                                                             See note
propagation,                                                           5
burning
associated
with a bona
fide
agricultural
operation
Notes to Table
X = Activity Is Not Permitted in Zoning District
OK = Activity Is Permitted in Zoning District
1.    Burning on RR-zoned land is prohibited in subdivisions and condominium
developments and on lots created by land division that have common boundaries
and are commonly considered a part of an RR-zoned subdivision or condominium.
Burning is permitted on RR-zoned land outside of subdivisions and condominiums.
2.    The total fuel area of campfires shall not exceed three feet in diameter
and two feet in height (measured from ground level). Campfires shall be
contained within a six-inch depression in the ground and ringed with stones,
bricks, concrete or concrete block. All such fires shall be extinguished
completely no later than midnight. Per §
92.28, a permit is not required for a campfire. Campfires are prohibited the
entire year in Pebblebrook Estates, Pebblebrook No. 2, 3, 4 and 5, and
Pebblebrook Place. Excluding Pebblebrook, campfires are permitted in
subdivision and condominium common areas (no other burning is permitted in
common areas).
3.    The use of barbecues, outdoor fireplace grills and similar facilities to
burn wood, charcoal, or gas is permitted in all districts for the purposes of
preparing food and/or generating warmth; except, however, chimineas and open
metal containers are not permitted in Pebblebrook Estates, Pebblebrook No. 2,
3, 4 and 5, and Pebblebrook Place.
4.    Burning of yard debris (excluding leaves and grass) is allowed by permit
only as follows:
   a.    In the R-1, R-1-S and PD districts, and in the subdivisions and
condominium developments in the RR district, burning is permitted on the first
Saturday and Sunday and third Tuesday and Wednesday of each month; except,
burning of yard debris is prohibited in July and August. The maximum size of
burn piles shall be six feet in diameter and six feet in height.
(Ord. rev. 8-5-2003)
   b.    In the RE, AG-SF, AG-C and outside of subdivisions and condominiums in
the RR district: burning is permitted throughout the year. The maximum size of
burn piles shall be six feet in diameter and six feet in height.
(Ord. rev. 8-5-2003)
   c.    In Pebblebrook Estates, Pebblebrook No. 2, 3, 4 and 5, and Pebblebrook
Place: burning of yard debris is prohibited the entire year.
5.    Burning for wildflower propagation in common open space areas of a
Planned Development (PD) may be allowed by permit, where called for on the
approved PD plans or PD agreement.
6.    Incinerators for commercial or industrial use are permitted in the B-1,
B-2 and I-1 districts only, subject to the requirements in §
92.25.
7.    Burning household trash is not permitted on parcels less than five acres
in area.
 
§ 92.21 ANNUAL BURN PERMITS.
   (A)   Burn permit required. A burn permit shall be obtained from the
Williamstown Township Hall prior to kindling a fire for any of the following
purposes:
      (1)   Open burning, unless specifically excepted;
      (2)   Leaf or grass burning;
      (3)   Burning yard debris other than grass and leaves, such as brush,
limbs and dead plant growth;
      (4)   Silviculture, range, wildlife or wildflower management practices;
and
      (5)   Prevention or control of disease or pests.
   (B)   Permit not required. The burning exceptions listed in §
92.28 shall not require permits (exceptions in §
92.28 include: campfires, burning in a grill, on a camp stove, or in a
fireplace, stove or furnace; burning household trash in an approved container;
subject to the conditions in §
92.28 and restrictions in the table in §
92.20).
   (C)   Consent of landowner. The application for a burning permit shall be
submitted by or have the written consent of the owner of the land upon which
the fire is to be kindled.
   (D)   Permit application and contents. The permit application shall provide
the name, address, driver's license number and telephone number of the
applicant and property owner (if not the applicant), the location where the
fire is to be set, the material that is to be burned and the proposed date and
time of the fire. The permit shall be kept readily available at the site of the
burning for inspection by any fire or police official who visits the site.
   (E)   Application and renewal procedures.
      (1)   The initial application for a burn permit shall be submitted in
person at the Williamstown Township Hall. The burn permit shall remain valid
for up to four consecutive days. Following the initial period of validity, a
burn permit may be reactivated by the applicant by phone for additional periods
of up to four days by calling the office that issued the initial permit during
regular business hours. Reactivation of the burn permit shall be required each
time an applicant wishes to burn.
      (2)   If an applicant has been cited for a violation of this chapter, the
initial reactivation of the permit following the violation must be done in
person. However, a permit may not be reactivated, and an applicant may not
obtain a new permit, within six months after a violation (unless the Fire Chief
has recommended a longer waiting period). The length of the waiting period
related to a violation may be appealed to the Township Board.
      (3)   The imposition of a permit waiting period shall not affect or limit
the penalties that may be imposed pursuant to §
92.99.
   (F)   Permit conditions.
      (1)   When granting a permit, the Fire Chief or his or her designee may
establish conditions under which the burning may occur.
      (2)   For example, the permit may specify the specific materials that may
be burned and the date(s) and time(s) that the burning may occur.
(Ord. 41, passed 10-1-2002; Ord. passed 8-5-2003)
§ 92.22 CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH BURNING IS ALWAYS PROHIBITED.
   Regardless whether a burn permit has been issued or required, all types of
burning are prohibited under the following conditions.
   (A)   Restrictions due to local conditions. Burning is prohibited where, due
to atmospheric or wind conditions or other local circumstances, the fire may be
hazardous or may create offensive smoke or odor emissions.
   (B)   Flammable, toxic or explosive materials.
      (1)   Highly flammable, toxic or explosive materials shall not be burned
in any area of the township.
      (2)   The person engaged in the burning possesses the burden of proof
that the materials being burned do not violate these restrictions.
   (C)   Foul odors. No person, at any time, shall burn garbage, animal
carcasses, rubbish, trash, animal waste or any other materials that would give
off foul odors.
   (D)   Accelerants. Use of accelerants, such as gas or another petroleum
product, is prohibited.
   (E)   Bonfires. Bonfires are prohibited, unless specifically permitted by
the Fire Chief, where the Fire Department consents to monitor the bonfire the
entire time it is burning.
(Ord. 41, passed 10-1-2002; Ord. passed 8-5-2003) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.23 DAILY STARTING AND ENDING TIMES.
   (A)   Fires may not be started prior to sunrise. Campfires shall be
extinguished completely by midnight each night. All other fires shall be
extinguished by 9:00 p.m. each night.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the starting and ending times specified in this
section, burning shall always adhere to the time limits specified in any permit
that has been issued.
(Ord. 41, passed 10-1-2002; Ord. passed 8-5-2003)
§ 92.24 SEPARATION OF FIRES FROM BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Unless otherwise noted herein, burning that is permitted by the table
in §
92.20 shall comply with the following setbacks, unless a greater separation is
required by the Fire Chief or his or her designee to prevent a fire that may
become hazardous or may create offensive smoke or odor emissions:
      (1)   Campfires: minimum setback of 25 feet from any building, structure
or property line; and
      (2)   Leaf and grass burning, burning yard debris, controlled burn for
silviculture, range management and wildflower propagation: minimum setback of
25 feet from any building or structure, 50 feet from any property line.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the above setbacks, burning of any type shall be set
back a sufficient distance to prevent unintended spread of fire to nearby
trees, underbrush and other potentially flammable vegetation.
(Ord. 41, passed 10-1-2002; Ord. passed 8-5-2003)
§ 92.25 INCINERATORS FOR COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL FIRES.
   (A)   A commercial or industrial fire is any fire, located in or on premises
that are used for commercial or industrial purposes, where the fire is used to
burn only the combustible materials that are generated by the business on the
premises.
   (B)   Any burning on a commercial or industrial property shall be confined
within a fireproof incinerator that complies with the requirements of the
International Fire Code and Michigan Building Code, which shall be subject to
inspection by the Township Building Official.
(Ord. 41, passed 10-1-2002; Ord. passed 8-5-2003)
§ 92.26 INCINERATORS FOR DOMESTIC USE.
   A domestic fire is any fire around the home or on the site surrounding the
home. No person shall set or cause to be set, burn or cause to be burned, any
paper, trash, rubbish or other material on domestic premises, unless confined
within a fireproof container constructed of metal or masonry, no larger than 55
gallons in size, equipped with an effective means for arresting sparks, and
having openings no larger than three-quarters of an inch. The burners shall not
be located less than 25 feet from any building or property line. Pursuant to §
92.22, incinerator use shall not cause foul odors.
(Ord. 41, passed 10-1-2002; Ord. passed 8-5-2003)
§ 92.27 MONITORING THE FIRE.
   Open burning, campfires and other fires shall be constantly attended by the
permit applicant or by a competent person of not less than 18 years of age
designated by the permit applicant (unless a higher age is specified on the
permit), until the fire is extinguished. A minimum of one portable fire
extinguisher, complying with an A-4 rating, at minimum, or other approved on-
site fire-extinguishing equipment having sufficient capacity to extinguish the
fire, such as dirt, sand, water barrel, garden hose or water truck, shall be
available for immediate use.
(Ord. 41, passed 10-1-2002; Ord. passed 8-5-2003)
§ 92.28 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   The prohibitions against burning set forth herein, and the requirement
for obtaining a permit pursuant to §
92.21, shall not apply to the following:
      (1)   The burning of wood, charcoal or other approved fuel, in a
conventional grill or camp stove for the preparation of food;
      (2)   The burning of wood, coal or gas in a fireplace, stove or furnace
which is constructed and/or installed in a building or structure in compliance
with all applicable manufacturer's instructions and all federal, state and
local ordinances, laws and regulations;
      (3)   The burning of campfires, provided any such fire complies with the
requirements in Note 2 of the table in §
92.20;
      (4)   The burning of household trash as specified in §
92.26; and/or
      (5)   Use of road flares or smudgepots and similar devices having open
flames that are used for public safety or agriculture.
   (B)   Although a permit is not required, residents anticipating a campfire
are encouraged to notify the NIESA Fire Department of the date and time of such
burning.
(Ord. 41, passed 10-1-2002; Ord. passed 8-5-2003) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.29 DISPOSAL OF ASH AND BURNING ON A ROAD.
   No ash or waste from burning shall be deposited within 15 feet of the
shoulder of any public road or highway in the township. No burning shall occur
within the right-of-way of a road or highway.
(Ord. 41, passed 10-1-2002; Ord. passed 8-5-2003) Penalty, see §
92.99
FIREWORKS
§ 92.40 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and cited as the “Fireworks Ordinance of
Williamstown Township”.
(Ord. passed 6-14-2017)
§ 92.41 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this subchapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   ACT 256. The Michigan Fireworks Safety Act, Public Act 256 of 2011, M.C.L.A.
§§ 28.451 et seq., as amended.
   APA. The American Pyrotechnics Association of Bethesda, Maryland.
   APA STANDARD 87-1. The 2001 APA Standard 87-1, Standard for Construction and
Approval for Transportation of Fireworks, Novelties, and Theatrical
Pyrotechnics, published by the American Pyrotechnics Association.
   ARTICLES PYROTECHNIC. Pyrotechnic devices for professional use that are
similar to consumer fireworks in chemical composition and construction, but not
intended for consumer use, that meet the weight limit for consumer fireworks,
but are not labeled as such, and that are classified as UN0431 or UN0432 under
49 C.F.R. 172.101.
   CONSUMER FIREWORKS. Fireworks devices that are designed to produce visible
or audible effects by combustion, that are required to comply with the
construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations promulgated by the
United States Consumer Products Safety Commission under 16 C.F.R. parts 1500 to
1507, and that are listed in APA Standard 87-1, 3.1.2, 3.1.3, or 3.5. CONSUMER
FIREWORKS include, for example, aerials, Roman candles, bottle rockets,
firecrackers, helicopter/aerial spinners, reloadable shell devices, missile-
type devices, single tube devised with report, and other items that leave the
ground. CONSUMER FIREWORKS are also called 1.4G or CLASS C fireworks. By law,
they may not contain more than 50 mg of explosive material.
   DISPLAY FIREWORKS. Large fireworks devices that are explosive materials
intended for use in fireworks displays and designed to produce visible and
audible effects by combustion, deflagration or detonation, as provided in 27
C.F.R. 555.11, 49 C.F.R. 172, and APA standard 87-1, 4.1. DISPLAY FIREWORKS
require a permit from the township, as well as from the federal Bureau of
Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF).
   FIREWORKS. Any composition or device, except for a starting pistol, a flare
gun or a flare, designed for the purpose of producing a visible or audible
effect by combustion, deflagration or detonation.
   LOW-IMPACT FIREWORKS. Ground and handheld sparkling devices, as that phrase
is defined in APA Standard 87-1, 3.1, 3.1.1.1, to 3.1.1.8, and 3.5.
   NATIONAL HOLIDAY. The following legal public holidays:
      (1)   New Year’s Day, January 1;
      (2)   Birthday of Martin Luther King, Jr., the third Monday of January;
      (3)   Washington’s Birthday, the third Monday in February;
      (4)   Memorial Day, the last Monday in May;
      (5)   Independence Day, July 4;
      (6)   Labor Day, the first Monday in September;
      (7)   Columbus Day, the second Monday in October;
      (8)   Veterans Day, November 11;
      (9)   Thanksgiving Day, the fourth Thursday in November;
      (10)   Christmas Day, December 25;
      (11)   Any other holiday specified in 5 U.S.C. 6103, as amended.
   NFPA. The National Fire Protection Association.
   SKY LANTERN. A balloon-type device that is uncontrollable after launch and
uses combustible or flammable material to provide heat for lift or buoyancy
into the atmosphere, and which is not a consumer firework.
   SPECIAL EFFECTS. A combination of chemical elements or chemical compounds
capable of burning independently of the oxygen of the atmosphere, and designed
and intended to produce an audible, visual, mechanical or thermal effect as an
integral part of a motion picture, radio, television, theatrical or opera
production, or live entertainment.
(Ord. passed 6-14-2017)
§ 92.42 CONSUMER FIREWORKS REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Low-impact fireworks. Low-impact fireworks are not regulated by this
subchapter, except as noted in §
92.42(E).
   (B)   Consumer fireworks.
      (1)   A person may ignite, discharge or use consumer fireworks, on the
day preceding, the day of, or the day after a national holiday, except between
the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m.
      (2)   On days other than the day preceding, the day of, or the day after
a national holiday, a person may ignite, discharge or use consumer fireworks at
the following times:
      (a)   Sunday - Thursday: 11:00 a.m. - 9:00 p.m.;
      (b)   Friday and Saturday: 11:00 a.m. - 12:00 midnight.
   (C)   Sky lanterns. A person shall not ignite, discharge or use a sky
lantern or Chinese lantern anywhere in the township.
   (D)   Permission to use property. A person shall not ignite, discharge or
use consumer fireworks on public property, school property, church property or
the property of another person, without that organization’s or person’s express
permission to use those fireworks on those premises. Fireworks discharge and
display shall be confined to the site on which the user has permission to use
the fireworks.
   (E)   Under the influence. An individual shall not ignite, discharge or use
consumer fireworks or low-impact fireworks while under the influence of
alcoholic liquor, a controlled substance, or a combination of alcoholic liquor
and a controlled substance, to the degree that mental and motor skills are
impaired. With respect to alcohol, UNDER THE INFLUENCE shall be based on breath
or blood alcohol concentration of 0.08% or greater.
   (F)   Burn ban. A person shall not ignite, discharge or use consumer
fireworks when a burn ban is in effect for the township.
(Ord. passed 6-14-2017) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.43 ARTICLES PYROTECHNIC, DISPLAY FIREWORKS, AND SPECIAL EFFECTS
REGULATIONS.
   (A)   General. The Township Board may permit articles pyrotechnic, display
fireworks or special effects fireworks, pursuant to Michigan Public Act 256 of
2011, M.C.L.A. §§ 28.451 et seq., as amended.
   (B)   Application. Any person wishing to conduct an articles pyrotechnic,
display fireworks or special effects fireworks display shall, at least 45 days
prior to the display, submit an application on a form furnished by the
township, pay the required fee, and obtain permission from the Township Board.
   (C)   Site plan. A site plan of the area where the articles pyrotechnic,
display fireworks, and special effects fireworks display is to be conducted
shall be submitted with the application. The site plan shall show all
structures in the vicinity and in the discharge site fallout area. The site
plan shall also show the distance separating the fireworks from spectator
viewing areas. The site plan shall be forwarded to the Fire Chief, or his or
her designated alternate, for review and approval, including any recommended
conditions, prior to coming before the Township Board for review.
   (D)   State and federal permits. Copies of required state and federal
permits shall be submitted with the application.
   (E)   Insurance. Proof of insurance conforming with the requirements of this
subchapter and Public Act 256 shall be submitted with the application.
   (F)   Competency of the display operator. Sufficient information shall be
submitted to demonstrate to the Township Board that the display operator is
competent and qualified, pursuant to NFPA 1123.
   (G)   Approval criteria. The Township Board shall approve an application for
articles pyrotechnic, display fireworks and special effects fireworks display,
if it finds that all of the following criteria are satisfied:
      (1)   The application and accompanying documentation are complete and
conform to the requirements of this subchapter;
      (2)   The display operator is competent and qualified to conduct the
fireworks display, per NFPA 1123;
      (3)   The Fire Chief, or his or her designated alternate, has approved
the application and site plan;
      (4)   The fireworks display will not have an adverse impact upon public
safety;
      (5)   A person shall not ignite, discharge or use articles pyrotechnic,
display fireworks and special effects fireworks on public property, school
property, church property or the property of another person without that
organization’s or person's express permission to use the fireworks on a form
provided by the township.
   (H)   Conditions of approval. The Township Board, in approving an
application hereunder, shall have the authority and sole discretion to impose
such reasonable conditions as it determines are necessary to assure that the
fireworks display will satisfy the above approval criteria.
   (I)   Requirements and restrictions.
      (1)   The person conducting the fireworks display shall follow NFPA 1123
for fireworks display and/or the township requirements set forth herein,
whichever are more restrictive.
      (2)   Pursuant to NFPA 1123, minimum separation distances from mortars to
spectators shall be maintained, as noted in the following chart, unless a
higher standard is promulgated by the NFPA:
Distances for Outdoor Aerial Shell Display Sites: Minimum Separation Distances
from Mortars to Spectators for Land or Water Displays
Mortar Size Minimum Secured  Vertical Mortars Angled Mortars Special Hazards
            Diameter of Site                  Offset
Mortar Size Minimum Secured  Vertical Mortars Angled Mortars Special Hazards
            Diameter of Site                  Offset
Inches      Feet             Feet             Feet           Feet
<1          150              75               75             150
1.5         210              105              75             210
2           280              140              95             280
2.5         350              175              115            350
3           420              210              140            420
4           560              280              190            560
5           700              350              230            700
6           840              420              280            840
7           980              490              320            980
8           1,120            560              370            1,120
10          1,400            700              460            1,400
12          1,680            840              560            1,680
 
      (3)    The applicant shall maintain personal injury liability insurance/
property damage liability insurance in the amount of $1,000,000 for each event.
The township shall be named as an additional insured on the insurance policy.
      (4)   The Township Board shall not issue a permit to a nonresident
person, firm or corporation for ignition of articles pyrotechnic or display
fireworks until the person, firm or corporation has appointed in writing a
resident member of the bar of this state or a resident agent to be the legal
representative, upon whom all process in an action or proceeding against the
person, firm or corporation may be served.
      (5)   The applicant shall be responsible for all shells being fired. In
the event one or more of the shells does not explode, the applicant shall
secure the area until the unexploded shell(s) is found and properly disposed
of.
      (6)   The consumption of alcohol immediately prior to and during the
fireworks display by any person involved in conducting the display is
prohibited. An individual shall not ignite, discharge or use fireworks while
under the influence of alcoholic liquor, a controlled substance, or a
combination of alcoholic liquor and a controlled substance.
      (7)   A fireworks display conducted hereunder shall conform to all
specifications set forth in the approved application and site plan, as well as
any conditions imposed by the Township Board in granting such approval.
      (8)   The applicant shall cause the site of the fireworks display to be
cleaned up within 24 hours after the fireworks display has ended.
      (9)   A permit is not transferable and shall not be granted to a minor.
(Ord. passed 6-14-2017) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.44 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Enforcing officials. This subchapter may be enforced by the NEISA Fire
Chief, Fire Marshal, fire inspectors, law enforcement officers, and code
enforcement officials.
   (B)   Seizure. If an enforcing official has determined that a violation of
this subchapter has occurred, the official may seize the fireworks as evidence
of that violation.
(Ord. passed 6-14-2017)
 § 92.45 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall become effective immediately upon its passage,
publication and recording by the Township Clerk.
(Ord. passed 6-14-2017)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   General.  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this
chapter, or who fails to comply with any of its terms, or who violates or fails
to comply with any order made thereunder, or who fails to comply with any
permit or certificate issued thereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor or
municipal civil infraction, as determined within the township's discretion.
Upon notice of a violation, the appropriate township employee shall investigate
any violation and then make a determination as to whether the penalty shall be
imposed. The imposition of a penalty for a violation shall not excuse the
violation or be considered a permit to allow the violation to continue. Each
day that a prohibited condition is maintained shall constitute a separate
offense. The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the
enforced removal of prohibited condition(s) or the obtaining of injunctive or
other civil relief. Any person who is convicted of a misdemeanor under this
section shall be subject to punishment by a fine of not more than $500, or
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both. If instead a municipal civil
infraction is imposed, the penalty shall be a fine not to exceed $100. The
Township Supervisor, or his or her designated agent, is hereby authorized to
write and serve municipal civil infraction tickets. This municipal civil
infraction ticket shall serve as notice of the alleged violation. Proceedings
for the municipal civil infraction shall proceed as provided in the Township
Municipal Civil Infractions Ordinance.
   (B)   Additional remedies. Any violation of this chapter shall constitute a
nuisance per se, and the Township Board of Trustees, its agents or attorneys,
may take action in any court of competent jurisdiction to cause the abatement
of such nuisance, and may seek redress for any expenses incurred by the
township in extinguishing a fire resulting from violation of this chapter.
These remedies are in addition to those set forth in division (A) above.
   (C)   Violations of fireworks regulations.
      (1)   A violation of the regulations in §
92.43 dealing with display fireworks shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person
who is convicted of a misdemeanor under this section shall be subject to
punishment by a fine not exceeding $500, or by imprisonment not exceeding 90
days for each offense, or both, at the discretion of the court. Each day a
violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense.
      (2)   A violation of the regulations in §
92.42 dealing with consumer fireworks shall constitute a municipal civil
infraction, whereupon the penalty shall be a fine not to exceed $500. Upon
notice of a violation, the appropriate township employee shall investigate any
violation and then make a determination as to whether the penalty shall be
imposed. The Township Supervisor, or his or her designated agent, is hereby
authorized to write and serve municipal civil infraction tickets. This
municipal civil infraction ticket shall serve as notice of the alleged
violation. Proceedings for the municipal civil infraction shall proceed as
provided in the Township Municipal Civil Infractions Ordinance. The imposition
of a municipal civil infraction fine for any violation shall not excuse the
violation or permit it to continue. Further violations subject the applicant,
or person or persons, agent, firm or corporation to subsequent municipal civil
infraction violations.
      (3)   The imposition of any sentence shall not exempt the offense from
compliance with the requirements of §§
92.40 et seq.
(Ord. 41, passed 10-1-2002; Ord. passed 8-5-2003; Ord. 58, passed 8-13-2014;
Ord. passed 6-14-2017)
CHAPTER 93: SIDEWALKS
Section
   
93.01   Title
   
93.02   Purpose and scope of application
   
93.03   Definitions
   
93.04   Standards
   
93.05   Enforcement
   
93.06   Severability
   
93.07   Conflicting provisions repealed
   
93.08   Effective date
 
   
93.99   Penalty
§ 93.01 TITLE.
   (A)   This chapter is hereby designated as and shall be referred to as the
"Williamstown Township Sidewalk Ordinance".
   (B)   Within the following text, it may be referred to as "this chapter".
(Ord. passed 2-3-1998)
§ 93.02 PURPOSE AND SCOPE OF APPLICATION.
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   The purposes of this chapter are to protect and promote public
health, safety and welfare by specifying standards for design, maintenance and
use of sidewalks located in public road rights-of-way; establishing
requirements for obtaining permits to construct sidewalks; designating
sidewalks maintenance responsibilities; and, establishing enforcement
procedures and penalties for violation of this chapter.
      (2)   These regulations are the minimum standards deemed necessary to
provide suitable and safe off-road accommodations for pedestrians.
   (B)   Scope of application. The requirements in this chapter shall apply to
sidewalks constructed within a public right-of-way.
(Ord. passed 2-3-1998)
§ 93.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL. The officer or other authority designated by the Township
Board to administer and enforce the Building Code.
   RUMBLE STRIPS. Ripples in pavement that are purposely installed to signal
visually-impaired pedestrians where a sidewalk intersects a road.
   SIDEWALK. A paved path, located in a road right-of-way, but away from the
actual road surface, and designed, constructed and designated for pedestrian
travel.
   TOWNSHIP. The Township of Williamstown, Ingham County, Michigan.
   TOWNSHIP BOARD. The Supervisor, Clerk, Treasurer and Trustees of the
Township of Williamstown, Ingham County, Michigan.
(Ord. passed 2-3-1998)
§ 93.04 STANDARDS.
   (A)   Use of sidewalks.
      (1)   Pedestrian use. Sidewalks, as defined herein, are for pedestrian
use and are not intended for use by motorized vehicles, such as, but not
limited to, motorcycles, mopeds or off-road utility vehicles.
      (2)   Unlawful damage. It shall be unlawful to damage or deface a
sidewalk by any means.
   (B)   Construction standards. Sidewalks shall comply with the standards set
forth herein and any supplemental engineering standards that may be adopted by
the Township Board, and with Ingham County Road Commission (ICRC) standards (at
the time of adoption of this chapter ICRC enforces Michigan Department of
Transportation (MDOT) sidewalk specifications on roads under the Road
Commission's jurisdiction). In the event of a conflict between standards, ICRC
standards shall prevail if the sidewalk is located in a public road right-of-
way.
      (1)   Minimum width. Five feet;
      (2)   Location.
         (a)   Sidewalks shall be located one foot off the property line in the
road right-of-way, except where the planned right-of-way is greater than the
width of the existing right-of-way; in which case, the sidewalk shall be
located one foot inside the planned right-of-way.
         (b)   Sidewalks shall be aligned horizontally and vertically with
existing sidewalks on adjacent properties.
         (c)   The Planning Commission may modify these location requirements
upon finding that another location would be more appropriate because of the
location of utilities, existing landscaping or trees, the location of
connecting sidewalks on adjacent parcels or other site considerations.
      (3)   Paving. Sidewalks shall be concrete with a depth of at least four
inches, except that sidewalks across a driveway or other vehicle crossing shall
be reinforced and have a depth of at least six inches. Other types of paving
other than concrete may be permitted, subject to Planning Commission approval.
Paving shall be placed on appropriate compacted fill to provide a proper base
and to prevent the pavement from uneven settling, heaving and/or cracking;
      (4)   Barrier-free design. Sidewalks shall comply with all state and
federal barrier-free requirements. Accordingly, ramps shall be provided at
curbs and other locations involving a grade change;
      (5)   Grading and drainage. Proposed sidewalks shall be designed to
maintain the existing direction and flow of storm water and to avoid damming or
flooding; and
      (6)   Rumble strips. Rumble strips shall be installed wherever a sidewalk
approaches an intersection with a road.
   (C)   Maintenance standards.
      (1)   Maintenance responsibility.
         (a)   It shall be the duty of the property owner to maintain public
sidewalks on or adjoining the property in accordance with this division (C).
Failure to comply with any provision in this division (C) shall be considered a
breach of this duty. Any damages resulting from such a breach shall be the sole
responsibility of the property owner.
         (b)   A legally established homeowners' association or condominium
association may assume the responsibility for maintenance of public sidewalks
within a subdivision or condominium under its jurisdiction. The terms under
which such an association assumes the responsibility, including the method of
funding sidewalk maintenance, shall be specified in the recorded subdivision
covenants, conditions and restrictions or condominium association master deed
and bylaws, as applicable.
      (2)   Repairs or restoration. A sidewalk that becomes cracked or damaged
to the extent that the sidewalk becomes potentially unsafe for use shall be
repaired or restored in compliance with the construction standards specified
herein.
      (3)   Obstructions. Sidewalks shall be kept free of all obstructions,
including, but not necessarily limited to, obstructions from structures,
vehicles, equipment, debris and vegetation. This restriction shall not apply to
temporary obstructions due to maintenance or construction work on or adjacent
to the sidewalk, in which case appropriate barriers and signage shall be
erected to maintain public safety.
      (4)   Snow and ice removal. Sidewalks shall be kept free and clear of ice
and snow. Snow shall not be piled in a manner that might obstruct the vision of
drivers or that blocks or impairs travel on a sidewalk or road.
(Ord. passed 2-3-1998)
§ 93.05 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Duties of the Building Official. The Building Official shall have
primary authority to enforce this chapter, as outlined in this section.
      (1)   Permits.
         (a)   A permit is required by the township prior to the construction,
removal or repair of a sidewalk. A permit may be obtained by submitting a
completed application form, along with plans and specifications, and the
required fee, to the Township Building Department. The Building Official shall
be responsible for evaluating the application to determine compliance with
chapter standards (and to determine compliance with the approved site plan,
where applicable) and issuing the permit. A separate permit shall not be
required if the proposed sidewalk is part of a larger development that requires
a building permit. A copy of the permit shall be kept at hand at the
construction site.
         (b)   The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining any permits
required by the Ingham County Road Commission related to sidewalk construction
within a county road right-of-way.
      (2)   Inspection. During construction, the Building Official shall be
responsible for inspection. In fulfilling this responsibility, the Building
Official shall follow the inspection guidelines set forth in the adopted
building code.
      (3)   Violations. The Building Official shall be responsible for
investigating violations of this chapter. Whenever the Building Official
determines that a violation exists, the Building Official shall pursue
compliance following the enforcement procedures set forth in the adopted
building code. If the owner of property, where a sidewalk has fallen into a
state of disrepair such that it is unsafe for use, fails to complete repairs
within 30 days after notification, then the township may cause necessary
repairs and charge the property owner for the costs of repair. If the costs are
not paid by the property owner, the costs shall become a lien against the
property.
      (4)   Performance guarantee. The Building Official may require that a
performance guarantee be deposited with the township to insure proper
completion of required sidewalk construction. The performance guarantee shall
satisfy the performance guarantee requirements specified in
Chapter 156 of this code.
   (B)   Site plan review. If a proposed sidewalk is part of larger development
that requires site plan review, then the sidewalk shall be shown on the site
plan, which plan shall be reviewed in accordance with the site plan review
procedures set forth in
Chapter 156 of this code.
   (C)   Authority of the Township Board to require sidewalk construction or
maintenance. In accordance with Michigan Public Act 246 of 1931, being M.C.L.A.
§§ 41.271 - 41.290, as amended, the Township Board may order the construction,
repair, or maintenance of, or may construct, repair, or maintain sidewalks in a
designated area within the township because of the health, safety or welfare of
the residents. The Township Board shall hold a public meeting relative to the
ordering of the sidewalk construction, repair or maintenance and shall notify
property owners involved of the time and place of the hearing. If the Township
Board determines that the construction, repair or maintenance of sidewalks is
necessary, it may construct, repair or maintain the sidewalks and assess the
costs to the property involved, payable over a five-year period, or permit the
owners of the property involved to have the sidewalks constructed, repaired or
maintained according to township specifications at their own expenses.
(Ord. passed 2-3-1998)
§ 93.06 SEVERABILITY.
   Should any portion of this chapter be found invalid for any reason, such a
finding shall not be construed as affecting the validity of the remaining
portions of this chapter, which shall remain in full force and effect.
(Ord. passed 2-3-1998)
§ 93.07 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS REPEALED.
   All other ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this chapter
are hereby repealed to the extent necessary to give this chapter full force and
effect.
(Ord. passed 2-3-1998)
§ 93.08 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter was adopted by the Township Board of the Township of
Williamstown, Ingham County, Michigan, on the third day of February, 1998, and
shall take effect on the           day of                               , 1998,
30 days following publication in a newspaper of general circulation within
Williamstown Township, in accordance with Michigan statutes.
(Ord. passed 2-3-1998)
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is responsible for a
municipal civil infraction, and shall be liable for a fine of not more than
$100 and the costs of prosecution for the first violation. Upon a finding of
responsibility for a subsequent violation, such person shall be liable for a
fine of not more than $500 and the costs of prosecution. In addition, the
Township may exercise those rights identified in §
93.05(C) or seek such injunctive or other relief as may be appropriate to abate
a continuing violation, the township's costs thereof to be borne by the
responsible party. The Township Supervisor or his/her designated agent is
hereby authorized to write and serve municipal civil infraction tickets. This
municipal civil infraction ticket shall serve as notice of the alleged
violation. Proceedings for the municipal civil infraction shall proceed as
provided in the Township Municipal Civil Infractions Ordinance.
(Ord. passed 2-3-1998; Ord. 58, passed 8-13-2014)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
      Chapter
         
110.   CABLE TELEVISION
         111.   RECREATIONAL MARIHUANA ESTABLISHMENTS
CHAPTER 110: CABLE TELEVISION
Section
   
110.01   Short title
   
110.02   Declaration of purpose
   
110.03   Definitions
   
110.04   Franchise required
   
110.05   Franchise; application; contents; fees; issuance; transfer
   
110.06   Franchise; nonexclusive; term; form
   
110.07   Franchise; fees; reporting; records
   
110.08   Construction of facilities; right to use streets; restrictions;
disposal; duties
   
110.09   Standard service
   
110.10   Rates; distribution; filing schedules; maximum rates; increase in
rates, procedures
   
110.11   Service provision to township, schools; public emergencies
   
110.12   Indemnity; proof of insurance; effective date of franchise
   
110.13   Termination; revocation or surrender of franchise
   
110.14   Commencement and completion of construction
   
110.15   Hearing and determination of complaints; procedure; local office
   
110.16   Priority of use
   
110.17   Surrender of other franchises
   
110.18   Reports
   
110.19   Rights of township
   
110.20   Cable Communications Commission
   
110.21   Miscellaneous provisions
   
110.22   Effective date
 
   
110.99   Penalty
§ 110.01 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the "Township of Williamstown Cable
Communications Ordinance" and may be cited as such and will be referred to
herein as "this Cable Communication Ordinance".
(Ord. 23, eff. 3-20-1981; Ord. rev. 9- -1993)
§ 110.02 DECLARATION OF PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide fair regulation of cable
communications service in the Township of Williamstown in the interest of the
public; to promote and encourage adequate, economical and efficient cable
communications service to the residents of the Township of Williamstown; to
promote and to encourage harmony between cable communications companies and
their subscribers and to provide for the furnishing of cable communications
service to the residents of the Township of Williamstown without unjust
discrimination, undue preferences or advantages.
(Ord. 23, eff. 3-20-1981; Ord. rev. 9- -1993)
§ 110.03 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, when used in this chapter, shall have the following
meanings, unless otherwise clearly apparent from the context.
   BOARD. The Township Board of the Township of Williamstown, or its designee.
   CABLE COMMUNICATIONS COMPANY. Any person who owns, controls, operates or
manages a cable communications system for the purpose of providing cable
communications service to members of the public located in the Township of
Williamstown; except that the definition shall not include:
      (1)   A telephone, telegraph or electric utility in a case where it
merely leases or rents to a cable communications company utility pole contact
space for the placing thereon of wire or cable facilities used in the
distribution of television or other signals to the subscribers of such cable
communications company; or
      (2)   A telephone or telegraph utility regulated by the Michigan Public
Service Commission or Federal Communications Commission in a case where it
merely provides communication channel service under published tariffs to a
cable communications company for the distribution of television signals to the
subscribers of the company.
   CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. The business, in whole or in part, of
receiving directly or indirectly over the air and amplifying or otherwise
modifying signals transmitting programs broadcast by one or more signals, sound
signals, pictures, visual images, digital signals, telemetry or any other type
of closed circuit transmission by means of electrical or light impulses,
whether or not directed to originating signals or receiving signals off the
air, and redistributing the signals by wire, cable or other means to members of
the public located in the Township of Williamstown who pay for the service.
   CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM, CABLE SYSTEM, CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM, CATV or
SYSTEM. A system of coaxial cables or other conductors, antennas, transmitters,
fixtures, converters, distribution network, studios and other equipment used or
to be used to originate or receive television or radio signals directly or
indirectly off the air and to transmit them via cable to subscribers for a
fixed or variable fee, including the origination, receipt, transmission and
distribution of voices, sound signals, pictures, visual images, digital
signals, telemetry or any other type of closed circuit transmission by means of
electrical or light impulses, whether or not directed to originating signals or
receiving signals of the air. Provided, however, the definition shall not
include any separate system which serves only the residents of a single
apartment building under common ownership, control or management, upon approval
of the Township Engineer of the Township of Williamstown.
   PERSON. One or more individuals, firms, corporations, associations,
partnerships or organizations of any kind and any combination thereof.
(Ord. 23, eff. 3-20-1981; Ord. rev. 9- -1993)
§ 110.04 FRANCHISE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Constructing, operating system; acquiring cable communications
company. No person shall construct, install, maintain or operate a cable
communications system in the Township of Williamstown, nor shall any person
provide a cable communications service or acquire ownership or control of the
cable communications company in the Township of Williamstown without the person
having first obtained a franchise therefor from the Township of Williamstown in
the form of a franchise agreement between the Township of Williamstown and the
franchisee, which franchise agreement shall include, at a minimum, compliance
with the specifications of this chapter.
   (B)   Use of streets and the like for installing, operating system. No
person shall use, occupy or traverse the city streets, alleys, lanes, avenues,
boulevards, sidewalks, bridges, viaducts, rights-of-way or any other public
place or public way in the Township of Williamstown or any extensions thereof
or additions thereto, whether on, above or under the surface of the ground, for
the purposes of installing, constructing, maintaining or operating a cable
communications system or facilities therefor or for the purpose of furnishing a
cable communications service, without the person having first obtained a
franchise therefor from the Township of Williamstown in the form of a franchise
agreement between the Township of Williamstown and the franchisee, which
franchise agreement shall include, at a minimum, compliance with all the
specifications of this chapter.
   (C)   Minimum, additional requirements. The specifications required by this
chapter are minimum requirements of a franchise agreement. Additional
requirements including, but not limited to, rates, charges, deposits,
specifications regarding required interconnections, studios or other signal
origination facilities, number of channels to be equipped and available for
immediate use upon initial construction of the system, use of channels by the
township, schools and other educational institutions, quality of community
access, availability of equipment to users, required establishment and
expansion of service area, other use of channels and other specifications or
requirements of a cable communications franchisee or system may be established
in the franchise agreement.
(Ord. 23, eff. 3-20-1981; Ord. rev. 9- -1993)
§ 110.05 FRANCHISE; APPLICATION; CONTENTS; FEES; ISSUANCE; TRANSFER.
   (A)   Application information, fee. The application for the franchise to
install, construct, maintain or operate a cable communications system in the
Township of Williamstown or to furnish a cable communications service therein
shall be made in writing to the Board in such form as may be prescribed; shall
include a description and map of the territory within the Township of
Williamstown in which the cable communications system is to be installed,
constructed maintained or operated or cable communications service to be
provided; shall be accompanied by a showing of the applicant's legal,
financial, technical and other qualifications to be a franchisee, hereunder;
and shall contain:
      (1)   In establishing legal qualifications, if other than a single
individual, a certified copy of the partnership agreement, articles of
association, or articles of incorporation, as the case may be, and also, if a
foreign corporation, a certified copy of its authorization to do business in
the State of Michigan;
      (2)   In establishing financial qualifications, a copy of applicant's
current balance sheet as of a date not more than 60 days prior to the date of
the application shall be furnished; if a loan or other credit arrangement is to
be consummated to finance the establishment and operation of the proposed
facilities, full particulars relative thereto shall be disclosed, including the
identity of the creditor;
      (3)   In establishing technical qualifications, a statement of the
arrangements to ensure the rendition of good service, including the type and
kind of facilities to be employed, the technical standards to be followed, the
maintenance and repair facilities to be used, the number and description of
technical personnel, including copies of any contracts, agreements or
arrangements relating to any of the above;
      (4)   A statement as to the location of the antenna site or sites and the
location of any places of business in the Township of Williamstown;
      (5)   A statement as to any affiliated corporations or business
organizations engaged in providing cable communications service, or
interlocking directorships or ownerships held by any owners, officers or
directors of applicant with any other business engaged in providing cable
communications service;
      (6)   A detailed statement as to the arrangements and timetable by which
the applicant proposes to construct its cable communications facilities and
system, including detailed descriptions of portions of the township to be
served by the system within one year, 18 months, two years, 30 months and three
years of the granting of a certificate of compliance by the Federal
Communications Commission;
      (7)   The applicant shall furnish information as to the programming
services and public services which it shall propose to provide:
         (a)   The off-air signals to be carried initially;
         (b)   The number of channels offered and the potential for diversified
services to local government, educational institutions, community groups,
householders and local commercial interests; and
         (c)   Projected development of customer and community services,
indicating priorities in development, and estimated time schedules therefor.
      (8)   Cost estimates of development, installation and maintenance of
system which items shall be deemed to include, but not be limited to, the
proposed cost of acquisition of the system where approval of a transfer of the
franchise has been requested;
      (9)   Revenue forecasts for the next five years of service;
      (10)   A proposed schedule of rates for installation charges, monthly
service fees and relocation charges; and
      (11)   Such other information as the township may request. The
application shall be accompanied by a fee of $1,000, which fee shall be
refunded if applicant is not granted a franchise.
   (B)   Additional information. Upon the filing of such an application and the
payment of the fee as prescribed, the Board shall consider the application and
may request such additional information as it may deem necessary to establish
the legal, financial, technical and other qualifications of the applicant to
provide a cable communications service in the Township of Williamstown.
   (C)   Issuing franchise. If the Board determines that the applicant
possesses the necessary qualifications, legal, financial, technical and
otherwise, to reasonably assure the applicant's ability to satisfactorily
install, construct or maintain or operate a cable communications system or to
furnish a cable communications service to the public in the Township of
Williamstown, the Board may issue applicant a nonexclusive franchise therefor
in the Township of Williamstown, provided that, no franchise shall be issued:
      (1)   Until the franchise application has been on file and available for
public inspection in the office of the Township Clerk for at least 30 days;
and/or
      (2)   Until the Board has, thereafter, held a public hearing on the
application after due notice of the time and place of the hearing has been
given to the public.
   (D)   Considerations of Board. In determining whether such a franchise shall
be issued, the Board shall take into consideration, among other things, the
technical qualifications of the applicant; the financial responsibility of the
applicant; the ability of the applicant to perform efficiently the service for
which the franchise is requested, including the prior experience, if any, of
the applicant in providing cable communications systems or furnishing cable
communications service; the proposed rate schedule; the nature and scope of the
applicant's proposed system; and the timetables for development of applicant's
proposed system.
   (E)   Transfer of franchise.
      (1)   No franchise granted hereunder may be sold, transferred or assigned
unless the transaction is first approved by the Board after receipt of a
written application therefor containing the same information as to transferee
as would be required of an original applicant. Prior approval of the Board
shall be required where ownership or control of more than 25% of the right of
control of franchisee is acquired by a person or group of persons acting in
concert, none of whom already own or control 25% or more of the right of
control, singularly or collectively. No franchise granted hereunder may be
sold, transferred or assigned; nor may more than 25% of the right of control of
franchise be transferred to a person or group of persons acting in concert,
none of whom already own or control 25% or more of the right of control,
singularly or collectively, until the sale, transfer or assignment of franchise
or transfer of right of control shall first have been offered to the township
or to a person approved by the Township Board.
      (2)   The offer shall be made at a price not greater than, and on terms
equivalent to, that made to the offeror by a bona fide bidder for such
franchise or right of control. The township or the person approved by the
Township Board shall accept or reject the offer within 90 days. This provision
shall not be deemed to restrict the transfer by bequest or descent of stock of
the franchisee.
(Ord. 23, eff. 3-20-1981; Ord. rev. 9- -1993)
§ 110.06 FRANCHISE; NONEXCLUSIVE; TERM; FORM.
   Any franchise issued pursuant to this chapter shall be a nonexclusive
franchise for a term of years, not to exceed 15 years, as the Board may approve
and shall be issued in such form as shall be determined by the Board.
(Ord. 23, eff. 3-20-1981)
§ 110.07 FRANCHISE; FEES; REPORTING; RECORDS.
   (A)   Annual franchise fee; computing. During the term of any franchise
granted pursuant to this chapter, the person granted the franchise shall pay to
the Township of Williamstown, for the use of its streets, public places and
other facilities, as well as the maintenance, improvements and supervision
thereof, and for the regulation activities required by virtue of the franchise,
an annual franchise fee in an amount equal to 3% of the annual local gross
subscriber revenues. Local gross subscriber revenues are those gross revenues
of the franchisee from subscribers within the township. Local gross subscriber
revenues include installation fees, disconnect and reconnect fees, and fees for
regular cable benefits, including the transmission of broadcast signals and
access and origination channels. Local gross subscribers revenues include local
gross revenues from Pay TV, in excess of the fair market value royalty paid by
franchisee therefor, and local leased channel revenues. To the extent that
franchisee's books of account do not reflect the source of any gross subscriber
revenue, that portion of gross subscriber revenue allocable to the Township of
Williamstown shall be based on the ratio of the number of subscribers in the
township to the number of subscribers outside the township. Sales tax or other
taxes levied directly on a per subscription basis and collected by franchisee
shall be deducted from the local gross revenues before computations of the fee
due the township is made. The township shall be furnished a statement with each
payment, certified as correct by the franchisee, and an annual statement for
the entire year, prepared by a certified public accountant. All statements
shall reflect the total amount of local gross subscriber revenues and the above
charges, deductions and computations for the period covered by the statement.
   (B)   Fee; when payable. The franchise fee shall be paid annually during the
existence of the franchise on or before a date 30 days subsequent to each
anniversary date of the franchise at the office of the Treasurer of the
Township of Williamstown during regular business hours. If the Township
Treasurer's office is closed on the thirtieth day, then payment may be made
during regular business hours on the next following day on which the office is
open for business.
   (C)   Records; inspection. The township shall have the right to inspect at
all reasonable times the customer records of any person granted a franchise
hereunder from which its franchise fee payments are computed and shall have the
right of audit and recomputation of any and all franchise fees paid. No
acceptance of any payment shall be construed as a release or as an accord and
satisfaction of any claim the township may have for further or additional sums
payable as a franchise fee under this chapter or for the performance of any
other obligation hereunder.
(Ord. 23, eff. 3-20-1981; Ord. rev. 9- -1993)
§ 110.08 CONSTRUCTION OF FACILITIES; RIGHT TO USE STREETS; RESTRICTIONS;
DISPOSAL; DUTIES.
   (A)   Rights nonexclusive. A franchise granted pursuant to this chapter
shall confer upon the grantee named therein the nonexclusive right to erect,
install, construct, reconstruct, replace, remove, repair, maintain and operate
in or upon, under, above and across the streets, avenues, highways, sidewalks,
bridges and other public ways, easements and rights-of-way, as existing as of
the date of the grant of said franchise and all subsequent extensions thereof
and additions thereto, in and belonging to the Township of Williamstown, all
necessary towers, poles, wires, cables, coaxial cables, transformers,
amplifiers, underground conduits, manholes and other television and/or radio
conductors, equipment and fixtures for the installation, construction,
maintenance and operation of a cable communications system (including audio,
video and radio signals) or the furnishing of a cable communications service.
   (B)   Description of facilities; map. Prior to the erection or installation
of any towers, poles, guys, anchors, underground conduits, manholes or fixtures
for use in connection with the installation, construction, maintenance or
operation of a cable communications system under a franchise granted pursuant
to this chapter, the grantee of a franchise hereunder desiring to erect or
install the facilities for use in connection with its cable communications
system shall first submit to the Township Engineer of the Township of
Williamstown for his or her review and approval a concise description of the
facilities proposed to be erected or installed, including engineering drawings,
if requested or required, together with a map indicating the proposed location
of the facilities. No erection or installation of any tower, pole, guy, anchor,
underground conduit, manhole or fixture for use in a cable communications
system shall be commenced by any person until approval therefor has been
received from the Township Engineer; provided, further, that, the approval
shall not be unreasonably withheld.
   (C)   Attachment space for township. Any person accepting a franchise
pursuant to this chapter and erecting or installing towers or poles shall, upon
written request by the Township of Williamstown, grant the Township of
Williamstown reasonable attachment space or spaces upon the towers or poles
without a rental charge for the attachment of wire or cable owned and used by
the Township of Williamstown; provided, however, that, the Township of
Williamstown shall pay any costs incurred by the person in providing attachment
space or spaces to the township, including all necessary costs of rearrangement
of the person's wires, cables or equipment and tower or pole replacement cost
for a larger tower or pole, if required.
   (D)   Purchase, removal of system. Upon the expiration, termination or
revocation of any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter, or should any
person wish otherwise to dispose of any tower or pole erected or installed for
use in connection with a cable communications system or any portion of the
system, the Township of Williamstown retains the first right and option to
purchase in place the towers or poles as it may require or the portion of the
system for the fair market value thereof. The township shall be under no
obligation to purchase all or any part of the system upon expiration,
termination or revocation for cause of any franchise granted pursuant to this
chapter. Further, upon the expiration, termination or revocation for cause of
any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter, should the township determine
that it does not desire to purchase the system or any part thereof, the
franchisee shall have a period of six months from the date of expiration,
termination or revocation to remove its towers, poles, wires, cables, fixtures
or other facilities from the streets, alleys, public rights-of-way or public
places. Provided, however, that, franchisee shall not disturb any underground
conduit, manholes or other facilities constructed underground. At the
expiration of the six- month period, any property not removed by franchisee
shall become the property of the Township of Williamstown to do with as it may
choose. Any cost to the Township of Williamstown in removing the property from
the streets, alleys, public rights-of-way or public places shall be claimed
against franchisee under the performance bond required under §
110.12.
   (E)   Underground facilities. In areas or portions of the Township of
Williamstown where transmission or distribution facilities of public utilities
providing telephone service and electric service are underground, or may be
placed underground when installed, any person granted a franchise pursuant to
this chapter shall likewise install, construct, maintain and operate its
transmission and distribution facilities in like manner underground to the
maximum extent feasible and permitted by existing technology and conditions,
subject to the approval of the Williamstown Township Engineer as hereinbefore
provided in division (B) above.
   (F)   Compliance with applicable regulations. All construction,
installation, maintenance and operation of any cable communications system or
of any communications service or of any facilities employed in connection
therewith shall be in compliance with the provisions of the National Electrical
Safety Code as prepared by the National Bureau of Standards, the National
Electrical Code of the National Board of Fire Underwriters, the Bell Telephone
System's Code of Pole Line Construction, any standards issued by the Federal
Communications Commission or other federal or state regulatory agencies in
relation thereto, and applicable regulations of public utilities operating in
the Township of Williamstown. Every cable communications system or service
installed, constructed, maintained or operated in the Township of Williamstown
shall be so designed, constructed, installed, maintained and operated as not to
endanger or interfere with the safety of persons or property in the Township of
Williamstown.
   (G)   Street openings; protection, repair. Any opening or obstruction in,
disturbance of or damage to the streets, alleys, public rights-of-way or public
places by any person in the exercise of any right granted pursuant to this
chapter shall be properly guarded by adequate barriers, lights, signals and
warnings as to prevent danger to any person or vehicle using such streets,
alleys, public rights-of-way or public places and shall be properly and
promptly repaired, all in a manner specified and approved by the Township
Engineer, at such person's expense.
   (H)   Relocation, removal of property.
      (1)   Any person owning or maintaining a cable communications system or
service or facilities therefor in or on the streets, alleys, public rights-of-
way or public places in the Township of Williamstown shall, at its expense and
without reimbursement from the township, upon request of the Township of
Williamstown, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate or remove from
the street, alley, public right-of-way or public place, any property of the
person when required by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street
vacation, freeway or street construction, change or establishment of street
grade, installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines, signal lines,
tracks, the construction or change of the transmission or distribution
facilities of any telephone or electric public utility or other public
improvements.
      (2)   Any such person shall also, at the request of any private party
holding an appropriate permit issued by the Township of Williamstown,
temporarily raise or lower its cable communications transmission or
distribution wires or cables to permit the moving of any building or other
structure; provided that, the actual expense of the temporary raising or
lowering shall be paid in full by party requesting the same.
   (I)   Failure to complete work. If any person shall fail to commence, pursue
or complete any work required by law or by the provisions of this chapter, as
hereinbefore set forth, to be done in any street, alley, public right-of-way or
public place as designated by the Engineer of the Township of Williamstown, the
Township Engineer may cause the work to be done and the person shall pay to the
Township of Williamstown the cost thereof within 30 days of the receipt of an
itemized statement of the cost.
(Ord. 23, eff. 3-20-1981; Ord. rev. 9- -1993)
§ 110.09 STANDARD SERVICE.
   (A)   Quality of system. Any cable communications company granted a
franchise pursuant to this chapter shall install, construct, maintain and
operate its cable communications system in accordance with the accepted
standards of the industry, in conformity with the state of the art and any
standards or operation or maintenance for a cable communications system which
may be established or issued by the Federal Communications Commission. Further,
it is the intention of the Board that any person granted a franchise to furnish
a cable communications service to the public within the Township of
Williamstown shall possess the financial and technical qualifications necessary
to provide a cable communications system which will assure its subscribers high
quality technical and public service.
   (B)   Cable specifications. All cable communications systems franchised
under this chapter shall have a cable of at least 300 MHZ of bandwidth (the
equivalent of 36 television broadcast channels), available for potential use of
the totality of cable services to be offered. The system shall possess the
capability for the reception and distribution of world wide radio signals.
   (C)   Signal capability. Every cable communications system franchised under
this chapter shall maintain bi-directional signal capability for digital, audio
and video signal transmission on all elements of the system. The extent to
which the reverse capability is available to subscriber use shall be specified
in the franchise agreement.
   (D)   Public access channels. Every cable communications system franchised
under this chapter, at a minimum, shall maintain and make available without
charge the public access channels, education access channels and local
government access channels as may be required by the franchise agreement by the
rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission, including the
expansion of the access channel capacity as may be required to fulfill the
needs for the access channels pursuant to the rules and regulations of the
Federal Communications Commission as may from time to time be in force and
effect.
   (E)   Interconnection with other systems. Every cable communications system
franchised under this chapter shall maintain the capacity, capability and
technical standards as will enable it to interconnect with any other cable
communications system located in any adjacent community. It is the intention of
the Board to require that all access channels in the Lansing metropolitan area
be interconnected to the cable communications system franchised under this
chapter.
(Ord. 23, eff. 3-20-1981; Ord. rev. 9- -1993)
§ 110.10 RATES; DISTRIBUTION; FILING SCHEDULES; MAXIMUM RATES; INCREASE IN
RATES, PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Discrimination prohibited. No cable communications company shall make
any unjust or unreasonable discrimination in rates, charges, classifications,
promotions, practices, regulations, facilities or services for or in connection
with like services, nor subject any person to any prejudice or disadvantage in
any respect whatsoever; provided, however, that, this shall not be deemed to
prohibit the establishment of a graded scale of charges and classifications of
rates to which any subscriber coming within the classification shall be
entitled.
   (B)   Schedule of rates and charges. No rate or charge for installation or
basic cable communications service provided in the Township of Williamstown
shall be effective, nor shall any cable communications company advertise,
collect or receive any rate or charge for its services, until it shall have
filed a complete schedule of rates and charges with the Clerk of the Township
of Williamstown and until the rates and charges shall have been approved by the
Township Board. The charges made for services of the franchisee hereunder shall
be fair and reasonable and no higher than necessary to meet all costs of the
service (assuming efficient and economical management), and provide a fair
return to the franchisee. The franchisee shall receive no consideration
whatsoever for its service other than in accordance with this section or the
franchise agreement without approval of the Board. The applicant for a
franchise shall include in its application its proposed rates, charges and
deposits.
   (C)   Increasing rates. No cable communications company may increase any
rate or charge for cable communication service, or alter any classification,
contract, rule, regulation or practice as to result in any increase in its
schedule of rates or charges for the service without the prior approval of the
increased rate or charge or alteration in its classification, contract, rule,
regulation or practice by the Township Board after public hearing thereon. The
public hearing shall be noted at least ten days in advance in a newspaper of
general circulation in the township. At the public hearing, the cable
communications company shall set forth in detail the basis of its requested
increase in rates or charges for service or alteration practice, including the
reasonableness and lawfulness thereof. In the determination of just, reasonable
and lawful rates and charges the Board shall consider and give weight to all
lawful elements properly to be considered, including expenses, a reasonable
return on the cost of the property used in the service, depreciation,
obsolescence, taxes, risks of the business and value of service to the
customer. The Board shall render its decision, with respect to any request by
the franchisee, for a rate increase within 90 days of the date of the request,
unless franchise shall stipulate in writing to an extension of the 90-day
period.
(Ord. 23, eff. 3-20-1981; Ord. rev. 9- -1993)
§ 110.11 SERVICE PROVISION TO TOWNSHIP, SCHOOLS; PUBLIC EMERGENCIES.
   (A)   Installations in schools and the like. Every cable communications
company furnishing service within the Township of Williamstown shall, without
charge for installation or service, provide one installation of its cable
communications service to each department of the Township of Williamstown and
each fire and police station in the township and shall, without charge, provide
cable communications service to each primary school, secondary school and
public library within the franchisee's current service area; provided that, the
services provided without charge shall not be included in determining the
number of subscribers in service for computation of the franchise fee as
hereinbefore provided.
   (B)   Emergency use. Every cable communications company providing service
within the Township of Williamstown shall make its cable system available,
without charge, to the Township of Williamstown, the County of Ingham, the
State of Michigan, the United States of America and/or emergency operations
agencies for the prompt and simultaneous communication to subscribers and the
public within the Township of Williamstown of any information resulting from or
required by war, threat of war, natural catastrophe, riot or insurrection,
necessary to save or protect life or property.
(Ord. 23, eff. 3-20-1981; Ord. rev. 9- -1993)
§ 110.12 INDEMNITY; PROOF OF INSURANCE; EFFECTIVE DATE OF FRANCHISE.
   (A)   Surety bonds. Every cable communications company shall, within 30 days
of the grant of a franchise to it pursuant to this chapter, file with the
Williamstown Township Clerk and, at all times thereafter, maintain in full
force and effect for the term of the franchise, at its expense, a corporate
surety bond, or such other surety arrangement as the Board may approve, in the
amount of $25,000, conditioned upon the faithful performance by the cable
communications company of its obligations under its franchise as herein set
forth, and upon the further condition that if such cable communications company
shall fail to comply with any one or more provisions of this chapter, there
shall be recoverable jointly and severally from the principal and surety of
such bond any damages or loss suffered by the township as a result thereof,
including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification or cost of
removal of any property of the cable communications company as provided in this
chapter plus attorney's fees and costs, up to the full amount of the bond, the
condition to be a continuing obligation for the duration of any franchise
granted under this chapter and any renewal thereof and thereafter until the
cable communications company has liquidated all of its obligations with the
Township of Williamstown which may have arisen under the franchise or from the
exercise of any privilege or right granted thereby. Any bond provided under
this section shall provide that, at least 30 days prior notice of any intention
not to renew, to cancel or to make a material change therein, shall be filed
with the Williamstown Township Clerk. Nothing herein shall be construed to
excuse faithful performance by any cable communications company or, in any way,
to limit its liability for damages or otherwise. The bond required hereunder
may be reduced in face amount to $10,000 at such time as franchisee is actively
providing cable communications service to 300 or more subscribers within the
Township of Williamstown. The reduction shall be deemed a "material change" in
the bond.
   (B)   Indemnity agreement; insurance. Any cable communications company
within 30 days of the grant of franchise pursuant to this chapter shall file
with the Williamstown Township Clerk, in addition to the bond as hereinbefore
set forth:
      (1)   An indemnity agreement to indemnify, defend and save the township
harmless from and against any or all claims, suits, actions or liability for
damage which may arise in any way from the grant of a franchise to the cable
communications company, or its operations thereunder in the Township of
Williamstown, including all expenses incurred by Township of Williamstown in
defending itself against any claim, action or suit;
      (2)   Proof of a general comprehensive liability insurance policy and an
automobile liability insurance policy issued by companies licensed to do
business in Michigan, protecting the township, its officers, boards,
commissions, agents and employees against liability for loss or damage for
personal injury, death and property damage, occasioned by the installation,
construction, maintenance or operation of a cable communications system in the
Township of Williamstown with minimum liability limits of $500,000 for personal
injury or death of any one person and $1,000,000 for personal injury or death
of two or more persons in any one occurrence, and $500,000 for damages to
property resulting from any one occurrence and the policy shall contain a
provision that a written notice of cancellation, or material change or
reduction in coverage, shall be given the Williamstown Township Clerk at least
30 days in advance of the effective date thereof; and
      (3)   Proof of adequate insurance as required by the Michigan Workers'
Compensation Law applicable to it.
   (C)   Taking-effect of franchise. No franchise hereunder shall be effective
until the provisions of divisions (A) and (B) above have been fully complied
with and failure to file with the Williamstown Township Clerk, within 30 days
after grant of a franchise, the bond, indemnity agreement, proof of general
comprehensive liability insurance policy, proof of automobile liability
insurance policy and proof of adequate workers' compensation insurance, or any
of them as required by divisions (A) and (B) above shall render the franchise
null and void without notice or further proceedings.
(Ord. 23, eff. 3-20-1981; Ord. passed 2-7-1984; Ord. rev. 9- -1993)
§ 110.13 TERMINATION; REVOCATION OR SURRENDER OF FRANCHISE.
   (A)   Expiration for failure to begin construction. Any franchise granted
pursuant to this chapter shall expire without further proceedings one year
after its effective date in the event the person granted the franchise has not
commenced construction of a cable communications system within such a period.
   (B)   Failure to provide required service. If any person granted a franchise
pursuant to this chapter shall fail to provide cable communications service
within and throughout the franchise areas as required under the terms of its
franchise agreement, the franchise shall, on the anniversary of the effective
date of the franchise next following the 12-month period during which cable
communications service has not been extended as required under the terms of the
franchise agreement, be deemed revoked without the necessity of Board action,
unless prior to the date, the person shall have applied to the Board and the
Board shall have, for good cause shown, granted an extension of the
construction or service periods set forth in the franchise agreement.
   (C)   Revocation of franchise. Any franchise granted pursuant to this
chapter shall be terminated and cancelled without further proceedings 120 days
after the appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over and conduct the
business of a cable communications company, whether in receivership,
reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or proceedings unless the
receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of
the period; provided, however, that, the receiver or trustee may apply for a
transfer or assignment of the franchise, as hereinbefore provided in §
110.05(E) hereof, within 60 days of the appointment of the receiver or trustee,
if duly approved by the court having jurisdiction in the premises, and provided
further, in case of a foreclosure or other judicial sale of the plant, property
or facilities of a cable communications company, with or without the
appointment of a receiver or trustee, including or excluding the franchise
granted under this chapter, the franchise as granted will be terminated and
cancelled without further proceedings upon 30 days written notice of
termination served upon the cable communications company and the purchaser
thereof, unless within the 30-day period, the purchaser shall apply to the
Township of Williamstown for a transfer or assignment to it of the same as
hereinbefore provided in §
110.05(E) hereof. Any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter is revocable
for cause by the Board prior to its expiration where the cable communications
company has failed substantially to comply with any provision or requirement of
this chapter, or the provisions of its franchise agreement. The Board may give
a written notice containing full particulars as to the provisions or
requirement with which compliance is claimed deficient and allow the cable
communications company 60 days to comply. At the expiration of the 60 days, the
franchise shall be deemed terminated and revoked, without further Board action,
unless the cable communications company shall request a hearing before the
Board upon its alleged failure to substantially comply with any provision or
requirement of this chapter or of its franchise agreement. The hearing shall be
public with the cable communications company being permitted to fully
participate therein including the right to introduce testimony and exhibits and
to examine and cross-examine witnesses. The hearing shall be recorded and, at
the conclusion thereof, the Board, if it finds that the cable communications
company has not substantially complied with any provision or requirement of
this chapter or its franchise agreement, may terminate and revoke the
franchise.
   (D)   Surrender of franchise. Any person granted a franchise pursuant to
this chapter may surrender it by written notice of intent to surrender its
franchise filed with the Williamstown Township Clerk not less than 60 days
prior to the surrender date. On the surrender date specified in the notice, all
rights, privileges and authority under the franchise shall terminate; provided,
however, that, the person shall have a period of six months to remove its
towers, poles, wires, cables, fixtures or other facilities from the streets,
alleys, public rights-of-way or public places, subject to the rights of the
Township of Williamstown as set forth in §
110.08(D) above. At the expiration of the six-month period, any property not
removed by such person shall become the property of the Township of
Williamstown as set forth in §
110.08(D) above. At the expiration of the six-month period, any property not
removed by the person shall become the property of the Township of Williamstown
to do with as it may choose. Any cost to the Township of Williamstown in
removing the property from the streets, alleys, public rights-of-way or public
places shall be claimed against the person under the performance bond required
under §
110.12(A).
(Ord. 23, eff. 3-20-1981; Ord. passed 2-7-1984; Ord. rev. 9- -1993)
§ 110.14 COMMENCEMENT AND COMPLETION OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Time limit for commencing work. Any person granted a franchise
pursuant to this chapter shall commence construction or installation of its
cable communications system within 120 days after the franchise is granted, or
if the issuance of a certificate of compliance by the Federal Communications
Commission is required, within 120 days of the issuance of the certificate.
   (B)   Completion of work. Any person granted a franchise pursuant to this
chapter shall, within such period as designated in the franchise agreement,
complete construction in the area designated in the franchise agreement. Any
person granted a franchise pursuant to this chapter who is unable to construct
according to the provisions of this section for "good cause" shall notify the
Board of the Township of Williamstown in writing within 30 days of the
occurrence of any delay or interruption of construction of more than 15 working
days' duration which interruption or delay would affect its inability to
construct according to schedule.
(Ord. 23, eff. 3-20-1981; Ord. passed 2-7-1984; Ord. rev. 9- -1993)
§ 110.15 HEARING AND DETERMINATION OF COMPLAINTS; PROCEDURE; LOCAL OFFICE.
   (a)   Hearing complaints. The Board, or any person or department designated
by it, shall, upon its own motion or upon complaint of any person or subscriber
of a cable communications company, have authority to hear and determine all
complaints concerning the rates, charges, rules, regulations, practices,
quality of service rendered or refused to be rendered, equipment furnished or
refused to be furnished, or any other matter relating to the service or
operation of the cable communications system or any person franchised under the
terms of this chapter.
   (B)   Notice of hearing; ordering changes. Upon the filing of any complaint
against any person pursuant to the preceding division, the Board shall give the
person at least 20 days notice of the time and place of a hearing to be given
the person upon the matters alleged in the complaint. The Board shall have the
power to order the changes in the rates, charges, rules, regulations, services,
equipment or other matters relating to the service or operation of the cable
communications company as in its judgment, based upon the record of the hearing
and findings of fact made thereon, appear to be just, reasonable and lawful.
   (C)   Business office. Every person granted a franchise pursuant to this
chapter shall have a business office located in or within two miles of the
Township of Williamstown, suitably staffed for the purpose among others of
receiving and investigating complaints, dealing with its subscribers, receiving
payment for service and otherwise conducting business, unless otherwise
provided in the franchise agreement.
(Ord. 23, eff. 3-20-1981; Ord. rev. 9- -1993)
§ 110.16 PRIORITY OF USE.
   Any right or privilege granted to any person under this chapter to use or
occupy any street, alley, public right-of-way or public place shall be
subordinate to any prior lawful occupancy of the property. Nothing in this
chapter shall be construed as limiting, in any way, the Township of
Williamstown in the lawful exercise of the police power, and the grant of a
franchise to any person as provided in this chapter shall confer no right,
privilege or exemption not specifically presented herein.
(Ord. 23, eff. 3-20-1981; Ord. rev. 9- -1993)
§ 110.17 SURRENDER OF OTHER FRANCHISES.
   By the application for and acceptance of a franchise pursuant to this
chapter, a cable communications company agrees that upon subsequent additions
of areas to the Township of Williamstown, either by annexation, consolidation
or otherwise, any and all franchises and/or licenses held by it to provide a
cable communications service or to install, construct, maintain or operate a
cable communications system in such areas shall be surrendered and any rights
or privileges in streets, alleys, public rights-of-way or public places to
install, construct, maintain or operate a cable communications system or to
furnish a cable communications service in such areas as may subsequently be
added to the Township of Williamstown by annexation, consolidation or
otherwise, shall thereafter be subject to and authorized by this chapter.
(Ord. 23, eff. 3-20-1981; Ord. rev. 9- -1993)
§ 110.18 REPORTS.
   Every cable communications company shall file annually with the Township
Engineer a current map showing the exact location of the transmission and
distribution facilities and equipment in the Township of Williamstown used by
it in providing cable communications service, and further, shall prepare and
furnish the Township of Williamstown on written request therefor, at such times
and in such form as may be prescribed, such reports as to its operations,
finances, the facilities and activities as may be reasonably necessary to
enable the Township of Williamstown to perform its obligations, functions and
duties under this chapter.
(Ord. 23, eff. 3-20-1981; Ord. rev. 9- -1993)
§ 110.19 RIGHTS OF TOWNSHIP.
   Any franchise granted under this chapter is made subject to all applicable
provisions of law relating to the Township of Williamstown and ordinances
thereof, and specifically subject to the rights and powers of the Township of
Williamstown and limitations upon the cable communications company holding such
franchise as are set forth in the statutes of the State of Michigan pertaining
to charter townships, which are herein incorporated by reference, and the cable
communications company shall abide by and be bound by the rights, powers and
limitations, and any franchise granted under this chapter constitutes and shall
be considered as a public utility franchise and a cable communications company
shall be deemed to be a public utility.
(Ord. 23, eff. 3-20-1981; Ord. rev. 9- -1993)
§ 110.20 CABLE COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION.
   (A)   Commission to be established.
      (1)   Establishment. The Township Board shall establish a commission to
be known as the Williamstown Cable Communications Commission. The Township
Board shall solicit from the public and from the franchisee names of persons
interested in serving on the Commission, but is not limited to names thereby
submitted.
      (2)   Members; term; compensation. The Commission shall consist of five
residents of the township appointed by the Township Board. Each member shall
serve a term of three years; provided, however, that, appointments to the first
Commission shall be for such terms as follows: two members for a term of three
years; two members for a term of two years; and one member for a term of one
year. Any vacancy in the office shall be filled by the Township Board for the
remainder of the term. No employee or person with ownership interest in a cable
television franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be eligible for
membership on the Commission. Members of the Commission may be compensated at a
rate to be determined by the Township Board. The rate of compensation, if any,
shall be established and may be revised, from time to time, by resolution of
the Township Board.
   (C)   Functions. The Commission, in addition to the functions and
responsibilities that the Board may delegate to it from time to time by
resolution, shall have the following functions:
      (1)   Discuss this chapter and the franchises thereunder with prospective
franchise applicants;
      (2)   Advise the Board on applications for franchises;
      (3)   Advise the Board on matters which might constitute grounds for
revocation of a franchise under this chapter;
      (4)   Recommend to the Board, after hearing, resolutions of disputes
between franchisees, between franchisee(s) and subscribers, between franchisee
(s) and access users, and between access users;
      (5)   Advise the Board on the regulation of rates under this chapter and
make recommendations on requested changes in rates, services or
classifications;
      (6)   Recommend to the Board general policy relating to access channels
with a view to maximizing the diversity of programs and services to
subscribers;
      (7)   Encourage the use of access channels by institutions, groups and
individuals within the township;
      (8)   Encourage and supervise the interconnection of systems;
      (9)   Review and report to the Board concerning records and reports which
the franchisee is required to submit under this chapter;
      (10)   The Commission shall annually prepare a budget and, prior to
adopting same shall conduct a public hearing thereon. The Commission shall also
prepare an annual report to the Township Board including an accounting of
budgeted fees received and distributed by the Commission and a report of the
type and amount of use of access channels; and
      (11)   Conduct evaluations of the system at least every three years and
make recommendations to the Township Board regarding amendments to this chapter
or to the franchise agreement.
(Ord. 23, eff. 3-20-1981; Ord. rev. 9- -1993)
§ 110.21 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Indemnification. Any person granted a franchise pursuant to this
chapter shall have no recourse whatsoever against the Township of Williamstown,
its officers, boards, commissions, agents or employees for any loss, costs,
expense or damage arising out of any provision or requirement of this chapter
or the enforcement thereof.
   (B)   Section headings. Section headings as set forth in this chapter are
for convenience only and shall not be a part of this chapter, nor be used to
construe any provision hereof more broadly or narrowly than its text would
indicate.
(Ord. 23, eff. 3-20-1981; Ord. rev. 9- -1993)
§ 110.22 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall become effective 30 days after publication subsequent to
final adoption:
   (A)   Published: February 18, 1981; and
   (B)   Effective: March 20, 1981.
(Ord. 23, eff. 3-20-1981; Ord. rev. 9- -1993)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than $500 or by
imprisonment for a period of not more than 90 days, or both fine and
imprisonment.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the existence of any criminal remedy as hereinbefore
provided, any cable communications system or cable communications service in
violation of any provisions of this chapter shall constitute a nuisance per se,
and the township shall be empowered to seek injunctive relief in a court of
appropriate jurisdiction to enjoin the violation and abate the nuisance.
(Ord. 23, eff. 3-20-1981; Ord. rev. 9- -1993)
CHAPTER 111: RECREATIONAL MARIHUANA ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
   
111.01   Title
   
111.02   Definitions
   
111.03   Marihuana establishments prohibited
   
111.04   Effective date
   
   
111.99   Penalty
§ 111.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as the “Williamstown
Township Prohibition of Marihuana Establishments Ordinance”.
(Ord. passed 2-13-2019)
§ 111.02 DEFINITIONS.
   Words used herein shall have the definitions as provided for in Initiated
Law 1 of 2018, M.C.L.A. §§333.27951 et seq., as may be amended.
(Ord. passed 2-13-2019)
§ 111.03 MARIHUANA ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED.
   The township hereby prohibits all marihuana establishments within the
boundaries of the township pursuant to Initiated Law 1 of 2018, M.C.L.A.
§§333.27951 et seq., as may be amended.
(Ord. passed 2-13-2019)
§ 111.04 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall take effect 30 days after publication.
(Ord. passed 2-13-2019)
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who disobeys neglects or refuses to comply with any
provision of this chapter, or who causes allows or consents to any of the same,
shall be deemed to be responsible for the violation of this chapter. A
violation of this chapter is deemed to be a nuisance per se.
   (B)   A violation of this chapter is a municipal civil infraction, for which
the fines shall not be less than $100 nor more than $500, in the discretion of
the court. The foregoing sanctions shall be in addition to the rights of the
township to proceed at law or equity with other appropriate and proper
remedies. Additionally, the violator shall pay costs that may include all
expenses, direct and indirect, the township incurs in connection with the
municipal civil infraction.
   (C)   Each day during which any violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
   (D)   In addition, the township may seek injunctive relief against persons
alleged to be in violation of this chapter, and such other relief as may be
provided by law.
   (E)   This chapter shall be administered and enforced by the Ordinance
Enforcement Officer of the Township or by such other person(s) as designated by
the Township Board from time to time.
(Ord. passed 2-13-2019)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
[Reserved]
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
      Chapter
         
150.   PUBLIC PARKS
         
151.   DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS
         
152.   WETLAND PROTECTION
         
153.   FLOODPLAINS
         
154.   DIVISION OF LAND
         
155.   SUBDIVISIONS
         
156.   ZONING
CHAPTER 150: PUBLIC PARKS
Section
General Provisions
   
150.01   Title
   
150.02   Purpose
   
150.03   Definitions
   
150.04   Ordinance interpretation
   
150.05   Severability
   
150.06   Effective date
Permits and Regulations
   
150.20   Special park use permits
   
150.21   Hours of use
   
150.22   Destruction of park property
   
150.23   Refuse, trash and litter
   
150.24   Bicycles
   
150.25   Motor vehicle use and parking
   
150.26   Park wildlife
   
150.27   Dogs, cats and other pets
   
150.28   Horses, ponies and other draft animals
   
150.29   Firearms and other weapons
   
150.30   Fires
   
150.31   Fireworks
   
150.32   Swimming
   
150.33   Boating
   
150.34   Camping
   
150.35   Skating and sledding
   
150.36   Loudspeakers
   
150.37   Alcoholic beverages, narcotics and illegal drugs
   
150.38   Use of restrooms
   
150.39   Peddling and soliciting
   
150.40   Unlawful obstruction
   
150.41   Appropriation or encumbrance of real property
   
150.42   Installations, construction and maintenance
Administration and Enforcement
   
150.60   Reservation of facilities
   
150.61   Fees and charges
   
150.62   Township park personnel
   
150.63   Emergency powers
 
   
150.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.01 TITLE.
   This chapter may be known and referred to as the "Williamstown Township
Parks Ordinance".
(Ord. 39, passed - -2001)
§ 150.02 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to promote proper use and protect and
preserve the cultural and natural features of township parks and park property
for the enjoyment and use of all citizens.
(Ord. 39, passed - -2001)
§ 150.03 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them.
   BOARD or TOWNSHIP BOARD. The Supervisor, Clerk, Treasurer and Trustees of
the Township of Williamstown, Ingham County, Michigan.
   CAMPING. The overnight lodging or sleeping of a person or persons within a
park, including camping in the open on the ground or in a sleeping bag, tent,
trailer-tent, trailer coach, vehicle camper, motor vehicle, or in any other
facility erected, parked or placed within the park.
   COMMISSION or PLANNING COMMISSION. The Williamstown Township Planning
Commission.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any vehicle that is self-propelled by any means whatever,
including all devices in, upon or by which any person or property may be
transported or drawn, excluding wheelchairs or other ambulatory assistance
devices or devices moved exclusively by human power.
   PARK, PUBLIC PARK, PARK PROPERTY or TOWNSHIP PARK PROPERTY. Any property
owned, managed, controlled or operated by Williamstown Township and delineated
as a park or natural area in the Williamstown Township Parks and Recreation
Master Plan. Hereinafter, all such areas are referred to as PARK or PARKS in
this chapter.
   PARKING or PARKED. Permitting a vehicle to remain standing, whether occupied
or not, when not loading or unloading.
   PARKING AREA or PARKING LOT. Any off-street area, whether paved or not,
which is designed for parking of motor vehicles.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, organization or any group or gathering of individuals.
   RULES AND REGULATIONS. Written rules and regulations, and amendments
thereto, concerning the use and maintenance of township parks and park
property, adopted by the Planning Commission and approved by the Township Board
of Trustees, copies of which are available to the public at the township
municipal office.
   TOWNSHIP. Williamstown Township, Ingham County, Michigan.
(Ord. 39, passed - -2001)
§ 150.04 ORDINANCE INTERPRETATION.
   The Planning Commission shall be the body responsible for the interpretation
of this chapter. A decision by the Commission concerning an interpretation of
this chapter may be appealed to the Township Board within ten days of the date
of the Planning Commission's decision.
(Ord. 39, passed - -2001)
§ 150.05 SEVERABILITY.
   This chapter and each of the various parts, sections, divisions, provisions,
sentences and clauses are severable. If any part, section, division, provision,
sentence or clause is found to be invalid or unenforceable for any reason by a
court of competent jurisdiction, the finding shall not affect the validity of
the remainder of this chapter, which shall remain in full force and effect.
(Ord. 39, passed - -2001)
§ 150.06 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall take effect on the              day of
                          , 2001,           days following publication in a
newspaper of general circulation within Williamstown Township, as required by
law.
(Ord. 39, passed - -2001)
PERMITS AND REGULATIONS
§ 150.20 SPECIAL PARK USE PERMITS.
   (A)   Township park facilities are intended for the use of the general
public for recreational purposes, such as picnicing, exercise, nature study and
similar activities on an informal basis. A special park use permit shall be
required for organized group activities and for uses that otherwise would not
be allowed by this chapter. The township shall maintain a list of activities
that require a special park use permit, which list may be updated from time to
time with the concurrence of the Township Board.
   (B)   A special park use permit may be issued by the Township Board, or its
designee, when the Board, or its designee, determines that adequate sanitary
facilities will be provided, safety precautions will be taken, the activity
will not unreasonably interfere with the use of the park and neighboring
property by others, there is adequate security against damages to the township,
and the use will comply with the requirements of this chapter and all
applicable rules and regulations adopted thereto.
   (C)   An activity which involves an exhibition or performances which may
reasonably be expected to cause a large number (over 100) of persons to
congregate shall be considered an outdoor event, which shall require a separate
special land use permit, pursuant to § 156.141(II).
   (D)   An application for a special park use permit shall be made on the
forms and according to the guidelines provided by the township. The application
shall be accompanied by the necessary fees and information specified in this
chapter and by rules and regulations made pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 39, passed - -2001)
§ 150.21 HOURS OF USE.
   Parks shall be closed for public use between sundown and sunrise, unless
otherwise permitted or restricted by resolution of the Township Board, or
unless otherwise permitted by a special park use permit. It shall be unlawful
for any person to enter, loiter or remain in a park after it is closed to the
public.
(Ord. 39, passed - -2001) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.22 DESTRUCTION OF PARK PROPERTY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to damage, deface, destroy,
disfigure, injure, tamper with or displace any park, park facilities or park
features, including, but not limited to: buildings, bridges, docks, tables,
benches, fences, pavement, utilities or utility lines or any parts or
appurtenances thereto; signs, notices or placards; monuments, stakes, posts or
other boundary markers; historic, prehistoric or cultural resources or
artifacts; or other structures or equipment.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a person to deposit or cause to be deposited
in any drain, pond or other body of water within or adjoining a township park
any foreign material or chemicals that would pollute the water or potentially
cause harm to marine life or public health.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to misuse, damage, cut, carve,
transplant or remove any trees, shrubs, flowers or other plant; or attach any
rope, wire, chain or other object to any tree or shrub.
(Ord. 39, passed - -2001) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.23 REFUSE, TRASH AND LITTER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, deposit or leave any bottles,
glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, cartons, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage or
other trash, except that which is incidental to the intended use of the park.
Refuse, trash and litter generated during proper use of the park shall be
deposited in trash receptacles.
(Ord. 39, passed - -2001) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.24 BICYCLES.
   Bicycles are permitted in parks; provided that, they are ridden only on
designated paths, trails or roads.
(Ord. 39, passed - -2001) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.25 MOTOR VEHICLE USE AND PARKING.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall operate or park motor vehicles of any kind,
including motorcycles, on other than designated roads and within parking areas
designated for motor vehicle use. This provision shall not prevent maintenance
and security vehicles from entering off-road areas to perform maintenance or
security work.
      (2)   Snowmobiles, off-road vehicles and all terrain vehicles (ATVs) are
not permitted in parks.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall leave, or cause to be left, any motor vehicle
upon park property when the park is closed.
      (2)   Ingham County Sheriff Department officers and township
representatives are authorized to remove any such motor vehicle at the owner's
expense.
   (C)   Motor vehicles shall be operated at all times with reasonable regard
to the safety of others, and at a maximum speed of ten mph, unless otherwise
posted. Motor vehicles shall be parked in designated areas when left
unattended.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful to repair or wash a motor vehicle in a park,
except for emergency repairs.
(Ord. 39, passed - -2001) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.26 PARK WILDLIFE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt, catch, wound, kill, trap,
shoot or throw objects at any bird or animal; or to molest or rob the nest of
any bird or any lair, den or burrow of any animal. This provision is not
intended to prevent protective action against dangerous animals by the Ingham
County Sheriff Department or by special park use permit.
   (B)   Fishing is permitted in township parks, subject to state laws and
regulations.
(Ord. 39, passed - -2001) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.27 DOGS, CATS AND OTHER PETS.
   (A)   Dogs, cats and other domestic animal pets may be brought upon park
property unless otherwise posted.
   (B)   Any dog, cat or other pet shall be kept under the full and immediate
control of a competent person at all times on a leash of no more than six feet
in length or a retractable leash of no more than 20 feet in length.
   (C)   All feces deposited by a dog or other pet on any public footpath,
athletic field or other area frequented by the public, shall be disposed of in
a sanitary manner by the person in control of the dog or other pet.
   (D)   No dog or pet shall be allowed to enter any public building, except
for a trained and working leader or general assistance dog.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful to leave or deposit dogs, cats or other animals,
birds or fish, whether dead or alive, in any park.
(Ord. 39, passed - -2001) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.28 HORSES, PONIES AND OTHER DRAFT ANIMALS.
   (A)   A horse, pony or other draft animal may be brought upon park property,
unless otherwise posted; provided that, the horse or draft animal is kept under
the full and immediate control of a competent person at all times.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to ride a horse, pony or other draft animal in a
careless, negligent or reckless manner so as to endanger persons or property.
   (C)   Feces deposited by a horse, pony or other draft animal shall be
disposed of in a sanitary manner by the person in control of the horse, pony or
other draft animal.
(Ord. 39, passed - -2001) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.29 FIREARMS AND OTHER WEAPONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, at any time, to use, carry or possess
in any township park, any firearm, air-rifle, B-B gun, spring gun, bow and
arrow, spear, sling, any instrument that can fire blank cartridges or any other
form of weapon potentially harmful to human safety or to wildlife. Shooting
into park property from beyond park boundaries is prohibited. These
restrictions shall not apply to any duly appointed law enforcement officer
while carrying out the duties and responsibilities of his or her position.
(Ord. 39, passed - -2001) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.30 FIRES.
   (A)   No person shall willfully set, or cause to be set on fire, any tree,
woodland, brush land, grassland or meadow within park property.
   (B)   No person shall drop, throw or otherwise scatter lighted matches,
burning cigars, cigarettes, tobacco paper or other materials that could cause
fire in a park.
   (C)   No person shall build, light or kindle any fire within park property
except in designated grills, firepits, receptacles or open space areas
designated for such purposes and, where required, with a township burn permit.
   (D)   Fires within park property shall not be left unattended. All fires
shall be extinguished prior to leaving the immediate vicinity.
   (E)   Fires within park property are subject to the conditions and
restrictions of
Chapter 92 of this code.
   (F)   The requirements in this section shall not prevent planned and
controlled prairie burns when necessary, when conducted by NIESA or another
authorized person or agency, with a burn permit.
(Ord. 39, passed - -2001) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.31 FIREWORKS.
   No person shall possess, light or discharge any rocket, firecracker,
torpedo, squib or other fireworks, or any substance of an explosive nature
within park property.
(Ord. 39, passed - -2001) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.32 SWIMMING.
   No person shall swim, bathe or enter into any drain, pond or other body of
water located within park property.
(Ord. 39, passed - -2001) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.33 BOATING.
   No person shall bring, use or navigate any boat, canoe, raft or other
watercraft upon any drain, pond, or other body of water located in a park,
except in those areas and at times designated and subject to applicable laws
and regulations.
(Ord. 39, passed - -2001) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.34 CAMPING.
   No person shall camp in a township park, except by special park use permit
from the Township Board.
(Ord. 39, passed - -2001) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.35 SKATING AND SLEDDING.
   No person shall skate, walk or go upon any ice on any drain, pond or other
body of water, nor shall any person engage in sledding on any hill in a park,
except in those places and at times designated.
(Ord. 39, passed - -2001) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.36 LOUDSPEAKERS.
   It shall be unlawful to use a loudspeaker, public address system or
amplifier on park property, except by special park use permit, and subject to
the provisions in
Chapter 91 of this code.
(Ord. 39, passed - -2001) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.37 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES, NARCOTICS AND ILLEGAL DRUGS.
   No person shall possess, consume, serve or cause to be served, or sell
alcoholic beverages, narcotics or illegal drugs of any kind in any township
park, except for alcoholic beverages specifically authorized by the Township
Board through issuance of a special park use permit.
(Ord. 39, passed - -2001) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.38 USE OF RESTROOMS.
   Male persons shall not resort to any restroom set apart for women and female
persons shall not resort to any restroom set apart for men, except this shall
not apply to children accompanied by an adult. No person shall loiter in or
about the facilities, nor shall any person use the facilities for purposes
other than those intended.
(Ord. 39, passed - -2001) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.39 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING.
   No person on park property shall peddle or solicit business of any nature
whatsoever; distribute handbills or other advertising matter; post any
unauthorized sign on any park land, water, structure or property; or use such
land, water, structure or property for peddling or soliciting, except as
specifically authorized by the Township Board through issuance of a special
park use permit.
(Ord. 39, passed - -2001) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.40 UNLAWFUL OBSTRUCTION.
   No person shall, by force, threat, intimidation, unlawful fencing or
enclosing or by other means, prevent any person from entering, leaving or
making lawful use of any park property. This section shall not apply to any
duly appointed law enforcement officer when carrying out the duties and
responsibilities of his or her position, or where a person or group has
obtained proper authority to fence or enclose an area for a particular purpose.
(Ord. 39, passed - -2001) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.41 APPROPRIATION OR ENCUMBRANCE OF REAL PROPERTY.
   No person shall enter upon any of the public land belonging to the township
and dig up the earth or deposit any earth, rock or other substances, nor shall
any person erect or attempt to erect any structures of any kind, or in any
other manner attempt to appropriate or encumber any portion of the real estate
belonging to the township, unless the person shall have first obtained proper
authority to do so.
(Ord. 39, passed - -2001) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.42 INSTALLATIONS, CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE.
   No installation, construction or maintenance shall be made above or below
ground, across or beneath township park property by any person except duly
authorized park personnel, without the prior written permission of the township
for the installation, construction or maintenance, which permit shall specify
in detail the work to be done and any conditions to be met.
(Ord. 39, passed - -2001) Penalty, see §
150.99
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 150.60 RESERVATION OF FACILITIES.
   (A)   The Township Board may permit park facilities to be reserved for use
at a particular time, subject to the conditions and requirements for
reservation of facilities be established by resolution of the Board.
   (B)   In the absence of reservations, the use of any athletic field within a
park for organized competition or practice shall be by right of first come-
first served. The Township Board may permit park facilities to be reserved for
use at a particular time, subject to the conditions and requirements for
reservation of facilities be established by resolution of the Board.
   (C)   In the absence of reservations, the use of any athletic field within a
park for organized competition or practice shall be by right of first come-
first served.
(Ord. 39, passed - -2001)
§ 150.61 FEES AND CHARGES.
   The township may charge a fee for use of a park or park facility, for
participation in a recreation program or activity or for a special park use
permit. The fee shall be established by resolution of the Township Board.
(Ord. 39, passed - -2001)
§ 150.62 TOWNSHIP PARK PERSONNEL.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting township employees
or agents from performing work or activities in any township park at a time and
in a manner directed by the township.
(Ord. 39, passed - -2001)
§ 150.63 EMERGENCY POWERS.
   The township may establish emergency rules necessary to protect the health,
welfare and safety of park visitors and to protect park property, including,
but not limited to, ordering all persons off park property and closing all or
any portion of a park.
(Ord. 39, passed - -2001)
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction as defined by
Michigan statute which shall be punishable by a civil fine of not more than
$500 along with costs which may include all expenses, direct and indirect,
which the township has incurred in connection with the municipal civil
infraction. Nothing herein shall prevent the township from seeking appropriate
restitution for damage to parks or park facilities. A violator of this chapter
shall also be subject to such additional sanctions and judicial orders as are
authorized under Michigan law.
(Ord. 39, passed - -2001)
CHAPTER 151: DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS
Section
   
151.01   Title
   
151.02   Findings and purpose
   
151.03   Definitions
   
151.04   Authorization and financing
   
151.05   Eligible land
   
151.06   Project selection
   
151.07   Fees
   
151.08   Enforcement
   
151.09   Severability
   
151.10   Effective date
 
   
151.99   Penalty
§ 151.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Development Rights Ordinance
of Williamstown Township".
(Ord. passed 6-29-1999)
§ 151.02 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
   The Township Board finds that:
   (A)   Williamstown Township contains lands that are particularly well-suited
for farming and adjacent to these farmlands are other woodlands, wetlands and
open lands that contribute to aesthetic and economic value of the community;
   (B)   These lands are a valuable and irreplaceable natural resource. When
these lands are converted to residential or other urban uses an important
community resource is permanently lost;
   (C)   Williamstown Township is experiencing development pressure because of
its location in the Lansing/East Lansing metropolitan area. Many of the same
characteristics that make the land valuable for agricultural use also make it
desirable for residential use;
   (D)   It is the policy of the Williamstown Township to protect and preserve
agricultural and open space lands. This policy is set forth in the township's
Master Plan,
Chapter 155 and
Chapter 156 of this code;
   (E)   The Master Plan,
Chapter 155 and
Chapter 156 of this code are not sufficient to dissuade speculative purchase of
farmlands for future development, thus driving the cost of farmland beyond its
value for agricultural use. These circumstances result in decreased
agricultural investment;
   (F)   The permanent acquisition by the township of interest in farmland and
open space lands will provide the opportunity to retain their use for
agricultural and open space, and provide for the long-term protection of public
interests which are served by farmlands and open space in the township; and
   (G)   Accordingly, this chapter has been created to establish, finance and
provide for the administration of a program for acquisition of development
rights (ADR) to protect agricultural land and other eligible land, as defined
herein.
(Ord. passed 6-29-1999)
§ 151.03 DEFINITIONS.
   The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this chapter.
   AGRICULTURAL LAND. Substantially undeveloped land devoted to the production
of plants and animals useful to humans, including forage and sod crops; grains,
feed crops and field crops; dairy and dairy products; poultry and poultry
products; livestock, including breeding and grazing of cattle, swine and
similar animals; berries; herbs; flowers; seeds; grasses; nursery stock;
fruits; vegetables; Christmas trees; and other similar uses and activities.
   CONSERVATION VALUES. The agricultural, natural, open space, scientific,
biological and ecological values of a parcel of property that are found to be
worthy of protection.
   DEVELOPMENT. An activity that materially alters or affects the existing
conditions or use of any land.
   DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS. The rights to develop land to the maximum intensity of
development authorized by law.
   DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS EASEMENT. A grant, by a legal instrument, whereby an
owner relinquishes to the public the right to develop the land except as
expressly reserved in the instrument, and which contains a covenant running
with the land describing the easement terms, conditions and development rights.
   FULL OWNERSHIP. Fee simple ownership, or outright ownership of real
property, including the ownership of all aspects of title, including the
ability to transfer the totality of the title.
   INTENSITY OF DEVELOPMENT. The height, bulk, area, density, setback, use and
other similar characteristics of development.
   OTHER ELIGIBLE LAND. Land that has a common property line with agricultural
land from which development rights have been purchased and that is not divided
from that agricultural land.
   OWNER. The party or parties who has/have legal title to or an equitable
interest in the property.
   PARCEL. A measured portion of land that is described by virtue of a proposal
to include the parcel in an agreement to acquire or transfer development
rights, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   PERMITTED USE. Any use reserved within a development rights easement
essential to the farming operation thereon or which does not alter the open
space character of the land.
   SUBSTANTIALLY UNDEVELOPED LAND. Land on which there is no more than one
residential dwelling unit (exclusive of migrant housing units) for each 20
acres of land.
   SUPERVISOR. The Williamstown Township Supervisor.
   TOWNSHIP BOARD. The Supervisor, Clerk, Treasurer and Trustees of
Williamstown Township, Ingham County, Michigan.
   VALUE OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS. The difference between the fair market value of
full ownership of the land (excluding buildings thereon) and the fair market
value of the agricultural rights plus any residential development rights to be
retained by the owner.
(Ord. passed 6-29-1999)
§ 151.04 AUTHORIZATION AND FINANCING.
   (A)   Authorization.
      (1)   The Township Board is authorized to establish an acquisition of
development rights (ADR) program to acquire property interests in agricultural
and other eligible land from willing landowners in Williamstown Township. The
property interest acquired may be either the development rights, or any lesser
interest, easement, covenant or other contractual right. Acquisition of
development rights under this chapter may not be accomplished through
condemnation. Participation in this program by a landowner shall be voluntary;
the township shall have no authority to force a landowner to participate.
      (2)   Acquisition of property interests through the ADR program may be
accomplished by purchase, gift, grant, bequest, devise, covenant or contract,
but only at a cost that is equal to or less than the appraised value, as
provided in this chapter.
      (3)   The Township Board is authorized to contract with other land
conservation organizations or farmland conservation trusts to participate in
the acquisition of interests in land or to administer the rights obtained by
the township under the ADR program.
   (B)   Financing. The Township Board is authorized to finance the ADR program
through one or more of the sources identified in § 33 of Michigan Public Act
184 of 1943, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3101 – 125.3702, as amended, including
general appropriations by the township, proceeds from the sale of development
rights, grants, donations, bonds or notes, General Fund revenue, special
assessments and other sources approved by the Township Board and permitted by
law.
(Ord. passed 6-29-1999)
§ 151.05 ELIGIBLE LAND.
   (A)   Agricultural lands identified in the Master Plan. Development rights
on a parcel of land may be acquired under this ADR program only if the parcel
of land is identified as "Agriculture" or "Agriculture/Residential" on the
Future Land Use Map in the township's Master Plan.
   (B)   Guidelines to establish acquisition priority. In the event that
financial resources of the township are inadequate to allow acquisition of
development rights on all of the parcels voluntarily offered for acquisition,
the following guidelines shall be used to establish acquisition priorities:
      (1)   Essential land protection goals. Every ADR project should be
related to one or more of the following land protection goals:
         (a)   The project aids in the conservation and stewardship of
productive agricultural or forest land;
         (b)   The project aids in the protection of wetlands, floodplains,
stream or river banks, ponds or groundwater recharge areas that have an
important role in maintaining ground or surface water quality; and
         (c)   The project preserves significant natural areas that have
recognized ecological value.
      (2)   Positive conservation values. Projects shall generally be ranked
highest based on the number of the following conservation values they exhibit:
         (a)   There is widespread community support for the project;
         (b)   If acquisition is not accomplished under the ADR program, the
land is likely to be developed for a use that does not preserve its special
conservation value;
         (c)   The project protects prime farmland adjacent to other lands that
are currently being farmed;
         (d)   The project protects scenic qualities visible to the public from
public roads, from the Red Cedar River or from public parks;
         (e)   There is a reasonable possibility that other valuable property
rights on other nearby properties could be acquired, thereby expanding the
overall conservation value of the project;
         (f)   The parcel is of sufficient size that the conservation resources
of the parcel are likely to remain intact, even if adjacent properties are
developed; and
         (g)   Protection of the property is consistent with current zoning.
      (3)   Negative conservation values. The priority of projects shall
generally decline if they exhibit any of the following negative conservation
values:
         (a)   There is little community support for the project;
         (b)   The project has limited value for the community as a whole;
         (c)   The parcel of land is not especially productive for agricultural
use (although conservation of open land for future agricultural use may be
considered a positive conservation value). Agricultural productivity shall be a
key consideration when comparing parcels of land for possible acquisition;
         (d)   The parcel of land is surrounded by land that has already been
taken out of agricultural production, creating potential conflict between
agricultural operations and more urban land use;
         (e)   The parcel of land is small and there is little likelihood of
adjacent properties being protected;
         (f)   The land that is proposed to be protected is part of a
development proposal that, overall, is likely to have significant adverse
impact on conservation of natural resources;
         (g)   The project will be unusually expensive and will use significant
financial resources; and
         (h)   The parcel of land is subject to mining that would destroy the
features the township would like to protect.
(Ord. passed 6-29-1999)
§ 151.06 PROJECT SELECTION.
   (A)   Planning Commission as an advisory body. The Township Planning
Commission shall have the responsibility for reviewing proposed ADR projects
and advising the Township Board. Upon completing its review, the Planning
Commission shall make a recommendation to the Township Board, based on the
requirements and standards in this chapter.
   (B)   Review by experts. The Planning Commission may consult experts as it
determines necessary; provided that, if there is a cost for such services, the
Township Board has appropriated funds for that purpose.
   (C)   Conflict of interest. No member of the Planning Commission or Township
Board shall vote on a proposed ADR project in which they have an ownership
interest or that is located adjacent to property in which the member has an
ownership interest.
   (D)   Application forms.
      (1)   Consideration of a ADR project shall be initiated by submitting an
application on forms supplied by the township. The Planning Commission shall
oversee the preparation of the application forms, which shall require the
following information, at minimum:
         (a)   Parcel identification, legal description and parcel size;
         (b)   Identification of rights-of-way or easements on the property;
         (c)   Complete ownership information, including a certification that
the interests of all joint tenants, financial institutions and any party with
an interest in the property are disclosed;
         (d)   Property value data, including assessed value and estimated
market value;
         (e)   Existing land use on and adjacent to the parcel;
         (f)   Identification of significant natural features (wetlands,
woodlands, ponds, streams, rivers, habitat containing endangered or threatened
species or species of special concern and the like);
         (g)   Identification of known environmental concerns on the property
(e.g., evidence of buried waste, soil contamination, ground or surface water
contamination and the like);
         (h)   Location of buildings, walls, shelters, fences, bridges, trails,
roads and other built features;
         (i)   Type of development rights transfer anticipated (e.g., gift,
purchase, bequest and the like);
         (j)   Type of development rights acquisition anticipated (e.g., fee
ownership, undivided interest, conservation restriction, retained life estate,
reversionary interest);
         (k)   Description of the residential development rights the owner
wishes to retain; and
         (l)   Explanation of the status of mineral rights.
      (2)   Required information may be provided on the application form, in
written documents and/or on maps, as appropriate.
   (E)   Project review and appraisal. The Planning Commission shall review the
proposed ADR project with respect to the requirements of this chapter and other
applicable ordinances and laws. If a proposed project satisfies the applicable
criteria and requirements, the Planning Commission may request the Township
Board to allocate funds for an appraisal. A "before" and "after" appraisal
shall be made to determine the value of the development rights. The appraisal
shall determine the fair market value of full ownership of the land (excluding
buildings thereon) and shall determine the fair market value of the
agricultural rights, plus any residential development rights specifically
retained.
      (1)   Appraisals shall be made by state certified appraisers selected by
the Planning Commission on a bid basis. The selected appraiser shall not have a
property interest, personal interest, or financial interest in the project
parcel. In the event that the low bidder has a conflict of interest, the second
lowest bidder shall conduct the appraisal.
      (2)   Appraisals shall be in writing and shall be furnished to the owners
for review. Errors of fact in any appraisal may be called to the attention of
the appraiser by the township or the owners, but corrections to the appraisal
shall be made only by the appraiser. If an owner believes the property has not
been properly appraised, the owner may have the appraisal reviewed, at the
owner's expense, by another state certified appraiser. The Planning Commission
shall consider both appraisals in making its recommendations to the Township
Board regarding project eligibility and value of development rights.
   (F)   Planning Commission recommendation and Township Board decision. Before
making a recommendation, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing,
following the public notice and hearing requirements for special land uses in §
156.477 of this code. Following review of the application, supporting data and
maps, appraisals, and any reports from experts, the Planning Commission shall
make a recommendation to the Township Board. The Township Board shall have the
authority to take final action on all ADR proposals. The decision by the
Township Board is discretionary; the findings and recommendation of the
Planning Commission shall not obligate the Township Board to approve or reject
a proposal to acquire development rights. The township administration shall
maintain a list of properties on which development rights have been acquired
with the conditions of acquisition.
   (G)   Conditions of approval. Township Board action to approve an ADR
proposal shall be set forth in a written agreement that is in a form that is
suitable for recording. The agreement shall specify conditions of approval,
including the following, at minimum:
      (1)   Runs with the land. An agreement to convey development interests
shall state that such conveyance shall run with the land;
      (2)   Property to remain substantially undeveloped. To promote the
agricultural use, or to preserve the opportunity for agricultural use of
properties on which the township has acquired development rights, such
properties shall remain substantially undeveloped;
      (3)   Rights retained by owner. An agreement for the sale or transfer of
development rights may include provisions by the owner to retain certain
rights, including, but not limited to:
         (a)   Residential development rights. The right to build residential
dwellings (residential development rights); provided that, no retained
residential development rights would result in more than one dwelling unit per
20 acres of land. The building locations for retained residential development
rights may be restricted in a negotiated "development rights easement";
         (b)   Right to convey retained rights. The right to sell, mortgage,
bequeath or donate the retained property rights; provided that, subsequent
interest holder shall be bound by the conditions of approval of the ADR
proposal; and
         (c)   Maintaining existing structures. The right to maintain, renovate
and replace existing structures; provided that, any such activity shall not
substantially alter the character or function of the structures.
      (4)   Prohibited activities. Any activity on or use of the ADR project
property is prohibited if the activity is inconsistent with the purposes of
this chapter or detrimental to the conservation values being preserved. By way
of example, the following activities and uses are prohibited:
         (a)   Any division or subdivision of the property;
         (b)   Commercial or industrial use (for the purposes of this chapter,
an agricultural use shall not be considered commercial or industrial);
         (c)   The placement or construction of any buildings, structures,
fences, walls, roads, parking lots or other improvements, unless expressly
permitted;
         (d)   Cutting of trees and vegetation, unless expressly permitted;
         (e)   Mining or alteration of the land surface, except where mineral
rights have been retained by another owner and where the other owner has
explicit rights to mine on the property (such information shall be disclosed on
the application);
         (f)   Dumping of waste or other materials;
         (g)   Alteration to natural watercourses, wetlands or other natural
water features;
         (h)   Use of motorized off-road vehicles, such as snowmobiles, dune
buggies, all-terrain vehicles and motorcycles; and
         (i)   Construction of billboards and other advertising signs.
      (5)   Agreements. An agreement to convey development interests shall
provide the township or its agent with certain rights needed to monitor the
protection of the conservation values of the property. These rights shall
include:
         (a)   Right to enter. The township shall have the right to enter the
property at reasonable times to monitor or enforce compliance with the
conditions of approval of the ADR proposal. The township, however, shall not
unreasonably interfere with the owner's retained rights on the property;
         (b)   Right to preserve. The township shall have the right to prevent
any activity or use of the property that is inconsistent with the conditions of
approval of the ADR proposal;
         (c)   Right to require restoration. The township shall have the right
to require restoration of the areas or features of the property that are
damaged by activity inconsistent with the conditions of approval of the ADR
proposal. The township or land trust shall also have the right to conduct
studies on the property to determine the appropriate types of restoration
activities, if necessary; and
         (d)   Signs. The township shall have the right to place signs on the
property to indicate that the property is being protected under the terms of a
ADR agreement.
      (6)   Restoration. An agreement to convey development interests may
provide the township with the right to engage in activities that restore the
biological and ecological integrity of the property. The activities may include
inventorying plant and animal species on the property, planting native
vegetation, removal of undesirable vegetation and the like.
   (H)   Duration of acquired interests, re-purchase of development rights.
Development rights acquired pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for
an indefinite period of time by the township or by a land conservation
organization or trust. Where the township holds an interest in the land and the
Township Board finds that, due to changing circumstances, the essential land
protection goals can no longer be achieved or the positive conservation values
can no longer be reasonably protected, then the Township Board may act to
dispose of the township's interest in the land. Disposition may be accomplished
by transfer to a land conservation or trust, pursuant to §
151.04(A), or by sale. If disposition is to be by sale, then the Township Board
shall submit to the voters a proposition to approve of the disposition of
interest in the land. If a majority of those voting approve such a proposition,
then the Township Board shall cause an appraisal to be made, in the same manner
as the initial appraisal, as described herein. The owner of the land from which
the development rights were acquired (or his or her successor) shall be given
the right of first refusal to re-purchase the development rights for an amount
not less than the appraised value. If the owner does not wish to re-purchase
the development rights, then they shall be offered to the general public for an
amount not less than the appraised value. Proceeds from the sale of development
rights shall be held by the township to only fund the continuing activities of
the ADR program, and for no other purpose.
(Ord. passed 6-29-1999)
§ 151.07 FEES.
   The township may charge a fee for review of applications for acquisition of
development rights. The fee shall be established by resolution of the Township
Board in an amount necessary to cover the cost of review.
(Ord. passed 6-29-1999)
§ 151.08 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Enforcement Officer. For the purposes of investigating a possible
violation of this chapter, the Township Supervisor shall be the Enforcement
Officer, unless the Township Board appoints another person to serve as
Enforcement Officer.
   (B)   Notice. If the township determines that the owner of the remaining
property rights is in violation of the conditions of approval of the ADR
application, or that a violation is threatened, the township shall provide
written notice to the owner, which shall identify the violation and request
corrective action to cure the violation and restore the property within a
specific period of time.
   (C)   Failure to act. If the violation has not been cured and property
restored within the specified period of time, the township is authorized to
take appropriate legal action, which may include injunctive or other equitable
relief, issuance of an appearance ticket, issuance of a civil infraction
citation, or prosecution in the Circuit Court for the County of Ingham or any
other court having jurisdiction.
   (D)   Acts beyond the owner's control.
      (1)   The township may not bring action against an owner for
modifications to the property resulting from causes beyond the owner's control,
such as unintentional fires, storms or trespassers.
      (2)   The township may, however, bring action against another party for
modifications that impair the continued protection of the land.
(Ord. passed 6-29-1999)
§ 151.09 SEVERABILITY.
   (A)   This chapter and each of the various parts, sections, divisions,
provisions, sentences and clauses are severable.
   (B)   If any part, section, divisions, provision or clause is found to be
invalid or unenforceable for any reason by a court of competent jurisdiction,
the finding shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this chapter,
which shall remain in full force and effect.
(Ord. passed 6-29-1999)
§ 151.10 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall take effect on the             day of
                               , 1999, 30 days following publication in a
newspaper of general circulation in Williamstown Township, as required by law.
(Ord. passed 6-29-1999)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   Any violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person
violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to punishment by a
fine not exceeding $500 or by imprisonment not exceeding 90 days for each
offense, or both, at the discretion of the Court. Each day a violation occurs
or continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. passed 6-29-1999)
CHAPTER 152: WETLAND PROTECTION
Section
General Provisions
   
152.001   Title
   
152.002   Legislative authority
   
152.003   Purpose
   
152.004   Scope of regulations
   
152.005   Rules of construction
   
152.006   Definitions
Wetlands Inventory and Identification
   
152.020   Township Wetland Inventory Map
   
152.021   Wetland identification and delineation
Wetland Use Permit
   
152.035   Activities requiring a wetland use permit
   
152.036   Permissible activities
   
152.037   Nonconforming uses and structures
   
152.038   Protection of wetlands during land division and development
   
152.039   Criteria for evaluating permit applications
   
152.040   Criteria for evaluating a permit application involving wetlands less
than two acres
Permit Application and Review Procedures
   
152.050   Wetland use permit application requirements
   
152.051   Wetland use permit review procedures - minor wetland activities
   
152.052   Wetland use permit review procedures - activities not considered
minor
   
152.053   Request for revaluation of property
Permit Conditions and Mitigation
   
152.065   Wetland use permit conditions
   
152.066   Mitigation
Enforcement
   
152.080   Fees
   
152.081   Notice to the Michigan Department of Natural Resources and
Environment (MDNRE)
   
152.082   Abrogation and conflict of authority
   
152.083   Effective date
 
   
152.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.001 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and cited as the “Wetland Protection Ordinance
of Williamstown Township.”
(Ord. passed 3-5-2002; Ord., § 1.1, passed 9-7-2010)
§ 152.002 LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The authority for requiring permits and regulating activities within
wetlands is derived from § 30308 of Part 303 of Michigan Public Act 451 of
1994, as amended, which is also known as the Natural Resources and
Environmental Protection Act, or NREPA.
   (B)   The Williamstown Township Board finds that wetlands are indispensable
and fragile natural resources that provide many public benefits, including
maintenance of water quality through nutrient cycling and sediment trapping,
and by serving as biological and chemical oxidation basins; flood and storm
water runoff control through temporary water storage; groundwater recharge; and
by providing open space, passive outdoor recreation opportunities, and fish and
wildlife habitat.
   (C)   Preservation of the remaining township wetlands in a natural condition
is necessary to maintain hydrological, economic, recreational, and aesthetic
natural resource values for existing and future residents of Williamstown
Township.
   (D)   Pursuant to Article 4, § 52 of the Constitution of the State of
Michigan, the conservation and development of natural resources of the state is
a matter of paramount public concern in the interest of the health, safety, and
general welfare of the people. Therefore, with authority provided by Part 303
of Act 451, the Township Board finds that this chapter is essential to the long
term health, safety, economic, and general welfare of the people of
Williamstown Township, and, to the furtherance of the policies set forth in Act
451.
(Ord. passed 3-5-2002; Ord., § 1.2, passed 9-7-2010)
§ 152.003 PURPOSE.
   This chapter is adopted for the following purposes:
   (A)   To provide for the protection, preservation, replacement, proper
maintenance, restoration, and use of the township’s wetlands in accordance with
their character, adaptability, and stability, in order to prevent their
pollution or contamination; minimize their disturbance and disturbance to the
natural habitat therein; and prevent damage from erosion, siltation, and
flooding.
   (B)   To encourage proper and reasonable economic use of wetlands,
discourage and prevent improper use, reduce financial burdens that improper
uses impose on the community, maintain a harmonious and compatible land use
balance within the township, and prevent nuisance conditions that arise with
the indiscriminate use or development of wetlands.
   (C)   To support the enforcement of applicable federal, state, and county
statutes, ordinances, and regulations, including the Natural Resources and
Environmental Protection Act which imposes a responsibility on governmental
agencies, individuals, and organizations to prevent or minimize the pollution,
impairment or destruction of natural resources that would be likely to be
caused by their activities.
   (D)   To establish standards and procedures for the review and regulation of
the use of wetlands.
   (E)   To provide for the issuance of wetland use permits for approved
activities.
   (F)   To provide a procedure for appealing decisions.
   (G)   To establish enforcement procedures and penalties for the violation of
this chapter.
   (H)   To assure that the right to reasonable use of private property is
maintained.
(Ord. passed 3-5-2002; Ord., § 1.3, passed 9-7-2010)
§ 152.004 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   These regulations apply to all wetlands, as defined in this
chapter, that: (i) are contiguous to an inland lake or pond, or a river or
stream, or (ii) are equal to or greater than one half acre in size, or (iii)
are not contiguous to an inland lake or pond, or a river or stream, and are one
half acre or greater but less than two acres in size, if the township
determines that its protection is essential to the preservation of the natural
resources of the township, pursuant to §
152.040. It is unlawful to conduct or maintain any regulated activity or use
within a regulated wetland without full compliance with the requirements of
this chapter and Part 303 of Act 451.
      (2)   Whenever persons requesting a wetland use permit are also subject
to state and/or federal permit requirements, the following shall also apply:
         (a)   The township shall have jurisdiction for the regulation of
wetlands under this subchapter, concurrent with the jurisdiction of the
Michigan Department of Natural Resources and Environment.
         (b)   Approvals under this division shall not relieve a person of the
need to obtain a permit from the Michigan Department of Natural Resources and
Environment and/or U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, if applicable.
         (c)   Issuance of a permit by the Michigan Department of Natural
Resources and Environment and/or U.S. Army Corps of Engineers shall not relieve
a person of the need to obtain approval under this chapter, if applicable.
   (B)   In the event that the MDNRE retains authority over any wetlands that
are not governed by this chapter, then wetlands use permit applications
involving such wetlands shall be submitted to the township for review and
comment, pursuant to § 30307(7) of Part 303 of Act 451.
(Ord. passed 3-5-2002; Ord., § 1.4, passed 9-7-2010)
§ 152.005 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   The following rules of construction apply to this chapter:
   (A)   The particular shall control the general.
   (B)   Words used in the present tense shall include the future.
   (C)   Words used in the singular number shall include the plural and the
plural shall include the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the
contrary.
   (D)   The words “shall,” “will,” and “must” are always mandatory and not
discretionary. The word “may” is permissive.
   (E)   The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
   (F)   All measurements shall be to the nearest integer, unless otherwise
specified herein.
   (G)   The phrase “used for” includes “arranged for,” “designed for,”
“intended for,” “occupied for,” and “maintained for.”
   (H)   The word “building” includes the word “structure.” The word “build”
includes the words “erect” and “construct.” A “building” or “structure”
includes any part thereof.
   (I)   The word “person” shall be defined as noted in the following §
152.006.
   (J)   Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation
involves two or more items, conditions, provisions, or events connected by the
conjunction “and,” “or,” or “either/or,” the conjunction shall be interpreted
as follows:
      (1)   “And” indicates that all the connected items, conditions,
provisions, or events shall apply.
      (2)   “Or” indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or
events may apply singularly or in any combination.
      (3)   “Either/or” indicates that the connected items, conditions,
provisions or events shall apply singularly but not in combination.
   (K)   Catch words and catch lines shall in no way by their presence or
absence limit or affect the meaning of this chapter.
   (L)   Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, where an
illustration accompanies any item within this chapter, the written text shall
have precedence over the illustrations.
   (M)   Words or terms not herein defined shall have the meaning customarily
assigned to them.
(Ord. passed 3-5-2002; Ord., § 2.1, passed 9-7-2010)
§ 152.006 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGGRIEVED PERSON. Any land owner whose property is within a wetlands
drainage basin who may reasonably assume that proposed activity within the
wetlands would affect the quantity or quality of water on the land owner’s
property.
   AQUATIC LIFE. Vertebrates or invertebrates that are dependent on wetlands
for some vital portion of their life cycle including any of the following:
breeding, spawning, nesting, rearing of young, feeding, and resting or
protection.
   CONTIGUOUS.
      (1)   A permanent surface water connection or other direct contact with
an inland lake, pond, river or stream;
      (2)   A seasonal or intermittent direct surface water connection or other
direct contact to an inland lake, pond, river or stream;
      (3)   A wetland that is partially or entirely located within 500 feet of
the ordinary high water mark of an inland lake, pond, river or stream, unless
it is demonstrated by the property owner with clear and convincing evidence
that there is no relation whatsoever between the wetland and the inland lake,
pond, river or stream, taking into account the purposes of this chapter; or
      (4)   Two or more areas of wetland separated only by human barriers, such
as dikes, roads, berms, or other similar features, but only with any of the
wetland areas contiguous under the criteria described in divisions (1), (2), or
(3) of this definition.
   CONTINUING VIOLATION. A violation of this chapter for which a citation and/
or stop work order has been issued but no substantive restorative action has
been taken.
   DEPOSIT. To fill, place or dump.
   EXCEPTIONAL WETLAND. A wetland that provides physical or biological
functions essential to the natural resources of the state and that may be lost
or degraded if not preserved through an approved site protection and management
plan for the purposes of providing compensatory wetland mitigation.
   FILL MATERIAL. Soil, rocks, sand, pilings, waste of any kind, or any other
material that displaces soil or water, reduces water retention potential or
reduces wetland vegetation growth.
   INLAND LAKE OR STREAM. A natural or artificial lake, pond, or impoundment; a
river, stream, or creek that may or may not be serving as a drain as defined by
the Drain Code of 1956 (M.C.L.A. §§ 280.1 to 280.630); or any other body of
water that has definite banks, a bed, and visible evidence of a continued flow
or continued occurrence of water, or a lake, or a pond that has a surface area
of less than five acres.
   LANDSCAPE LEVEL WETLAND ASSESSMENT. The use of aerial photographs, maps, and
other remotely sensed information to predict and evaluate wetland
characteristics and functions in the context of all of the following:
      (1)   The wetland’s landscape position and hydrologic characteristics.
      (2)   The surrounding landscape.
      (3)   The historic extent and condition of the wetland.
   LOT. A designated parcel of land established by subdivision, condominium, or
metes and bounds description, to be used or built upon as a unit.
   MINOR DRAINAGE. Ditching and tiling for the removal of excess soil moisture
incidental to the planting, cultivating, protecting, or harvesting of crops or
improving the productivity of land in established use for agriculture,
horticulture, silviculture, or lumbering.
   MINOR WETLAND ACTIVITY. Types of regulated activities that would be expected
to have only a minor impact on wetlands and that can, therefore, be reviewed
through an expedited permit application process. MINOR WETLAND ACTIVITIES are
further defined as those that may cause only minimal adverse environmental
effects when performed separately, and may have only minimal cumulative adverse
effects on the environment. Examples of minor wetland activities are listed in
the document titled “General Permit Categories for Minor Activities in Wetlands
in the State of Michigan,” which was issued by the Michigan Department of
Natural Resources and Environment on June 13, 2007, and is attached to this
ordinance as Appendix A. These examples of minor activities in wetlands are
subject to replacement by minor project categories established by the MDNRE
pursuant to § 303.1.2, Park 303 P.A. 451 of 1994, as amended. Examples of MINOR
ACTIVITIES listed include: construction or maintenance of small ponds one-half
of an acre or less, construction of simple elevated or floating structures,
construction of fences, walkways on public lands or lands managed by nonprofit
conservation organizations, construction of new driveways or widening of
existing driveways, installation of utilities, oil, gas, and mineral well
access roads, storm water outfalls, culverts for water level equalization,
emergency administration, drain management and conservation, septic system
replacement, repairs to serviceable structures, emergency spill cleanup,
cleanup of hazardous substances and hazardous and toxic waste, maintenance
dredging of man-made storm water and wastewater treatment ponds and lagoons;
public road projects, minor residential construction with the total impact area
in wetlands not exceeding one-quarter acre for all phases, scientific measuring
devises and test wells, fish and wildlife habitat structures, wetland habitat
restoration and enhancement, removal of man-made structures, and mowing of
vegetation or the removal of vegetation in the area between the ordinary high-
water mark and the water’s edge.
   MITIGATION OF WETLANDS. Creation of new wetlands of the same or similar
function to offset unavoidable loss of existing wetlands, or preservation of
non-regulated wetlands of the same or similar function to offset unavoidable
loss of existing wetlands.
   MOWING OF VEGETATION. The cutting of vegetation to a height of not less than
two inches, without disturbance of soil or plant roots.
   NATIONWIDE PERMIT. A nationwide permit issued by the United States Army
Corps of Engineers under 72 FR 11091 to 11198 (March 12, 2007), including all
general conditions, regional conditions, and conditions imposed by this state
pursuant to a water quality certification under § 401 of Title IV of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act, 33 USC 1341, or a coastal zone management
consistency determination under § 307 of the Coastal Zone Management Act of
1972, 16 USC 1456.
   PERSON. An individual, sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association, municipality, this state, and instrumentality or agency of this
state, the federal government, or an instrumentality or agency of the federal
government, or other legal entity.
   PLANNER or TOWNSHIP PLANNER. The Planning Director, staff planner or
consulting planner designated by the Township Board to advise the township
administration, Township Board, and Planning Commission on items such as
planning, zoning, land use, subdivision, housing and other related planning and
development issues. This term shall include township specialists on such
subjects as landscaping, woodlands, and wetlands.
   RAPID WETLAND ASSESSMENT. A method for generally assessing the functions,
values, and condition of individual wetlands based on existing data and field
indicators.
   REMOVE. To dig, dredge, suck, pump, bulldoze, drag line, or blast.
   RESTORATION. Action taken to return a wetland from a disturbed or totally
altered condition to a previously existing natural or un-altered condition.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed, erected, or assembled of materials above or
below the surface of the land or water, including but not limited to,
buildings, bulkheads, piers, docks, landings, dams, waterway obstructions,
paving and roads, poles, towers, cables, pipelines, drainage tiles, and other
underground installations.
   TOWNSHIP BOARD. The Supervisor, Clerk, Treasurer, and Trustees, who together
serve as the legislative body of Williamstown Township, Ingham County,
Michigan.
   TOWNSHIP WETLAND INVENTORY MAP. The Williamstown Township Wetland Inventory
Map created to comply with Part 303 of the Natural Resources and Environmental
Protection Act P.A. 451 of 1994, as amended. The Township Wetland Inventory Map
is based on the National Wetland Inventory Map of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service; the Michigan Resource Information System Mapping (MIRIS), aerial
photography, and on-site inspections. The TOWNSHIP WETLAND INVENTORY MAP may be
referred to herein as INVENTORY MAP.
   TOWNSHIP WETLANDS CONSULTANT. The person or firm designated by the Township
Board to advise the township administration, Township Board, and Planning
Commission on matters related to implementing this chapter.
   WATER DEPENDENT. Requiring access or proximity to or siting within an
aquatic site to fulfill its basic purpose.
   WETLAND.
      (1)   A WETLAND is land characterized by the presence of water at a
frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal
circumstances does support, wetland vegetation or aquatic life and is commonly
referred to as a bog, swamp, or marsh, and which is any of the following:
         (a)   Contiguous to the Great Lakes or Lake St. Clair, an inland lake
or pond, or a river or stream.
         (b)   Not contiguous to the Great Lakes, and inland lake or pond, or a
river or stream; and more than five acres in size.
         (c)   Not contiguous to the Great Lakes, an inland or pond, or a river
or stream; and five acres or less in size if the department determines that
protection of the area is essential to the preservation of the natural
resources of the state from pollution, impairment, or destruction and the
department has so notified the owner.
      (2)   A WETLAND is further characterized by the presence of hydric soils
and prevalence of hydrophytic vegetation typically adapted for life in
saturated soil conditions. A wetland that exhibits these characteristics may be
dry on the surface during part or all of the year.
   WETLAND BUFFER. A strip of land surrounding a wetland that provides
protection for the wetland from inadvertent and secondary impacts. A WETLAND
BUFFER may also protect wildlife habitat, prevent erosion, provide nutrient
filtration and serve other functions associated with a wetland.
   WETLAND MITIGATION PLAN. A plan which describes actions that will be taken
to compensate for permitted wetland impacts.
   WETLAND VEGETATION. Plants that, under normal conditions, exhibit
adaptations to allow germination and growth with at least their root systems in
water or in saturated soils.
(Ord. passed 3-5-2002; Ord., § 2.2, passed 9-7-2010)
WETLANDS INVENTORY AND IDENTIFICATION
§ 152.020 TOWNSHIP WETLAND INVENTORY MAP.
   The Township Wetland Inventory Map is a general guide to the location of
wetlands in Williamstown Township that shall be used in the administration of
this chapter.
   (A)   The Township Wetland Inventory Map on file at the township, together
with all explanatory matter thereon and attached thereto, as may be amended
through the wetland identification, verification or delineation process, is
hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this chapter.
   (B)   The Township Wetland Inventory Map does not create any legally
enforceable presumptions regarding whether a particular lot contains or does
not contain wetlands, since wetlands are subject to verification and
delineation as specified herein.
   (C)   Wetlands boundaries approved through delineation shall be added to the
Township Wetland Inventory Map.
   (D)   The township shall insure that each record owner of property on the
property tax roll shall be notified of any amendment to the Township Wetland
Inventory Map. The notice shall indicate that:
      (1)   The Inventory Map has been amended;
      (2)   The Inventory Map may be viewed at the Township Hall;
      (3)   The owner’s property may be designated as a wetland on the
Inventory Map;
      (4)   The township has a Wetlands Protection Ordinance;
      (5)   The Inventory Map does not necessarily include all of the wetlands
in the township that may be subject to the Wetland Protection Ordinance.
(Ord. passed 3-5-2002; Ord., § 3.1, passed 9-7-2010)
§ 152.021 WETLAND IDENTIFICATION AND DELINEATION.
   The Township Wetland Inventory Map shall be validated through the wetland
identification process, and the wetland delineation process. The wetland
identification process shall be used to verify that wetlands exist on
properties where shown on the Wetland Inventory Map. The wetland delineation
process shall be used to establish the actual boundaries of the wetlands.
   (A)   Wetland identification process. Prior to issuance of any permit to
develop or use a parcel of land which is shown to have a wetland on the
Inventory Map or which is otherwise determined to potentially contain a
wetland, wetland delineation may be required. The Township Wetland Consultant
shall first decide whether identification is required based on the proximity,
relationship and potential impact of the proposed use on the wetland.
      (1)   The township or owners of property containing wetlands may initiate
the identification process.
      (2)   The identification shall be limited to a finding that wetlands
exist (and their regulatory status) or do not exist by the Township Wetland
Consultant. The finding may be based on, but not limited to review of aerial
photography and topographical maps and field inspection. The wetland
identification process does not include the establishment of exact wetland
boundaries.
      (3)   In the event that there is a finding of no wetlands on the
property, then no further action by the applicant would be required and the
finding shall be recorded on the Wetland Inventory Map.
      (4)   In the event that there is a finding of a wetland, then the
establishment of the actual boundary through the wetland delineation process
may be required to amend the Township Wetland Inventory Map or process a
wetland use permit application.
   (B)   Wetland delineation process.
      (1)   Prior to the issuance of a permit for regulated activities in
wetlands or to develop or use a parcel of land containing wetlands, wetland
delineation may be required. Following wetland delineation by the applicant’s
consultant or by the MDNRE as requested by the applicant, a survey or
dimensioned site plan shall be provided, drawn at an appropriate scale, showing
property lines, buildings and other points of reference. The Township Wetland
Consultant shall then approve or recommend revisions to the applicant’s wetland
delineation and findings pertaining to regulatory status. The findings of these
processes, once accepted in final by the township, shall be indicated on the
Township Wetland Inventory Map. In addition to illustrating the wetland
findings from the delineation on the Wetland Inventory Map, the information
shall be kept on file and made available at the township.
      (2)   The township shall apply the technical wetland delineation
standards set forth in the United States Army Corps of Engineers January 1987
wetland delineation manual, technical report Y-87-1, and appropriate regional
United States Army Corps of Engineers supplements, in identifying wetland
boundaries under this part, including, but not limited to, § 30307.
   (C)   Informal review of wetlands (pre-application meeting). Prior to
seeking wetlands delineation as described herein, a property owner may request
advice and preliminary evaluation of wetlands by the Township Wetland
Consultant. Such assistance shall be arranged through the township, and shall
be subject to payment of fees to cover expenses.
(Ord. passed 3-5-2002; Ord., § 3.2, passed 9-7-2010)
WETLAND USE PERMIT
§ 152.035 ACTIVITIES REQUIRING A WETLAND USE PERMIT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any of the following
activities within a regulated wetland without first obtaining a wetland use
permit in accordance with the requirements of this chapter:
   (A)   Depositing or permitting fill material to be deposited in a wetland.
   (B)   Grading land, soil, or other materials in a wetland.
   (C)   Dredging, removing, or permitting the removal of soil or minerals from
a wetland.
   (D)   Draining, or causing to be drained, any water from a wetland.
   (E)   Diverting, obstructing or impeding the flow of water within a
protected wetland.
   (F)   Constructing, operating, or maintaining any use or development in a
wetland.
   (G)   Fertilization or chemical application for other than commercial
agricultural purposes or ecological restoration purposes.
   (H)   Cutting of vegetation other than for purposes of agricultural
practices or ecological restoration.
(Ord. passed 3-5-2002; Ord., § 4.1, passed 9-7-2010)
§ 152.036 PERMISSIBLE ACTIVITIES.
   The following uses shall be allowed in a wetland without a permit, subject
to other applicable state laws and regulations:
   (A)   Fishing, trapping or hunting.
   (B)   Swimming or boating.
   (C)   Hiking.
   (D)   Grazing of animals.
   (E)   Farming, horticulture, silviculture, lumbering and ranching
activities, including plowing, irrigation, irrigation ditching, seeding,
cultivating, minor drainage, harvesting for the production of food, fiber, and
forest products, or upland soil and water conservation practices. Wetlands
altered as permitted in this division shall not be used for a purpose other
than a purpose described in this division without a permit from the township.
   (F)   Maintenance or operation of serviceable structures in existence on
October 1, 1980 or constructed pursuant to Part 303 of the Natural Resources
and Environmental Protection Act.
   (G)   Construction or maintenance of farm or stock ponds.
   (H)   Maintenance, operation, or improvement which includes straightening,
widening or deepening of the following which is necessary for the production or
harvesting of agricultural products:
      (1)   An existing private agricultural drain.
      (2)   That portion of a drain legally established pursuant to the Drain
Code of 1956, Act No. 40 of the Public Acts of 1956, as amended, being M.C.L.A.
§§ 280.1 to 280.630, which has been constructed or improved for drainage
purposes.
      (3)   A drain constructed pursuant to other provisions of Part 303 of the
Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act (Act 451, Public Acts of
1994, as amended) or former Act No. 203 of the Public Acts of 1979.
   (I)   Construction or maintenance of farm roads, forest roads, or temporary
roads for moving mining or forestry equipment, if the roads are constructed and
maintained solely for agricultural or silvicultural purposes, and are
constructed and maintained in a manner to assure that adverse effect on the
wetland will be otherwise minimized.
   (J)   Drainage necessary for the production and harvesting of agricultural
products if the wetland is owned by a person who is engaged in commercial
farming and the land is to be used for the production and harvesting of
agricultural products. Except as otherwise provided in Part 303 of the Natural
Resources and Environmental Protection Act, wetlands modified under this
division after October 1, 1980, shall not be used for nonfarming purposes
without a permit from the MDNRE. This division shall not apply to a wetland
which is contiguous to a lake or stream, or to a tributary of a lake or stream,
or to a wetland which the MDNRE has determined by clear and convincing evidence
to be a wetland which is necessary to be preserved for the public interest, in
which case a permit shall be required.
   (K)   Maintenance or improvement of existing public streets, highways or
roads, within the right-of-way and in such a manner as to assure that any
adverse effect on the wetland will be otherwise minimized. Maintenance or
improvement does not include adding extra lanes, increasing the right-of-way,
or deviating from the existing location of the street, highway, or road.
   (L)   Maintenance, repair, or operation of gas or oil pipelines and
construction of gas or oil pipelines having a diameter of six inches or less,
if the pipelines are constructed, maintained, or repaired in a manner to assure
that any adverse effect on the wetland will be otherwise minimized.
   (M)   Maintenance, repair, or operation of electric transmission and
distribution power lines and construction of distribution power lines if the
distribution power lines are constructed, maintained, or repaired in a manner
to assure that any adverse effect on the wetland will be otherwise minimized.
   (N)   Operation or maintenance, including reconstruction of recently damaged
parts, of serviceable dikes and levees in existence on October 1, 1980, or
constructed pursuant to Part 303 of the Natural Resources and Environmental
Protection Act.
   (O)   Construction of iron and copper mining tailings basins and water
storage areas.
   (P)   A wetland that is incidentally created as a result of one or more of
the following activities:
      (1)   Excavation for mineral or sand mining, if the area was not a
wetland before excavation. This exemption does not include a wetland on or
adjacent to a water body of one acre or more in size.
      (2)   Construction and operation of a water treatment pond or lagoon in
compliance with the requirements of state or federal water pollution control
regulations.
      (3)   A diked area associated with a landfill if the landfill complies
with the terms of the landfill construction permit and if the diked area was
not a wetland before diking.
   (Q)   Any structure lawfully existing prior to the adoption date of this
chapter that is damaged by fire, explosion, an act of God, or other cause
beyond the control of the owner may be restored, rebuilt, or repaired, but only
to its former condition. Reconstruction must commence within two years from the
date the structure was damaged, and all necessary township, state, and federal
permits must be obtained.
   (R)   The cutting of vegetation within the right-of-way of a public street,
highway, or road for the purpose of vehicular safety.
   (S)   Impacts to vegetation occurring for the sole purpose of ecological
restoration of native plant communities.
   (T)   Removal and replacement of existing septic systems.
(Ord. passed 3-5-2002; Ord., § 4.2, passed 9-7-2010)
§ 152.037 NON-CONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Any structure or use lawfully existing prior to the adoption date of
this chapter, but not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, may be
continued, maintained and operated. No such nonconforming structure or use
shall be enlarged, increased, or expanded without first seeking a wetland use
permit.
   (B)   Any structure lawfully existing prior to the adoption date of this
chapter, damaged by fire, explosion, act of God, or other causes beyond the
control of the owner, may be restored, rebuilt, or repaired without obtaining a
wetland use permit, provided construction on the structure commences within two
years from the date the structure was damaged.
(Ord. passed 3-5-2002; Ord., § 4.3, passed 9-7-2010)
§ 152.038 PROTECTION OF WETLANDS DURING LAND DIVISION AND DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   Land division to create new lots shall be allowed only if there will
be sufficient buildable area to meet the minimum zoning setback regulations,
and provide adequate non-wetland area to accommodate principal and accessory
buildings, off-street parking, septic disposal fields, well location, and other
required site features; except that land division may be permitted if the
property owner records an affidavit acknowledging that the presence of wetlands
may affect the usability of the resulting parcels for permitted uses in the
zoning district. The affidavit shall be reviewed by the Township Planner and
Assessor prior to recording, and property owner shall provide a copy of the
recorded affidavit or deed restriction to the township. This provision shall
not apply to previously recorded lots of record upon which one single-family
house is proposed to be built.
   (B)   Maximum lot coverage by a building shall be based on that part of the
site outside of the wetland.
(Ord., § 4.4, passed 9-7-2010)
§ 152.039 CRITERIA FOR EVALUATING PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   The criteria to evaluate wetland use permit applications to permit a use
listed in §
152.035 are as follows:
   (A)   A permit for an activity listed in §
152.035 shall not be approved unless the township finds that issuance of the
permit would be in the public interest, would be otherwise lawful in all
respects, and is necessary to allow reasonable use of the property.
   (B)   In determining whether an activity is in the public interest, the
benefit which reasonably may be expected to accrue from the activity shall be
balanced against the reasonably foreseeable detriments of the activity. The
decision shall reflect the national, state, and local concern for the
protection of natural resources from pollution, impairment, and destruction,
giving consideration to the following:
      (1)   The relative extent of public and private need for the proposed
activity.
      (2)   The availability of feasible and prudent alternative locations and
methods to accomplish the expected benefits from the activity.
      (3)   The extent and permanence of beneficial or detrimental effects that
the proposed activity may have on the public and private uses for which the
area is suited, giving consideration to the benefits the wetland provides.
      (4)   The probable impact of the proposal in relation to the cumulative
effect created by other existing and anticipated activities in the watershed.
      (5)   The probable impact on recognized historic, cultural, scenic,
wildlife, ecological, or recreational values, and on public health or safety.
      (6)   The size and quality of the wetland being considered and the amount
and quality of the wetland remaining in the general area.
      (7)   Economic value, both public and private, of the proposed activity.
      (8)   Findings of necessity for the proposed activity by other local,
county, or state agencies.
      (9)   Proximity to any waterway.
      (10)   Extent to which upland soil erosion adjacent to the protected
wetland is controlled.
   (C)   In considering a permit application, the township shall give serious
consideration to the findings of necessity for the proposed activity which have
been made by state agencies.
   (D)   A wetland use permit shall not be issued unless it is shown that an
unacceptable disruption will not result to the aquatic resources, giving
consideration to the above criteria. A permit shall not be issued unless the
applicant also demonstrates that:
      (1)   The proposed activity is primarily dependent upon being located in
the wetland.
      (2)   A proposed mitigation plan will replace the lost or eliminated
resource value of the wetlands.
      (3)   A feasible and prudent alternative does not exist.
   (E)   If it is otherwise a feasible and prudent alternative, an area not
presently owned by the applicant that could reasonably be obtained, utilized,
expanded, or managed in order to fulfill the basic purpose of the proposed
activity may be considered.
   (F)   An alternative that entails higher costs, as described in R 281.922a
(11) of the Michigan Administrative Code, is not feasible and prudent if those
higher costs are unreasonable. In determining whether such costs are
unreasonable, the department shall consider both of the following:
      (1)   The relation of the increased cost to the overall scope and cost of
the project.
      (2)   Whether the projected cost is substantially greater than the costs
normally associated with the particular type of project.
   (G)   Failure to submit a complete application is sufficient reason for
denial of a wetland use permit.
(Ord. passed 3-5-2002; Ord., § 4.5, passed 9-7-2010)
§ 152.040 CRITERIA FOR EVALUATING A PERMIT APPLICATION INVOLVING WETLANDS LESS
THAN TWO ACRES.
   Non-contiguous wetlands that are one-half acre or greater but less than two
acres in size shall be unregulated unless the Township Board finds that the
wetland is essential to the preservation of the natural resources of the
township, pursuant to § 30309 of Part 303 of Michigan Public Act 451 of 1994,
as amended. In making this determination, the Township Board must find that one
or more of the following conditions exist at the site:
   (A)   The site supports state or federal endangered or threatened plants,
fish, or wildlife appearing on a list specified in § 36505 of the Natural
Resources and Environmental Protection Act.
   (B)   The site represents what is identified as a locally rare or unique
ecosystem.
   (C)   The site supports plants or animals of an identified local importance.
   (D)   The site provides groundwater recharge documented by a public agency.
   (E)   The site provides flood and storm control by the hydrologic absorption
and storage capacity of the wetland.
   (F)   The site provides wildlife habitat by providing breeding, nesting, or
feeding grounds or cover for forms of wildlife, waterfowl, including migratory
waterfowl and rare, threatened, or endangered wildlife species.
   (G)   The site provides protection of subsurface water resources and
provision of valuable watersheds and recharging groundwater supplies.
   (H)   The site provides pollution treatment by serving as a biological and
chemical oxidation basin.
   (I)   The site provides erosion control by serving as a sedimentation area
and filtering basin, absorbing silt and organic matter.
   (J)   The site provides sources of nutrients in water food cycles and
nursery grounds and sanctuaries for fish.
(Ord., § 4.6, passed 9-7-2010)
PERMIT APPLICATION AND REVIEW PROCEDURES
§ 152.050 WETLAND USE PERMIT APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Coordination with other permits. An application for a wetland use
permit may be submitted prior to or concurrently with an application for site
plan approval or other land use permit application.
   (B)   Application requirements. The application for a wetland use permit
shall include the following:
      (1)   A completed application for wetlands, on the form supplied by the
MDNRE, (copies of which may be obtained from the township).
      (2)   A wetland delineation or verification request shall include, at
minimum, the following information: dominant vegetation in the tree, sapling,
shrub, and herb layers; presence or lack of accepted wetland hydrology
indicators; analysis of soil including a description of the soil profile to at
least 20 inches and comparison to Ingham County Soil Survey; and a map or maps,
drawn to scale, showing the actual wetland boundaries. Mapped data shall be
represented in a manner that allows comparison to the Township Wetland
Inventory Map. The boundaries of the wetlands shall be staked or flagged and
clearly marked with sequential numbers in the field to permit observation and
review by the Township Wetland Consultant.
      (3)   Soil drainage and stormwater management plans.
      (4)   A mitigation plan, if the proposed activity will result in the loss
of or alteration to wetland resources.
      (5)   Copies of any proposed or existing MDNRE or Michigan Department of
Natural Resources permits or applications (including any for floodplains or
threatened and endangered species) filed with township in accordance with Part
303 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act (Act 451, Public
Acts of 1994, as amended), which shall become part of the application.
      (6)   A written statement of the qualifications of the applicant’s
wetland expert.
(Ord. passed 3-5-2002; Ord., § 5.1, passed 9-7-2010)
§ 152.051 WETLAND USE PERMIT REVIEW PROCEDURES - MINOR WETLAND ACTIVITIES.
   Minor wetland activities, as defined in §
152.006, shall be processed in accordance with the expedited review process set
forth herein. All other wetland use permit applications shall follow the
regular review process in §
152.052.
   (A)   Expedited review process for minor wetland activities.
      (1)   Upon receipt of an application for a minor wetland activity, the
Township Supervisor or his/her designee shall insure that all required
information has been submitted. If an application is not complete, the
applicant may be granted additional time to complete the application provided
that the applicant agrees that the additional time shall not be charged against
the township’s 90-day decision period. The receipt of the application shall
constitute permission from the owner to conduct an on-site investigation.
      (2)   Upon receipt of an application the Township Supervisor or his/her
designee shall:
         (a)   Transmit one copy of the application to the Township’s Wetlands
Consultant, who shall evaluate the proposed action and mitigation measures
based upon the criteria listed in §
152.040 of this chapter and submit a written recommendation to the Township
Supervisor or his/her designee.
         (b)   Transmit one copy of the application to the Michigan Department
of Natural Resources and Environment (MDNRE).
         (c)   Render a decision within 45 days of receipt of a completed
application on the proposed activity based in part upon the Wetland
Consultant’s review and recommendation. The Township Supervisor or his/her
designee may attach reasonable conditions to the permit in accordance with the
requirements of §
152.065 of this chapter.
         (d)   After reviewing the Wetland Consultant’s report, if the Township
Supervisor or his/her designee determines that the proposed activity within the
wetland would be of sufficient intensity that the wetland may be negatively
impacted, full review and approval of the application by the Planning
Commission and Township Board shall be required. If the application is
forwarded to the Planning Commission and Township Board, a decision on the
proposed wetland use application shall be rendered within 90 days of receipt of
a completed application.
         (e)   Any person who is aggrieved by a decision regarding a minor
wetland activity permit application may request that the Township Board
reconsider the action following the procedures outlined in §
152.052(B)(4).
(Ord., § 5.2, passed 9-7-2010)
§ 152.052 WETLAND USE PERMIT REVIEW PROCEDURES - ACTIVITIES NOT CONSIDERED
MINOR.
   The following wetland use permit review procedures shall be followed for
activities not considered minor, as defined in §
152.006.
   (A)   Review options. The applicant may elect to have the application
processed under one of the following review options:
      (1)   The application may be reviewed prior to the review of a land use
proposal on the site, with the understanding that the land use review may not
be complete at the time a decision is rendered on the wetland application.
Election of this option may require a reopening of the wetland application
review if the land use approval is inconsistent with the wetland permit
approval.
      (2)   The applicant may choose to have the wetland use application
reviewed and acted upon concurrently with review and action on a land use
proposal on the site, in which case the 90-day review period limitation
specified in division (B)(3), shall be considered automatically extended to
accommodate the land use review process.
   (B)   Procedures.
      (1)   The Township Planner, or his/her designee, shall insure that all
required information has been submitted. If an application is not complete, the
applicant may be granted additional time to complete the application provided
that the applicant agrees that the additional time shall not be charged against
the township’s 90-day decision period. The receipt of the application shall
constitute permission from the owner to conduct an on-site investigation.
      (2)   Upon receipt of an application the township administration shall:
         (a)   Transmit one copy of the completed application to the Michigan
Department of Natural Resources and Environment (MDNRE).
         (b)   Publish a notice of the application and the date and time of the
Planning Commission public hearing required by division (B)(3)(c). The township
administration may consult with the Planning Commission Chairperson or Vice
Chairperson regarding scheduling of the hearing. The hearing notice shall be
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the township not less than
five days nor more than 15 days prior to the date of the hearing. Such notice
shall indicate the place, time and subject of the hearing, the place and time
the proposed wetland use permit application may be examined, and the date and
time for submission of written public comments. The wetland use permit hearing
may be held in conjunction with a hearing on the related land use proposal.
         (c)   Post the subject property with a sign no less than six square
feet in size which shall indicate that an application for a wetland use permit
application has been submitted and that date and time for the public comment.
         (d)   Transmit copies of the application and supporting documentation
to the Township Planner and Township Wetlands Consultant. The Wetlands
Consultant and Planner shall submit written reviews and recommendations to the
township, basing their comments on the criteria in this chapter.
         (e)   Transmit the application and supporting documentation to the
Planning Commission.
      (3)   Planning Commission and Township Board review.
         (a)   Wetland use permit applications shall be decided by the Township
Board, following receipt of a recommendation by the Planning Commission.
         (b)   The Planning Commission shall hold one public hearing, as
described in division (B)(2)(b).
         (c)   After completing review of the report and recommendation from
the Township Wetland Consultant, holding a public hearing, and reviewing other
public comment received, the Planning Commission shall recommend approval,
approval with conditions or denial of the application to the Township Board.
The Township Board shall then make a final decision within 90 days after
receipt of the completed application.
         (d)   Written notice of the decision shall be sent to the applicant
and to all persons who have requested notice of the decision. The denial of a
permit shall be accompanied by a written statement of the reasons for denial.
         (e)   A permit approval shall become effective ten calendar days
following the date of the approval.
      (4)   Request for reconsideration.
         (a)   Any person who is aggrieved by a decision regarding a wetland
use permit may request that the Township Board reconsider their action by
filing a written request, which shall specify the reasons that reconsideration
is requested, and which shall include any additional information that the
Township Board may not have had when it first acted on the permit. The request
for reconsideration shall be submitted to the Township Clerk within ten
calendar days following the date of the initial decision. The timely filing of
a request for reconsideration shall have the effect of staying the permit
pending the outcome of the request. Since such reconsideration would be above
and beyond any action mandated by Act 451, such action need not occur within
the township’s 90-day decision period.
         (b)   The Township Board shall hold a hearing on the request for
reconsideration which shall be open to public comment and shall include an
opportunity for the appealing party to present evidence.
         (c)   Notice of the time and place for consideration of a request for
reconsideration shall be sent by mail or personal delivery to the owners of the
property considered in the request. The notice may also be placed in a
newspaper of general circulation in the township not less than five days nor
more than 15 days prior to the date of the meeting at which the request will be
addressed.
         (d)   The Township Board shall affirm, affirm with conditions, or
reverse, their initial decision.
(Ord. passed 3-5-2002; Ord., § 5.3, passed 9-7-2010)
§ 152.053 REQUEST FOR REVALUATION OF PROPERTY.
   The owner of any property for which a wetland use permit was applied for
under this chapter and was denied, may request revaluation of the affected
property by the Township Board of Review for assessment purposes to determine
its fair market value under the use restriction. A landowner who is aggrieved
by a determination, action, or inaction under this chapter may protest and
appeal that determination, action or inaction pursuant to the General Property
Tax Act, Act No. 206 of the Public Acts of 1893, being M.C.L.A. §§ 211.1 to
211.157.
(Ord. passed 3-5-2002; Ord., § 5.4, passed 9-7-2010)
PERMIT CONDITIONS AND MITIGATION
§ 152.065 WETLAND USE PERMIT CONDITIONS.
   (A)   As a condition of approval, the Township Board, upon consideration of
recommendations from the Planning Commission, Township Wetlands Consultant, or
Township Planner, may attach reasonable conditions considered necessary to
insure that the intent of this chapter will be fulfilled, to minimize or
mitigate damage or impairment to, encroachment in, or interference with natural
resources and processes within the protected wetland or to otherwise improve or
maintain the water quality.
   (B)   As a condition of approval, the Township Board may establish a
reasonable time for undertaking and completing all proposed activities and
improvements, not to exceed five years.
   (C)   Following approval of a wetland use permit application, a wetland use
permit shall be issued provided that the proposed activity complies with other
ordinances and laws, and that all other required permits have been obtained.
   (D)   As a condition of approval, the township may require the applicant to
file with the Township Treasurer a performance guarantee in the form of cash,
certified check, or an irrevocable bank letter of credit, in amount determined
necessary to insure compliance with the wetland use permit.
   (E)   A wetland use permit for a seasonal operation need not be renewed
annually unless otherwise stated in the permit. Any temporary, seasonal, or
permanent operation that is discontinued for two or more seasons shall be
presumed to have been abandoned and the wetland use permit automatically
voided.
   (F)   Any change in activity that increases the size or scope of the
operation and that affects the criteria considered in approving the permit
shall require the filing of a new wetland use permit application.
   (G)   Any permit granted under this chapter may be revoked or suspended by
the Township Board, after notice and an opportunity for a hearing, for any of
the following causes:
      (1)   A violation of a condition of the permit.
      (2)   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose relevant facts in
the application.
      (3)   A change in conditions that requires a temporary or permanent
change in the activity.
   (H)   An applicant who has received a wetland use permit shall comply with
the following in connection with any construction or other activity on the
property for which the wetland use permit has been issued:
      (1)   Maintain soil erosion and sedimentation control structures and
measures, including but not limited to, silt fences, straw bale berms, and
sediment traps.
      (2)   Maintain clear delineation of the protected wetlands so that the
boundaries are visible to all construction workers.
      (3)   Post on the site, prior to commencement of work on the site and
continuing throughout the duration of the project, a copy of the approved
wetland use permit containing the conditions of issuance, in a conspicuous
manner such that the wording of said permit is available for public inspection.
   (I)   The wetland use permit shall remain effective for a time period
coincidental with any other land use permit reviewed and approved concurrent
with the wetland use permit. If applied for in writing prior to the expiration
date and concurrent with the expiring land use permit, the Township Board may
grant a wetland use permit extension that corresponds to additional time
granted for the underlying land use permit. The maximum number of extensions
shall coincide with the maximum number allowed for the underlying land use
permit. Where there is no other activity or permit involved, the wetland use
permit shall remain effective for one year, with the opportunity for a one year
extension.
(Ord. passed 3-5-2002; Ord., § 6.1, passed 9-7-2010)
§ 152.066 MITIGATION.
   (A)   No net loss of wetlands. Unless explicitly approved otherwise by the
Township Board, there shall be no permitted net loss in acreage of regulated
wetlands in Williamstown Township. Wherever wetlands area loss or direct
wetland resource impairment are anticipated due to proposed land use activity,
mitigation shall be required. The ratio of wetland mitigation acreage to
wetland impact acreage shall be at least 2:1 unless explicitly approved by the
Township Board. Mitigation shall not substitute for making all prudent efforts
to avoid wetlands loss. Accordingly, prior to considering a proposal for
wetland mitigation, the applicant shall provide evidence to demonstrate that:
      (1)   No reasonable alternatives exist to avoid impact to existing
wetlands; and
      (2)   The resource value of existing wetlands will be replaced through
mitigation. Such resource value may include flood prevention; wildlife habitat;
groundwater resource protection and recharge; pollution treatment; erosion
control; nutrient sources; aesthetics; recreation; open space, or other
resource value associated with the impacted wetland.
   (B)   Exception to mitigation requirement. The Township Board may waive the
mitigation requirement, upon receiving a recommendation from the Township
Wetlands Consultant, and making the finding that the loss of wetland resource
value will be so small as to make mitigation infeasible and/or unreasonable.
   (C)   Compensatory wetland mitigation. In accordance with § 30311d of Part
303 of Public Act 451 of 1994, as amended, the township in coordination with
the MDNRE may approve one or more of the following methods of compensatory
wetland mitigation:
      (1)   Acquisition of approved credits from a wetland mitigation bank.
      (2)   The restoration of a previously existing wetland. The restoration
of a previously existing wetland is preferred over the creation of a new
wetland where none previously existed.
      (3)   The creation of new wetlands, if the permit applicant demonstrates
that ecological conditions necessary for establishment of a self-sustaining
wetland ecosystem exists or will be created.
      (4)   The preservation of existing wetlands.
   (D)   Review of mitigation plans. Mitigation plans shall be submitted to the
Township Wetland Consultant and reviewed with the wetland use permit
application in accordance with the procedures outlined in §
152.051.
   (E)   Review criteria. The following criteria shall be used to evaluate a
mitigation plan:
      (1)   Mitigation shall be provided on-site where practical and beneficial
to the wetland resources. If mitigation on-site is not practical and
beneficial, then mitigation in the immediate vicinity, within the same
watershed, of the permitted activity may be considered. Only if all of these
options are impractical shall mitigation be considered elsewhere.
      (2)   The mitigation plan shall assure that there will be no net loss to
the wetland resource values.
      (3)   The mitigation plan must comply with all applicable federal, state,
and local laws.
      (4)   A plan to monitor preserved and replacement wetlands over a minimum
of five years must be included with the mitigation proposal. The monitoring
plan shall provide a means (financial and technical) to modify the mitigation
plan, where necessary, to preserve the resource value of the wetland.
   (F)   Timing of mitigation. Mitigation activity shall be completed before
initiation of other permitted activities, unless the Township Board finds that
another schedule would be more appropriate.
(Ord. passed 3-5-2002; Ord., § 6.2, passed 9-7-2010)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 152.080 FEES.
   Applications for wetland use permits, wetland verification and delineation
under this chapter shall be accompanied by an application fee in an amount
specified by resolution of the Township Board. In the absence of such a
resolution, fees shall be paid in an amount to cover the expenses of
professional review, inspection and enforcement, publication of notices, and
other expenses related to implementation of this chapter on a specific parcel
or in connection with a specific development proposal.
(Ord. passed 3-5-2002; Ord., § 7.2, passed 9-7-2010)
§ 152.081 NOTICE TO THE MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES AND
ENVIRONMENT (MDNRE).
   (A)   The township shall notify the Michigan Department of Natural Resources
and Environment (MDNRE) of the adoption of this chapter. The township shall
cooperate with the Department of Natural Resources and Environment in the
enforcement of Part 303 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection
Act regarding wetlands under the jurisdiction of the MDNRE as defined under
this chapter.
   (B)   The township shall notify the MDNRE of its decisions on all
applications processed by the township.
(Ord. passed 3-5-2002; Ord., § 7.3, passed 9-7-2010)
§ 152.082 ABROGATION AND CONFLICT OF AUTHORITY.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to conflict with present or
future state statutes in the same subject matter; conflicting provisions of
this chapter shall be abrogated to, but only to, the extent of the conflict.
Moreover, the provisions of this chapter shall be construed, if possible, to be
consistent with and in addition to relevant state regulations and statutes. If
any part of this chapter is found to be invalid or unconstitutional by any
court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate,
distinct and independent provision. Such holding shall not affect the validity
of the remaining portions thereof, and the remainder of the chapter shall
remain in force.
(Ord. passed 3-5-2002; Ord., § 7.4, passed 9-7-2010)
§ 152.083 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall become effective seven days after publication and
recording by the Township Clerk.
   (A)   Recommendation by the Planning Commission: July 20, 2010.
   (B)   Adoption by the Township Board: September 7, 2010.
   (C)   Effective date: seven days after publication.
(Ord. passed 3-5-2002; Ord., § 7.5, passed 9-7-2010)
§ 152.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Penalties. In addition to the rights and remedies herein provided to
the township, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be subject
to a fine in an amount not exceeding $500 per day or per separate offense, or
imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days, or both, at the discretion of
the court. Each violation of this act shall be a separate offense and in the
event of a continuing violation, each day during which the violation exists
shall be deemed to be separate and distinct offense. Each day such violation is
continued or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and
shall be punishable as such hereunder. The assessment of penalties shall not
diminish the authority of the township to order the restoration of a damaged
wetland and seek full restitution for such work, pursuant to division (D).
   (B)   Stop work orders. Whenever any work is performed contrary to the
provisions of this chapter, the Township Supervisor or his/her agent shall
order the work to cease by notice in writing served on any persons engaged in
doing or causing such work to be performed, and any such persons shall, upon
receipt of the order, shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the
Township Supervisor or his/her agent to proceed.
   (C)   Civil remedies. Any use of land or premises in violation of any
provision of this chapter is declared to be a nuisance per se. Whenever any
work is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter, the township may
commence judicial proceedings for injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate
relief to prevent, enjoin, abate, correct, restore, or remove any violation of
this chapter. The rights and remedies herein provided are civil in nature and
in addition to any criminal remedies under this chapter or provided by state
law.
   (D)   Investigation, restoration. The Township Wetlands Consultant or his/
her agent, officer or employee shall have authority under this chapter to enter
upon privately-owned land for the purpose of performing the township’s duties
under this chapter and may take or cause to be made such examinations, surveys
or samplings as are deemed necessary. In the event of a violation of this
chapter, the Township Board shall have the power to order restoration of the
damaged wetland by the owner of the property or the person or agent responsible
for the violation. If the owner or person responsible does not complete the
restoration measures within an ordered period of time, the Township Board may
order the affected wetland restored to its prior condition and/or create or
restore other wetlands for the purpose of offsetting losses sustained as a
result of the violation. The owner or person responsible for the original
violation shall be responsible to the township for the full cost of all such
remedial activity.
(Ord. passed 3-5-2002; Ord., § 7.1, passed 9-7-2010)
CHAPTER 153: FLOODPLAINS
Section
   
153.01   Title
   
153.02   Purpose
   
153.03   Definitions
   
153.04   Flood insurance study; maps
   
153.05   Compliance with chapter
   
153.06   Effective date
§ 153.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Williamstown Township
Floodplain, Ord. 25".
(Ord. 25, eff. 4-10-1982)
§ 153.02 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and
property due to water or erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to flood, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, streams, channels and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of flood
waters;
   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging and other developments which may
increase erosion or flood damage; and
   (E)   Prevent and regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards.
(Ord. 25, eff. 4-10-1982)
§ 153.03 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless specifically defined above, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. The land in the floodplain within a community
subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improve or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, mobile home development excavation or drilling
operations located within the area of special flood hazard.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). The official map on which the Federal
Insurance Administration had delineated both the areas of special flood hazards
and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The official report provided by the Federal Insurance
Administration that includes flood profiles, flood boundary-floodway maps and
the water surface elevation of the base flood.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
chapter.
(Ord. 25, eff. 4-10-1982)
§ 153.04 FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY; MAPS.
   The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance
Administration in a scientific engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance
Study for the Township of Williamstown", dated October 15, 1981, with
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood Boundary-flooding Maps is
hereby adopted by reference, and declared to be a part of this chapter. The
flood insurance study is on file at the Williamstown Township office.
(Ord. 25, eff. 4-10-1982)
§ 153.05 COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER.
   (A)   The administrative officials of the township shall be the Township
Planning Commission and the Williamstown Township Board which will review all
development and subdivision proposals to ensure compliance with this chapter.
   (B)   All development will be prohibited within areas of special flood
hazard as provided by the Flood Insurance Study Maps.
   (C)   The Planning Commission and the Township Board shall hear and decide
all appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter
consistent with the standards of § 60.3 (d) and 60.6 (a) of the Rules and
Regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program (44 C.F.R. parts 59 et
seq.).
(Ord. 25, eff. 4-10-1982)
§ 153.06 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall become effective 30 days after publication.
   (A)   Adopted: March 2, 1982;
   (B)   Date of publication: March 11, 1982; and
   (C)   Effective: April 10, 1982.
(Ord. 25, eff. 4-10-1982)
CHAPTER 154: DIVISION OF LAND
Section
General Provisions
   
154.01   Title
   
154.02   Legislative determination
   
154.03   Scope of application
   
154.04   Definitions
   
154.05   Fees
   
154.06   Severability
   
154.07   Effective date
Application Requirements
   
154.20   Application forms and documentation
   
154.21   Information required
Review Procedures
   
154.35   Submittal to Township Assessor and Planner
   
154.36   Review by Township Planner
   
154.37   Review by the Planning Commission
   
154.38   Accelerated review
   
154.39   Decision by the Township Assessor
   
154.40   Report to the Board of Trustees and Planning Commission
   
154.41   Recording deeds
   
154.42   Appeals
   
154.43   Application for site plan approval or a building permit
   
154.44   Issuance of a building permit not certain
Standards for Granting Approval
   
154.60   Adoption
   
154.61   General requirements, compliance with state law
   
154.62   Zoning requirements
   
154.63   Taxes and assessment liens
   
154.64   Consent of the title holder
   
154.65   Disruption to flow of water
   
154.66   Deed restrictions
   
154.67   Easements
   
154.68   Buildability
 
   
154.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.01 TITLE.
   This chapter is hereby designated and shall be referred to as the
"Williamstown Township Ordinance to Regulate the Division of Land".
(Ord. 33, passed - -1996)
§ 154.02 LEGISLATIVE DETERMINATION.
   In the interest of protecting the public health, safety and welfare, the
Board of Trustees of the Township of Williamstown finds that this chapter is
necessary to regulate the division and partitioning of parcels of land which
are not subject to platting procedures and requirements and to regulate
division and partitioning of lots located in recorded subdivisions. This
chapter is created pursuant to the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, M.C.L.A. §§
125.3101 – 125.3702, as amended; Public Act 288 of 1967, being M.C.L.A. §§
560.101—560.293, as amended by various Acts including Public Act 591 of 1996
and Public Act 87 of 1997; and Public Act 246 of 1945, as amended. This
chapter,
Chapter 155 and
Chapter 156 of this code shall be considered the ordinances referred to in §
105(b) of Public Act 591 of 1996, which have been adopted in part to carry out
the provisions of the Act 591.
(Ord. 33, passed - -1996; Ord. rev. 4-1-1997; Ord. rev. 12-1-1998)
§ 154.03 SCOPE OF APPLICATION.
   It shall be unlawful for a person to divide or partition any lot, outlot or
other parcel or tract of land in a recorded plat or divide or partition any
unplatted parcel or tract of land, or transfer property between adjoining
parcels or tracts, except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter,
unless the division or partition is approved and a part of a recorded plat,
pursuant to the Land Division Act, Michigan Public Act 288 of 1967, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101—560.293, as amended, or unless the division or partition is
approved pursuant to the Condominium Act, Michigan Public Act 59 of 1978, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 559.101—559.272, as amended.
(Ord. 33, passed - -1996; Ord. rev. 12-1-1998)
§ 154.04 DEFINITIONS.
   Whenever used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meaning ascribed to them.
   ACREAGE TRACT or ACREAGE LAND. Land or real estate which is not located in,
or a part of, a recorded plat.
   ACCESSIBLE. A parcel is accessible if it meets one or both of the following
requirements:
      (1)   The parcel has an area where a driveway provides vehicular access
to an existing road or street and meets all applicable location standards of
the Michigan Department of Transportation or Ingham County Road Commission
pursuant to Michigan Public Act 200 of 1969, as amended, or has an area where a
driveway can provide vehicular access to an existing road or street and meet
all such applicable location standards.
      (2)   The parcel is served by and existing easement that provides
vehicular access to an existing road or street and meets all applicable
location standards of the Michigan Department of Transportation or Ingham
County Road Commission pursuant to Michigan Public Act 200 of 1969, as amended,
or can be served by a proposed easement that will provide vehicular access to
an existing road or street and that will meet all such applicable location
standards.
(Ord. rev. 4-1-1997)
   APPLICANT. An individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or
combination thereof, who holds ownership interest in land and is seeking
approval for a division or partition of land in accordance with this chapter.
   DATE OF FILING. The date on which an application for division of land is
submitted to the township in a form that complies with all of the application
requirements specified in this chapter.
(Ord. rev. 4-1-1997)
   DIVISION. The partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of land for the
purposes of sale, or lease of more than one year, or of building development,
that results in one or more parcels of less than 40 acres or the equivalent,
and that satisfies the requirements of § 108 and 109 of Public Act 288 of 1967,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101—560.293, as amended. DIVISION does not include a
property transfer between two or more adjacent parcels, if the property taken
from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel, and a division is not subject
to the platting requirements of the Public Act 288.
(Ord. rev. 4-1-1997)
   DIVIDE or PARTITION. The splitting or separating of a parcel of land into
parts by changing the boundaries and/or legal description, where such splitting
or separating of land is not accomplished pursuant to platting procedures under
the Land Division Act, Michigan Public Act 288 of 1967, being M.C.L.A. §§
560.101—560.293, as amended, or the Condominium Act, Michigan Public Act 59 of
1978, being M.C.L.A. §§ 559.101—559.272, as amended.
   LAND. All land areas occupied by real property.
(Ord. rev. 4-1-1997)
   LOT, SUBDIVISION. A piece of land, the dimensions and configuration of which
are shown on a subdivision plat or condominium subdivision plan recorded in the
offices of the Ingham County Register of Deeds.
   LOT, ZONING. A single tract of land, located within a single block which, at
the time of filing for a building permit, is designated by its owner or
developer as a tract to be used, developed or built upon as a unit, under
single ownership and control. A ZONING LOT shall satisfy this chapter with
respect to area, size, dimensions and frontage as required in the district in
which the zoning lot is located unless the zoning lot is legally non-conforming
or the Zoning Board of Appeals has approved variances from applicable zoning
requirements. When used in this chapter, the term LOT shall generally refer to
a ZONING LOT, unless otherwise specified.
   PARCEL. A measured portion of land which is described by virtue of a request
to divide or partition the parcel in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. A PARCEL may be a subdivision lot or an acreage tract or acreage land.
   PARENT PARCEL or PARENT TRACT. A parcel or tract lawfully in existence on
the effective date of Public Act 591 of 1996.
(Ord. rev. 4-1-1997)
   PERSON. An individual, trustee, executor, other fiduciary, corporation,
firm, partnership, association, organization or other legal entity acting as a
unit.
   PLANNER, TOWNSHIP. The Township Planner is the person or firm designated by
the Township Board to advise the Township administration, Township Board and
Planning Commission on planning, zoning, land use, housing and other related
planning and development issues. The Township Planner may be a consultant or an
employee of the township.
   PLAT. A map or chart of a subdivision of land which has been approved in
accordance with the Land Division Act, Michigan Public Act 288 of 1967, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101—560.293, as amended.
   PRIVATE ROAD. A road which for ingress and egress to and from land that does
not abut a public road, which the road is not dedicated for use by the public.
   PUBLIC ROAD. A road that is dedicated for use of the public for travel and
which is maintained by a public agency, such as the township or Ingham County
Road Commission.
   SUBDIVIDE, SUBDIVISION. The partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract
of land for the purpose of sale, or lease of more than one year, or of building
development that results in one or more parcels of less than 40 acres or the
equivalent, and that is not exempted from the platting requirements specified
in Public Act 288 of 1967, being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101—560.293, as amended.
SUBDIVIDE or SUBDIVISION does not include a property transfer between two or
more adjacent parcels, if the property taken from one parcel is added to an
adjacent parcel.
(Ord. rev. 4-1-1997)
   TRACT. Two or more parcels that share a common property line and are under
the same ownership.
   WETLANDS.
      (1)   Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under
normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted
for life in saturated soil conditions.
      (2)   WETLANDS generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas.
(Ord. 33, passed - -1996)
§ 154.05 FEES.
   The township may charge a fee for review of applications for division of
land. The fee shall be established by resolution of the Township Board in an
amount necessary to cover the cost of the review.
(Ord. 33, passed - -1996)
§ 154.06 SEVERABILITY.
   This chapter and each of the various parts, sections, divisions, provisions,
sentences and clauses are severable. If any part, section, division, provision,
sentence or clause is found to be invalid or unenforceable for an reason by a
court of competent jurisdiction, the finding shall not affect the validity of
the remainder of this chapter, which shall remain in full force and effect.
(Ord. 33, passed - -1996)
§ 154.07 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   Motion to approve having been made by Trustee
                                  and seconded by
                                     , this chapter was made and passed by the
Board of Trustees of Williamstown Township on the
                               day of                          , 1996. This
chapter shall take effect on the                                 day of
                           , 1996, 30 days following publication in a newspaper
of general circulation within Williamstown Township, as required by law.
(Ord. 33, passed - -1996)
APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
§ 154.20 APPLICATION FORMS AND DOCUMENTATION.
   The application for division of land shall be made on the forms and
according to the guidelines provided by the township. The application shall be
accompanied by the necessary fees and information as specified in this chapter.
(Ord. 33, passed - -1996)
§ 154.21 INFORMATION REQUIRED.
   Applications shall be accompanied by the following information:
   (A)   Except for large acreage parcels (equal to or greater than 40 acres)
that can be adequately described in reference to section or quarter section
lines, three copies of a drawing shall be submitted, which may be an informal
scale drawing (such as a tentative parcel map referred to in § 109(1)(a) of
Public Act 288 of 1967, being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101—560.293, as amended), which
shall include all information listed below. A tentative decision may be made
based on this informal scale drawing, with final approval withheld until
receipt of a formal drawing prepared by a professional land surveyor registered
in the State of Michigan. The final drawing shall be prepared according to the
guidelines specified in § 3 of Michigan Public Act 132 of 1970, as amended,
showing the parcels that would result from the requested division of land,
provided that the parcels are drawn as large as possible within the eight and
one-half-inch by 14-inch format required by Act 132, and providing all of the
following information:
(Ord. rev. 4-1-1997)
      (1)   Dimensions of all existing and proposed parcels;
      (2)   All structures on and within 50 feet of the proposed parcels;
      (3)   Location of all existing and proposed public and private easements
and rights-of-way;
      (4)   Location of minimum setbacks on each proposed parcel, in accordance
with
Chapter 156 of this code;
      (5)   Location of surface water, lakes, ponds, streams and wetlands. The
initial investigation shall locate wetlands identified on the National Wetlands
Inventory maps, prepared by the U.S. Department of Interior and available from
the Michigan Department of Natural Resources. After subsequent investigation
and on-site review, the Township Assessor or other reviewing body may require
more detailed wetlands information if deemed necessary to make a decision
regarding the proposed division of land; and
      (6)   The means of access from each resulting parcel to an existing road
or street.
(Ord. rev. 4-1-1997)
   (B)   A legal description of existing parcels of land involved in the
proposed land division;
   (C)   Tentative approval may be granted without a formal legal description
of all parcels that would result from the requested division of land, but a
legal description must be received before final approval is granted. The legal
description shall be in a form sufficient for recording with the Ingham County
Register of Deeds, and shall indicate the acreage of all parcels;
   (D)   Copies of existing or proposed deed restrictions related to the
proposed parcels;
   (E)   Sufficient information about previous land division activity to
demonstrate that the parcel is eligible to be divided in the manner being
proposed;
(Ord. rev. 4-1-1997)
   (F)   If any portion of the land is subject to a farmland development rights
agreement pursuant to Michigan Public Act 116 of 1974, as amended, the Farmland
and Open Space Preservation Act, then a copy of the agreement shall be provided
to the township for review; and
   (G)   The Township Planner, Planning Commission or Assessor may require
additional information deemed necessary to determine compliance with the
standards in §§
154.60 through
154.68.
(Ord. 33, passed - -1996)
REVIEW PROCEDURES
§ 154.35 SUBMITTAL TO TOWNSHIP ASSESSOR AND PLANNER.
   All applications for division of land shall be submitted, together with the
required information, to the Township Assessor, or his or her designated
representative, and to the Township Planner. In the event that the position of
Township Planner is unoccupied, the duties assigned to the Township Planner by
this chapter shall be performed by the person(s) designated by the Township
Supervisor.
(Ord. 33, passed - -1996)
§ 154.36 REVIEW BY TOWNSHIP PLANNER.
   The Township Planner, or the person designated to perform the Planner's
duties, shall review the application for completeness of data and to determine
whether it is in compliance with this chapter and
Chapter 156 of this code. If deemed necessary during the course of his or her
review and if authorized by the Township Assessor, the Township Planner may
submit the application to other township staff, consultants or county officials
for review and recommendation, including, but not limited to, those having
jurisdiction over assessing, planning, engineering and/or building code
enforcement. The Township Planner shall prepare and submit a written status
report to the Township Assessor within ten working days of receipt of the
application.
(Ord. 33, passed - -1996)
§ 154.37 REVIEW BY THE PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   Except where accelerated review occurs pursuant to §
154.38, the Township Assessor shall submit the application to the Planning
Commission for consideration. The Planning Commission is authorized to comment
on and may provide a non-binding recommendation regarding each application for
division of land.
   (B)   Applications for division of land shall be placed on the Planning
Commission's meeting agenda for consideration under unanimous consent
procedures (i.e., "consent agenda"). Items on the consent agenda shall be
considered en bloc unless a member of the Commission requests that a particular
item be placed on the regular agenda for discussion.
   (C)   Items that remain on the consent agenda shall require unanimous
consent of the Planning Commission; otherwise, each item shall be considered
individually on the regular agenda.
(Ord. 33, passed - -1996; Ord. rev. 4-1-1997)
§ 154.38 ACCELERATED REVIEW.
   The above review procedures may be accelerated to accommodate administrative
necessity at the discretion of the Township Assessor and Planner, when a
routine application for division of land has been submitted and all township
ordinance requirements and other requirements have been met. The Township
Assessor shall prepare a report explaining the reason for using an accelerated
review and a detailed compliance report, and both shall be submitted to the
Planning Commission and the Township Board for review at their next regular
meetings.
(Ord. 33, passed - -1996)
§ 154.39 DECISION BY THE TOWNSHIP ASSESSOR.
   Upon review of the proposed division of land, and after consideration of the
comments, if any, submitted by the Township Planner, Planning Commission, other
staff, consultants and county officials, the Township Assessor shall make a
final decision concerning the proposed division, based on the standards set
forth in this chapter. The decision of the Township Assessor shall be made
within 30 days after the date of filing the application. The Township Assessor
shall direct the Township Planner or other responsible person to indicate
approved land divisions on the township base map.
(Ord. 33, passed - -1996; Ord. rev. 4-1-1997)
§ 154.40 REPORT TO THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES AND PLANNING COMMISSION.
   The Township Assessor shall report in writing any approved divisions of land
including acreage and parcel numbers, to the Township Board of Trustees, at the
next regularly scheduled Board meeting following the approval.
(Ord. 33, passed - -1996)
§ 154.41 RECORDING DEEDS.
   Within 60 days after approval of any division of land, the appropriate deeds
and other transfer documents shall be recorded with the Ingham County Register
of Deeds, if applicable, based on the descriptions and surveys set forth in the
approved application. The recording of the deeds and transfer documents shall
be the responsibility of the applicant.
(Ord. 33, passed - -1996)
§ 154.42 APPEALS.
   (A)   An appeal may be taken to the Zoning Board of Appeals by any person
aggrieved by a decision by the Township Assessor or other body charged with
enforcement of this chapter.
   (B)   In ruling on an appeal related to this chapter, the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall follow the general guidelines for appeals as set forth in
Chapter 156 of this code.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent an applicant from seeking a
variance from zoning requirements prior to submitting an application for
division of land pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 33, passed - -1996)
§ 154.43 APPLICATION FOR SITE PLAN APPROVAL OR A BUILDING PERMIT.
   Following final approval of a division of land in accordance with this
chapter, the property owner may apply for site plan review or a building
permit, as applicable, to allow development in accordance with
Chapter 156 of this code. Building permits shall not be issued for illegal lot
splits or division of land. Notwithstanding this provision, nothing in this
chapter is intended to prevent issuance of building permits or development on
legal non-conforming lots of record, subject to compliance with zoning
requirements.
(Ord. 33, passed - -1996)
§ 154.44 ISSUANCE OF A BUILDING PERMIT NOT CERTAIN.
   (A)   Approval of a divisions of land is not a determination that the
resulting parcels comply with other ordinances and regulations. The township
and its officers and employees shall not be liable for approving a land
division if building permits for construction on the parcels are subsequently
denied because of inadequate water supply, inadequate sewage disposal
facilities, or other reasons. Any notice of approval of a division shall
include a statement to this effect.
(Ord. rev. 12-1-1998)
   (B)   If, at the time the lands division proposal is acted on, insufficient
information exists to determine whether a proposed lot can be built upon in
compliance with
Chapter 156 of this code, the proposed land division may still be approved;
provided that, the property owner first submits an affidavit acknowledging that
insufficient information has been compiled to determine usability of the
resulting parcels for permitted uses in the zoning district in which the parcel
(s) are located. Furthermore, the affidavit shall indicate that the property
owner shall not allege any taking of property resulting from future denial of a
use permit, where the denial is related to the insufficiency of information
available to the township at the time the parcel was created.
(Ord. rev. 12-1-1998)
   (C)   The affidavit shall be prepared in a form that is acceptable to the
Township Attorney, and the applicant shall record the affidavit with the office
of the Ingham County Register of Deeds relative to the parcels identified in
the affidavit. Evidence that the affidavit has been recorded shall be submitted
to the township.
(Ord. rev. 12-1-1998)
(Ord. 33, passed - -1996)
STANDARDS FOR GRANTING APPROVAL
§ 154.60 ADOPTION.
   The standards in this subchapter have been adopted to provide a uniform
basis for decisions required by this chapter, and to allow land division where
it would protect public health, safety and welfare; be consistent with the
township's Master Plan; minimize danger from fire and floods; protect and
conserve the value of land and the value of buildings and improvements upon the
land; minimize conflict between land uses; further the orderly layout and use
of land; and provide the most beneficial relationship between the uses of land
and buildings and circulation of traffic.
(Ord. 33, passed - -1996)
§ 154.61 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS, COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW.
   (A)   An application for division of land shall not be approved unless it is
in compliance with the Land Division Act, Michigan Public Act 288 of 1967,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101—560.293, as amended or replaced.
   (B)   Accordingly, the following conditions apply:
      (1)   Division of the parent parcel or parent tract. The number of
parcels created shall not exceed the amount specified by § 108 of Michigan
Public Act 288 of 1967, being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101—560.293, as amended.
Accordingly, a proposed division, together with any previous divisions of the
same parent parcel or parent tract, shall result in a number of parcels not
more than the sum of the following:
         (a)   For the first ten acres or fraction thereof in the parent parcel
or parent tract: four parcels;
         (b)   For each whole ten acres in excess of the first ten acres in the
parent parcel or parent tract: one additional parcel, for up to a maximum of 11
additional parcels;
         (c)   For each whole 40 acres in excess of the first 120 acres in the
parent parcel or parent tract: one additional parcel;
         (d)   If the parent parcel or parent tract is 20 acres or greater, the
division may result in a total of two additional parcels; provided that, one or
both of the following conditions exist:
            1.   Because of the establishment of one or more new roads, no new
driveway access to an existing public road is required or created for any of
the resulting parcels; and/or
            2.   One of the resulting parcels comprises not less than 60% of
the area of the parent parcel or parent tract.
         (e)   A parcel of 40 acres or more created by the division of a parent
parcel or parent tract shall not be counted toward the number of parcels
permitted.
(Ord. rev. 4-1-1997)
      (2)   Additional future division. A parcel or tract created by an exempt
split (as defined in Public Act 288 of 1967, being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101—560.293,
as amended) or a division is not a new parent parcel or parent tract and may be
further partitioned or split without being subject to the platting requirements
of Public Act 288 of 1967, being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101—560.293, as amended, if
all of the following requirements are met:
         (a)   Not less than ten years have elapsed since the parcel or tract
was recorded; and
         (b)   The partitioning or splitting results in not more than the
following number of parcels, whichever is less:
            1.   Two parcels for the first ten acres or fraction thereof in the
parcel or tract, plus one additional parcel for each whole ten acres in excess
of the first ten acres in the parcel or tract; and
            2.   A total of seven parcels, except that a total of ten parcels
may result if one of the resulting parcels under this division comprises not
less than 60% of the area of the parcel or tract being partitioned or split.
(Ord. rev. 4-1-1997)
      (3)   Division of land in a recorded plat.
         (a)   A subdivision lot, outlot or other parcel of land in a recorded
plat may be divided pursuant to the requirements of this chapter only if the
lot, outlot or other parcel is divided into not more than four parts; and,
provided that:
            1.   Each of the resulting parcels shall comply with minimum
requirements for a buildable zoning lot;
            2.   The total number of lots in the subdivision shall not increase
above the number originally platted; and
            3.   The total land area within the subdivision shall not decrease
below the area of the original plat.
         (b)   Proposals to increase or decrease the total land area within a
subdivision shall require a replat of all or part of the subdivision pursuant
to § 104 of Michigan Public Act 288 of 1967, being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101—560.293,
as amended. Where land has been added to a subdivision lot resulting in
expansion of the lot and subdivision boundaries, the lot shall not be
subsequently divided in a manner that would decrease the size or amount of land
encompassed by the original platted lot.
      (4)   Depth-to-width ratio. Parcels created as a result of division of
land that are ten acres or smaller shall have a maximum depth-to-width ratio of
three to one, except where it is demonstrated that a deeper lot will protect
natural resources, such as woodlands, wetlands or wildlife habitat.
(Ord. rev. 4-1-1997)
      (5)   Irregularly shaped lots.
         (a)   The purposes of minimum lot area standards are to achieve
adequate open space around and between dwelling units, achieve building
development that is proportional to the area of the lot, provide adequate land
on each lot to allow development without the need for variances, preserve the
character of the neighborhood and surrounding area, and maintain privacy on
each building lot. This can be accomplished on lots meeting the minimum area
standards that are nearly rectangular in shape, but is more difficult to
accomplish on irregularly-shaped lots, such as those with more than four sides
and/or those where a portion of the required lot area is located in one or more
appendages or extensions off of the main buildable portion of the lot (such as
T-shaped or L-shaped lots).
         (b)   Consequently, any proposal to create a new lot ten acres or less
in area shall not be permitted if the lot:
            1.   Has more than four sides;
            2.   Is irregularly-shaped as a result of an appendage or
extension; and
            3.   Has less than the minimum lot area required if the area of the
appendage or extension is not included in the lot area calculation.
(Ord. added 2-3-2004)
(Ord. 33, passed - -1996)
§ 154.62 ZONING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All parcels created as a result of division of land shall comply with
all applicable zoning requirements, including minimum lot size, lot width,
public road frontage and parking requirements. Each parcel created as a result
of division of land shall be accessible, as defined in §
154.04. No parcel that is smaller in area than currently required by the Zoning
Ordinance shall be further divided.
(Ord. rev. 4-1-1997)
   (B)   Notwithstanding these requirements, land division proposals may be
approved in the following circumstances:
      (1)   Where the proposed division of land would reduce the degree of
existing nonconformity with zoning standards; or
      (2)   Where the division of land is proposed with the intention of
immediately combining portions of the original parcel with additional land for
the purposes of creating a new parcel or parcels, provided that the new parcel
or parcels is/are in compliance with zoning requirements or reduce the degree
of nonconformity with zoning requirements.
   (C)   In each of these cases, the division shall be permitted only if the
property owner records an affidavit or deed restriction with the Ingham County
Register of Deeds which describes the property and the circumstances and
conditions of approval. The affidavit or deed restriction shall be reviewed by
the Township Planner and Assessor prior to recording, and the property owner
shall provide a copy of the recorded affidavit or deed restriction to the
township.
   (D)   An application for division of land in a commercial or industrial
district shall not be approved if the division would result in a loss of
parking so that:
      (1)   An existing use or uses would no longer comply with the minimum
parking requirements; and
      (2)   Development on a resulting parcel or parcels would be unable to
comply with the minimum parking requirements.
(Ord. 33, passed - -1996)
§ 154.63 TAXES AND ASSESSMENT LIENS.
   Any due or unpaid taxes or special assessments upon the property shall be
paid before the division of land is given final approval.
(Ord. 33, passed - -1996)
§ 154.64 CONSENT OF THE TITLE HOLDER.
   No division of land shall be approved without the written consent of the
title or deed holder of the subject parcel.
(Ord. 33, passed - -1996)
§ 154.65 DISRUPTION TO FLOW OF WATER.
   No division of land shall be approved if subsequent development within the
required setbacks would result in identifiable disruption to the existing or
natural flow of water within drainage ditches, natural watercourses, or drains
having a recorded easement, unless evidence of a feasible alternate method of
drainage is presented and approved by the County Drain Commissioner.
(Ord. 33, passed - -1996; Ord. rev. 4-1-1997)
§ 154.66 DEED RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   The effect of proposed division of land on deed restrictions shall be
considered by the Township Assessor in his or her review of the application.
However, the deed restrictions shall not be binding upon the township under
this chapter.
   (B)   The deeds for all parcels of unplatted land shall meet the
requirements of § 109, sub-sections (3) and (4) of Public Act 288 of 1967,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101—560.293, as amended. Evidence of compliance with
these requirements (e.g., copies of recorded deeds) shall be submitted to the
township.
(Ord. rev. 4-1-1997)
(Ord. 33, passed - -1996)
§ 154.67 EASEMENTS.
   Approval of a proposed division of land shall be subject to the dedication
of any easements necessary for roads, public utilities, bicycle/non-motorized
vehicle paths, sidewalks or other necessary public facilities required.
(Ord. 33, passed - -1996)
§ 154.68 BUILDABILITY.
   (A)   An application for division of land shall not be approved unless the
applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Township Assessor that the
resulting parcels have adequate usable land area, such that the parcels can be
built upon or used in compliance with Zoning Ordinance standards. In
determining whether this criterion has been met, issues that shall be taken
into consideration include, but are not necessarily limited to the following:
      (1)   Each resulting parcel shall either be served by a public sanitary
sewer and wastewater treatment system or be capable of being served by an on-
site sewage disposal system, such as a septic system, approved by the Ingham
County Health Department;
      (2)   Each resulting parcel shall either be served by a public water
system or shall be capable of obtaining adequate potable water from an on-site
well approved by the Ingham County Health Department;
      (3)   Unusual topography which may prevent use of portions of a parcel;
      (4)   Presence of easements or rights-of-way that restrict use of a
parcel;
      (5)   Wetlands, surface water or floodplains that restrict or prevent use
of portions of a parcel;
      (6)   Soils that are incapable of supporting a foundation for a building;
and
      (7)   The shape of a parcel and/or building footprint with respect to
minimum practical dwelling unit dimensions.
(Ord. rev. 4-1-1997)
   (B)   Nothing in divisions (A)(1) or (2) above shall obligate the township
to provide public sanitary sewers, wastewater treatment of public water
utilities.
   (C)   If, at the time the land division proposal is submitted, insufficient
information exists to determine whether a proposed lot can be built upon in
compliance with
Chapter 156 of this code, the proposed land division may still be approved;
provided that, the property owner first submits an affidavit acknowledging that
insufficient information has been compiled to determine usability of the
resulting parcels for permitted uses in the zoning district in which the
parcels are located. Furthermore, the affidavit shall indicate that the
property owner shall not allege any taking of property resulting from future
denial of a use permit, where the denial is related to the insufficiency of
information available to the township at the time the parcel was created.
(Ord. 33, passed - -1996)
§ 154.99 PENALTY.
   A violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor or municipal
civil infraction, as determined within the township's discretion. Any person
who is convicted of a misdemeanor under this section shall be subject to
punishment by a fine not exceeding $500 or by imprisonment not exceeding 90
days for each offense, or both at the discretion of the court. The cost of
prosecution shall also be assessed against the violator. Each day that a
violation exists or continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. If
a municipal civil infraction is imposed, the penalty shall be a fine not to
exceed $100. The Township Supervisor or his/her designated agent is hereby
authorized to write and serve municipal civil infraction tickets. This
municipal civil infraction ticket shall serve as notice of the alleged
violation. Proceedings for the municipal civil infraction shall proceed as
provided in the Township Municipal Civil Infractions Ordinance.
(Ord. 33, passed - -1996; Ord. 54, passed 6-11-2014)
CHAPTER 155: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
155.01   Title
   
155.02   Purpose
   
155.03   Scope of regulations
   
155.04   Vested rights
   
155.05   Rules of construction
   
155.06   Definitions
Plat Review Procedures
   
155.20   Summary of review procedures
   
155.21   Extension of review deadlines
   
155.22   Coordination of development options with subdivision approval
   
155.23   Pre-application conference
   
155.24   Sketch plan review
   
155.25   Tentative preliminary plat review
   
155.26   Final preliminary plat review
   
155.27   Completion of subdivision improvements
   
155.28   Final plat approval
   
155.29   Building permits and certificates of occupancy
Design Standards
   
155.40   Objectives
   
155.41   Preservation of natural features
   
155.42   Lots
   
155.43   Roads
   
155.44   Sidewalks and bicycle paths
   
155.45   Mailbox clusters
   
155.46   Landscaping
   
155.47   Public reservations
   
155.48   Easements and reserve strips
   
155.49   Utilities
Administration and Enforcement
   
155.60   Compliance
   
155.61   Interpretation, conflict and separability
   
155.62   Fees
   
155.63   Waivers
   
155.64   Performance guarantee
   
155.65   Enforcement
   
155.66   Other remedies
   
155.67   Pending prosecutions
   
155.68   Repeal and effective date
 
   
155.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 155.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Subdivision Control Ordinance
of Williamstown Township".
(Ord. passed 3-18-1997)
§ 155.02 PURPOSE.
   (A)   This chapter,
Chapter 154 and
Chapter 156 shall be considered the ordinances referred to in § 105(b) of
Public Act 591 of 1996, which have been adopted in part to carry out the
provisions of the Act 591.
   (B)   These regulations are adopted for the following additional purposes:
(Ord. rev. 4-1-1997)
      (1)   To provide for the orderly development of the township in
furtherance of the Master Plan and consistent with
Chapter 156 of this code;
      (2)   To achieve efficient use of the land and a quality living
environment;
      (3)   To provide for adequate light, air, and privacy to minimize danger
from fire, flood and other dangers, and to promote the health, safety and
welfare of the general public;
      (4)   To protect the character and social and economic stability of all
parts of the township;
      (5)   To encourage the orderly and beneficial development of the township
through appropriate control of the timing and sequence of development and
protection of sensitive environmental areas;
      (6)   To protect and conserve the value of land, buildings and
improvements by minimizing conflicts among land uses;
      (7)   To guide public and private policy making and actions in order to
achieve adequate and efficient transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks,
playgrounds, open space, police and fire protection and other public facilities
and services;
      (8)   To coordinate land use with road and highway development in the
interest of preventing traffic congestion; accommodating vehicular, pedestrian
and other non-motorized transportation; and, providing for the proper location
of streets and buildings;
      (9)   To establish reasonable standards for design of subdivisions in
order to further the orderly layout and use of land, and to ensure proper
survey, legal description and placement of monuments on subdivided land;
      (10)   To permit development at a rate that is consistent with the
availability and capacity of public facilities and services;
      (11)   To prevent the pollution of air and surface and ground water; to
assure the adequacy of drainage facilities; and to encourage the wise use and
management of natural resources so as to preserve the integrity, stability and
beauty of the township in addition to protecting the public health, safety and
general welfare;
      (12)   To promote subdivision design that conserves energy, in part by
creating a network of connected roads and by avoiding excessively long dead-end
or cul-de-sac roads; and
      (13)   To preserve the natural character and natural features of the
land, including woodlots, wetlands, watercourses, natural drainage courses and
stream channels, wildlife habitats and other valuable natural assets.
(Ord. passed 3-18-1997)
§ 155.03 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   (A)   These regulations apply to all subdivisions, created after the
effective date of this chapter, that are located totally or partially within
the boundaries of Williamstown Township; except that, proposed subdivisions
that have been granted tentative or final preliminary plat approval shall
continue to be reviewed under the requirements in place prior to adoption of
this chapter.
   (B)   No land may be subdivided through the use of any legal description
other than with reference to a plat or lot split approved by the township in
accordance with this chapter.
   (C)   No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any
parcel or plat of land created by subdivision after the effective date of this
chapter that is not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. After
the effective date of this chapter, no excavation of land or construction of
any public or private improvements shall take place or be commenced for the
purposes of creating a subdivision except in conformity with these regulations.
(Ord. passed 3-18-1997)
§ 155.04 VESTED RIGHTS.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no vested rights shall accrue
to the owner or developer of any subdivision solely as a result of tentative or
final preliminary plat or final plat approval. Furthermore, tentative
preliminary plat approval provides no rights or authority to begin improvements
or construction related to subdivision development.
(Ord. passed 3-18-1997)
§ 155.05 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   The following rules of construction shall apply to this chapter.
   (A)   The particular shall control the general.
   (B)   Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, where a
regulation involves two or more items, conditions, provisions or events
connected by a conjunction, the conjunctions shall have the following meanings.
      (1)   "And" indicates that all connected items, conditions, provisions or
events shall apply.
      (2)   "Or" indicates that all connected items, conditions, provisions or
events may apply singly or in any combination.
      (3)   "Either" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions
or events shall apply singly, but not in combination.
   (C)   Unless the context indicates to the contrary, where an illustration
accompanies any provision in this chapter, the written text shall have
precedence over the illustrations.
   (D)   References to departments, commissions, boards other offices, and
positions are to those of Williamstown Township, unless otherwise indicated. In
the event that any department, commission, board or other office or position is
renamed or replaced, then the reference shall apply to the successor
department, commission, board, office or position.
   (E)   A reference to a public official of the township is to that person who
performs the function referred to, and may include a designee of the public
official.
   (F)   A reference to days is to calendar days unless otherwise indicated in
this chapter or specified by state law. If a deadline falls on a weekend or
township holiday, the deadline shall be extended to the next working day. A
working day is defined as any day that is not a Saturday, Sunday or official
township holiday.
   (G)   In computing a period of days, the day of the act or event from which
the designated period of days begins to run shall be excluded, and the last day
of the period is included, unless the last day is not a working day. If the
last day is not a working day, the period runs until the end of the next
working day.
   (H)   Use of "shall", "will" or "must" is mandatory; use of "may" is
permissive.
   (I)   Use of "including", "includes", "such as", "additional" or
"supplemental" means that the examples provided are illustrative and not an
exhaustive listing, unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary.
   (J)   Words in the present tense include the future tense, words used in the
plural include the singular, and the singular plural, unless the context
clearly indicates to the contrary.
   (K)   The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, company or corporation, as well as an individual.
   (L)   "Across" or "across from" shall mean "on the opposite side" and shall
not be interpreted as having the same meaning as "adjacent" or "contiguous"
unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary.
   (M)   All measurements shall be to the nearest integer, unless otherwise
specified.
   (N)   Words or terms not defined herein shall have the meaning customarily
assigned to them.
(Ord. passed 3-18-1997)
§ 155.06 DEFINITIONS.
   The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this Subdivision Control Ordinance.
   ABUTTING. Having a common border with, or being separated from such common
border by, an easement.
   ACCESSIBLE. A parcel is ACCESSIBLE if it meets one or both of the following
requirements:
      (1)   The parcel has an area where a driveway provides vehicular access
to an existing road or street and meets all applicable location standards of
the Michigan Department of Transportation or Ingham County Road Commission
pursuant to Michigan Public Act 200 of 1969, as amended, or has an area where a
driveway can provide vehicular access to an existing road or street and meet
all such applicable location standards.
      (2)   The parcel is served by and existing easement that provides
vehicular access to an existing road or street and meets all applicable
location standards of the Michigan Department of Transportation or Ingham
County Road Commission pursuant to Michigan Public Act 200 of 1969, as amended,
or can be served by a proposed easement that will provide vehicular access to
an existing road or street and that will meet all such applicable location
standards.
(Ord. rev. 4-1-1997)
   ADJACENT. See CONTIGUOUS.
   ADJOINING. For the purposes of giving proper public notice as required in
this chapter, ADJOINING shall include properties across the street from the
property being developed.
   ALLEY. A public or private right-of-way primarily designed to serve as
secondary access to the side or rear of those properties whose principal
frontage is on another street. An ALLEY is not intended for general traffic
circulation.
   APPLICANT. The owner of land proposed to be subdivided or the owner's
representative who shall have express written authority to act on behalf of the
owner.
   APPROPRIATE ROAD AGENCY. The road agency having jurisdiction over the road,
street or highway being referenced.
   AS-BUILT PLANS. Construction plans that have been revised upon completion of
construction to illustrate the actual location and details of improvements.
   BERM. A continuous, raised earthen mound with a flattened top and sloped
sides, capable of supporting live landscaping materials, and with a height and
width that complies with the requirements of this or other applicable
ordinances.
   BICYCLE PATH. A path, usually separated from the roadway, designed
specifically to satisfy the physical requirements of bicycling.
   BLOCK. An area of land usually bounded on all sides by streets or other
transportation routes such as railroad lines, or by physical barriers such as
water bodies, public open space, unsubdivided acreage or other barrier to the
continuity of development, and not traversed by an existing or future through
street.
   BLOCK LENGTH. The distance between intersections of through streets, the
distance being measured along the longest street bounding the block and from
right-of-way line to right-of-way line of the two intersection streets.
   BOARD. The Township Board of Williamstown Township.
   BOND. Any form of a surety bond in an amount and form satisfactory to the
Township Board.
   BUFFER. An area occupied by trees, shrubs, fences and/or berms, designed to
separate conflicting uses or limit the view and/or travel of sound between
adjacent sites (see also GREENBELT). A BUFFER is often located along a property
line. Plantings may consist of natural vegetation or trees and shrubs planted
in accordance with a landscape plan.
   BUILDABLE AREA. The area of a lot which is defined by the minimum setback
requirements within which building construction is permitted by the terms of
this chapter.
   BUILDABLE AREA, NET. The net buildable area is that portion of a site that
is not encumbered by Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ)-
regulated wetlands (except as specifically noted), steep slopes, road rights-
of-way, easements, structures or lots, or other existing or proposed features
that would prevent construction of a building or use of the site for a use
permitted in the district in which the site is located.
   BUILDING. Any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of
persons, animals, chattels or property or materials of any kind.
   BUILDING LINE or SETBACK LINE. A line parallel to the front lot line at the
minimum required front setback line, beyond which a building or part thereof
cannot extend unless otherwise permitted under the terms of the Zoning
Ordinance.
   CALIPER. The diameter of a tree trunk measured in inches, four feet above
ground level.
   CANOPY TREE. A canopy tree is a deciduous tree which has a mature crown
spread of 15 feet or greater when grown in Ingham County and has a trunk with
at least eight feet of clear stem at maturity.
   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PROGRAM. A proposed schedule of all future projects
listed in order of construction priority together with cost estimates and the
anticipated means of financing each project.
   CAPTION. The name by which the plat is legally and commonly known.
   CENTERLINE OFFSET OF ADJACENT INTERSECTIONS. The gap between the centerlines
of roads that intersect a common road from opposite or the same sides.
   CLERK. The Township Clerk of Williamstown Township.
   CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT. A development that concentrates buildings in specific
areas on a site to allow the remaining land to be used for recreation, common
open space and preservation of environmentally sensitive areas.
   COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT. A planned commercial center containing buildings,
parking, service areas, landscaping and road improvements to accommodate
businesses involved in the sales of goods and services.
   COMMISSION or PLANNING COMMISSION. The Planning Commission of Williamstown
Township.
   COMMON OPEN SPACE. Land within or related to a development, not individually
owned or dedicated for public use, which is designed and intended for the
common use or enjoyment of the residents of the development. It may include
complementary structures and improvements (see also PRIVATE OPEN SPACE).
   CONSTRUCTION PLANS. The drawings accompanying a subdivision plat that show
the specific location and design of improvements to be installed in the
subdivision.
   CONTIGUOUS. Lots are CONTIGUOUS when at least one boundary line of one lot
touches a boundary line or lines of another lot.
   CONVENTIONAL DEVELOPMENT. Development other than planned development.
   CROSSWALK or PEDESTRIAN WALKWAY. A right-of-way, at least ten feet in width,
dedicated to public use, which crosses a block to facilitate pedestrian access
to adjacent streets.
   CUL-DE-SAC. A local street with only one outlet and having a circular
turnaround for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement.
   CULVERT. A structure designed to convey a watercourse not incorporated in a
closed drainage system under a road or pedestrian walk.
   DATE OF FILING. The date on which a plat is submitted to the Township Clerk
in a form that complies with all of the application data requirements in this
chapter for review in accordance with procedures outlined in this chapter.
   DEDICATION. A conveyance of land by a private owner in the nature of a gift
or grant and an acceptance of that land by or on behalf of the public.
   DENSITY. The permitted number of dwelling units per gross acre of land to be
developed.
   DESIGN FLOOD. The relative size or magnitude of a major flood of reasonable
expectancy, which reflects both flood experience and flood potential and is the
basis of the delineation of the floodway, the flood hazard area and the water
surface elevations.
   DESIGN STANDARDS. Standards that set forth specific improvement
requirements.
   DETENTION BASIN. A human-made or natural water collector facility which
collects surface and/or sub-surface water in order to impede its flow.
   DEVELOPER. The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land proposed to be
subdivided or the owner's representative.
   DEVELOPMENT. The construction of a new building, reconstruction of an
existing building or improvement of a structure on a parcel or lot, the
relocation of an existing building to another lot or the improvement of open
land for a new use.
   DIVIDED STREET. A street having an island or other barrier separating moving
lanes.
   DIVISION. The partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of land for the
purposes of sale, or lease of more than one year, or of building development,
that results in one or more parcels of less than 40 acres or the equivalent,
and that satisfies the requirements of §§ 108 and 109 of Public Act 288 of
1967, being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101—560.293, as amended. DIVISION does not include
a property transfer between two or more adjacent parcels, if the property taken
from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel, and a division is not subject
to the platting requirements of the Public Act 288, being M.C.L.A. §§
560.101—560.293.
(Ord. rev. 4-1-97)
   DRAINAGE. The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by drains,
grading or other means.
   DRAINAGE SYSTEM. The natural and human-made system through which water flows
from the land.
   DRIVEWAY. A private lane, designed primarily for use by vehicles, that
connects a building with a road.
   EASEMENT. A right, created by an express or implied agreement of the owner
of land, to make lawful and beneficial use of adjacent land or the land of
another.
   ENVIRONMENTAL CONSTRAINTS. Features, natural resources or land
characteristics that are sensitive to improvements and may require conservation
measures or the application of creative development techniques to prevent
degradation, or may require limited development, or in certain instances may
preclude development.
   EROSION. The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments, or the
wearing away of the land surface by water, wind, ice or gravity.
   ESCROW. A deed, a bond, money or interest in a piece of property temporarily
deposited with a neutral third party, called the escrow agent, by the agreement
of two parties. The escrow agent will hold the deposit until the conditions of
the agreement are met, at which time the agent will release it to the grantee.
   FENCE. An artificially constructed unroofed barrier of wood, masonry, stone,
wire, metal or similar manufactured material, used to prevent or control
entrance, confine within or mark a boundary.
   FINISHED GRADE. For the purposes of this chapter, the elevation of the
surface of the ground, paving, sidewalks or other surface upon completion of
excavation, filling and land balancing related to subdivision construction.
   FLOODPLAIN. That land which can be expected to be inundated and that is
delineated on the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map prepared by the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development, as may be supplemented, amended,
or revised from time-to-time.
   FRONTAGE. See LOT FRONTAGE.
   GOVERNING BODY. The Township Board of Township of Williamstown, Ingham
County, Michigan.
   GRADE. The slope of a street, or other public way, specified in percentage
terms. The slope of a street is the ratio of its "rise" to its "run". This
calculation results in a fraction, which can be converted to a percentage by
multiplying its decimal equivalent by 100.
   GREENBELT. A strip of land located within or adjacent to a road or highway
right-of-way, reserved for the planting of shrubs, trees and groundcover to
serve as an obscuring screen or buffer for noise or visual enhancement, in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter. In certain cases, existing
vegetation may be permitted in a GREENBELT, subject to requirements of this
chapter.
   GROUND COVER. A planting of low-growing plants or sod that in time forms a
dense mat covering the area, preventing soil from being blown or washed away
and the growth of unwanted plants.
   GRUBBING. The removal of understory vegetation from a site which does not
include the removal of any trees with a caliper of three inches or greater.
   HALF STREET. A street containing less than the required right-of-way width.
   HOUSEHOLD. Any person or persons who reside or intend to reside in the same
housing unit.
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. A surface that has been compacted or covered with a
layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
   IMPOUNDMENT. An artificially-created body of water, such as a pond, confined
by a dam, dike, floodgate or other barrier.
   IMPROVEMENTS. Grading, street surfacing, curbs and gutters, sidewalks,
cross-walks, water mains, fire hydrants, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, drains,
culverts, bridges and other additions to the natural state of land which
increases its value, utility, habitability and use as a subdivision.
   INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT. A planned industrial area containing buildings,
parking, service areas, landscaping and road improvements to accommodate
industrial uses.
   ISLAND. In street design, a raised area, usually curbed, placed to guide
traffic and separate lanes, or used for landscaping, signs or lighting.
   LAND DIVISION ACT. Michigan Public Act 288 of 1967, being M.C.L.A. §§
560.101—560.293, as amended (known as the Subdivision Control Act prior to
enactment of Michigan Public Act 591 of 1996).
(Ord. rev. 4-1-1997)
   LEVEL OF SERVICE. A qualitative measure describing operational conditions
within a traffic stream; generally described in terms of speed and travel time,
delay, freedom to maneuver, traffic interruptions, comfort and convenience and
safety.
   LOOP ROAD. A road or street that has its only ingress and egress at two
points on the same collector street.
   LOT. A measured portion of a parcel or tract of land, which is described and
fixed in a recorded plat.
   LOT AREA, NET. The total horizontal area within the lot lines of the lot,
exclusive of any abutting public road rights-of-way or private road easements,
or the area of any lake. The NET LOT AREA shall be used in determining
compliance with minimum lot area standards.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot abutting upon two streets at their intersection or upon
two parts of the same street forming an interior angle of less than 135
degrees.
   LOT DEPTH. The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines,
measured along the median between the side lot lines.
   LOT (FLAG).A lot which is located behind other parcels or lots fronting on a
public road, but which has a narrow extension to provide access to the public
road. The extension, which provides access to the buildable portion of the lot,
shall comply with the lot width standards for the district in which the lot is
located.
   LOT FRONTAGE. The length of the front lot line measured along the street
right-of-way or easement line.
   LOT LINE. The fixed boundaries of a lot described by a survey and recorded
in a plat.
      (1)   FRONT LOT LINE. In the case of a lot not located on a corner, the
line separating the lot from a street right-of-way. In the case of a corner lot
or double frontage lot, the FRONT LOT LINE shall be that line that separates
the lot from the right-of-way for the road which is designated as the front on
the plat, or which is designated as the front on the site plan review
application or request for a building permit, subject to approval by the
Planning Commission or Building Official. On corner lots where the dwelling
unit is placed at an angle, both lines along the street rights-of-way shall be
considered FRONT LOT LINES.
      (2)   REAR LOT LINE. Ordinarily, that lot line which is opposite and most
distant from the front lot line. In the case of irregular, triangular, wedge-
shaped or lots that are pointed at the rear, the rear lot line shall be an
imaginary line parallel to the front lot line, not less than ten feet in
length, lying farthest from the front lot line and wholly within the lot. On
corner lots where the dwelling unit is placed at an angle, the REAR LOT LINE
shall be an imaginary line parallel to the front building line, not less than
ten feet in length, lying farthest from the front building line and wholly
within the lot.
      (3)   SIDE LOT LINE. Any lot line other than the front or rear lot lines.
A SIDE LOT LINE separating a lot from a road right-of-way is a "side street lot
line". A SIDE LOT LINE separating a lot from another lot or lots is an
"interior side lot line".
   LOT, REVERSE FRONTAGE. A through lot that is not accessible from one of the
parallel or nonintersecting streets upon which it fronts (see definition of
THROUGH LOT).
   LOT, THROUGH. A lot, other than a corner lot, that fronts upon two more-or-
less parallel streets or upon two streets that do not intersect at the
boundaries of the lot.
   LOT WIDTH. The straight line distance between the side lot lines, measured
at the two points where the minimum front yard setback line intersects the side
lot lines.
   MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE. Any security which may be required and accepted by
Williamstown Township to ensure that necessary improvements will function as
required for a specific period of time.
   MASTER PLAN. A comprehensive, long-range plan adopted and amended from time
to time by the Planning Commission, that is intended to serve as a guide for
growth and development of the township. The plan consists of maps, text, tables
and graphics with recommendations concerning land use, economic development,
housing, recreation and open space, transportation and community facilities.
   MEDIAN. That portion of a divided road or highway that separates lanes of
traffic proceeding in opposite directions.
   MDEQ. Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (or its successor
department or agency).
   MDOT. Michigan Department of Transportation.
   MDNR. Michigan Department of Natural Resources (or its successor department
or agency).
   MDPH. Michigan Department of Public Health (or its successor department or
agency).
   MODEL HOME. A dwelling unit used initially for display purposes which
typifies the type of units that will be constructed in the subdivision and
which will not be permanently occupied during its use as a model.
   MULCH. A layer of wood chips, dry leaves, straw, hay, plastic or other
materials placed on the surface of the soil around plants to retain moisture,
prevents weeds from growing, hold soil in place or aid plant growth.
   NATURAL RESOURCES. Land, soils, wetlands, floodplains, surface and ground
water, topography, trees and other types of vegetative cover, subsurface
strata, geologic formations, animal life and naturally occurring substances and
living organisms that can be useful to people. Natural resources are of two
types: renewable (e.g., plants and trees) and nonrenewable (e.g., mineral
resources).
   OFFSET. The distance between the centerlines of driveways or streets that
are across the street from one another.
   OFF-SITE. Any premises not located within the area of the property to be
subdivided, whether or not in the common ownership of the applicant for
subdivision approval.
   OFF-STREET PARKING. Parking that is not located within a street or road
right-of-way, such as parking in a parking lot, parking structure or private
driveway.
   ON-STREET PARKING. Parking that is located on a dedicated street right-of-
way.
   OPEN SPACE. Land within or related to a development which is designated and
intended for the enjoyment and use of residents of a subdivision. OPEN SPACE
typically is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except for
living plant material and recreational facilities (such as neighborhood parks,
golf courses, ballfields, sidewalks, bikepaths and gazebos), permitted signs
and drives needed to access open space facilities and utility lines.
   OUTLOT. When included within the boundary of a recorded plat, means a lot
set aside for purposes other than a building site, park or other land dedicated
to public use or reserved to private use. For example, land set aside for a
future road would typically be set aside in an OUTLOT.
   PARCEL. A continuous area or acreage of land which can be described as
provided for in the Land Division Act.
   PARENT PARCEL or PARENT TRACT. A parcel or tract lawfully in existence on
the effective date of Public Act 591 of 1996.
(Ord. rev. 4-1-1997)
   PARKING SPACE. An area provided for the parking of a motor vehicle.
   PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE. Any security that may be required by Williamstown
Township as a guarantee that the improvements required as a result of approval
of subdivision plat are satisfactorily completed.
   PERSON. Any individual, trustee, executor, fiduciary, corporation, firm,
partnership, association, organization or other legal entity acting as a unit.
   PERVIOUS SURFACE. A surface that permits full or partial absorption of storm
water.
   PLANNED DEVELOPMENT. A planning or construction project involving the use of
special zoning requirements and review procedures which are intended to provide
design and regulatory flexibility, so as to encourage innovation in land use
planning and design and thereby achieve a higher quality of development than
might otherwise be possible.
   PLANNER or TOWNSHIP PLANNER. The Planning Director, staff planner or
consulting planner designated by the Township Board to advise the township
administration, Township Board and Planning Commission on items such as
planning, zoning, land use, subdivision, housing and other related planning and
development issues. This term shall include township specialists on such
subjects as landscaping, woodlands and wetlands.
   PLANNING COORDINATOR. The Planning Coordinator is the person or persons
designated by the Township Board to administer the township's planning and
zoning program on a day-to-day basis, including, but not limited to, processing
applications, maintaining the minutes of the Planning Commission, sending
notices of public hearings and similar work.
   PLAT. A map or chart of a subdivision of land, prepared in conformance with
the Land Division Act.
      (1)   FINAL PLAT. A map of a subdivision of land prepared in a form that
is ready for approval and recording in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter and the Land Division Act.
      (2)   PRELIMINARY PLAT. A map showing all salient features of a proposed
subdivision submitted to the township for the purposes of preliminary
consideration, and prepared in accordance with this chapter and the Land
Division Act. The preliminary plan review process is separated into "tentative"
and "final" preliminary plat review.
      (3)   SKETCH PLAN. An optional initial review by the Planning Commission
of a plan, drawn to scale, showing the proposed layout of streets, lots and
other features in relation to existing conditions on the site and on adjoining
sites and also showing general subdivision information.
   POTABLE WATER SUPPLY. Water suitable for drinking or cooking purposes.
   PRELIMINARY PLAT APPROVAL. The conferral of certain rights prior to final
approval after specific elements of a development plan have been agreed upon by
the Planning Commission, Township Board and the applicant.
   PRIVATE OPEN SPACE. Land within or related to a development that is
privately maintained and that has not been accepted for maintenance and
ownership by the township or other public agency or governmental unit.
   PRIVATE ROAD. A road that is privately maintained and has not been accepted
for maintenance or ownership by the Ingham County Road Commission or the State
of Michigan. The inclusion of this definition is not intended to indicate that
private roads are permitted in Williamstown Township.
   PROPRIETOR. A natural person, firm, association, partnership, corporation or
combination of any of them, which may hold any ownership interest in land,
whether recorded or not. Sometimes also referred to herein as the DEVELOPER.
   PUBLIC OPEN SPACE. An open space area conveyed or otherwise dedicated to the
township, a school district, a state or county agency or other public body for
recreational or conservation uses.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewerage system as defined in M.C.L.A. § 324.4101, as
amended.
   PUBLIC UTILITY. Any person, firm or corporation, municipal department, board
or commission or other public authority duly authorized to furnish gas, steam,
electricity, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, communication, cable television,
telegraph, telephone, transportation, water or other services to residents of
the township.
   PUBLIC WALKWAY. A right-of-way dedicated for the purpose of a pedestrian
access through residential areas, and located so as to connect to two or more
streets, or to a street and a public land parcel.
   RECORD DRAWINGS. Construction plans that have been revised upon completion
of construction to illustrate the recorded location and details of
improvements.
   REPLAT. The process of changing, or the map or plat which changes, the
boundaries of a recorded subdivision plat or part thereof. The legal dividing
of an outlot within a recorded subdivision plat without changing the exterior
boundaries of the outlot is not a REPLAT.
   RETAINING WALL. A structure erected between lands of different elevation to
protect structures and/or prevent the washing down or erosion of earth from the
upper slope level.
   RETENTION BASIN. A pond, pool or basin used for storage of water run-off and
that lacks an outlet for water, relying instead on percolation of storm water
into the ground.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land reserved and dedicated for a street, alley,
walkway or other public purpose, and which may be occupied by public utilities,
such as electric transmission lines, gas pipelines, cable television lines,
fiber optics lines, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewer mains, shade
trees or other utility uses. RIGHTS-OF-WAY established and shown on the final
plat are to be distinct and separate from the lots or parcels adjoining the
rights-of-way, and are not to be included in the dimensions or areas of the
lots or parcels. Nothing in this definition or ordinance is intended to prevent
the establishment of separate easements for utilities.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY LINES. The lines that form the boundaries of a right-of-way.
   ROAD CLASSIFICATIONS.
      (1)   The classification of roads described in the Master Plan as
follows:
         (a)   COLLECTOR ROADS. Collector roads provide access to abutting
properties and traffic circulation within residential, commercial, industrial
and agricultural areas. The purpose of a COLLECTOR ROAD is to collect traffic
throughout the township and channel it to the arterial system.
         (b)   LOCAL ROADS. LOCAL ROADS primarily provide direct access to
abutting land and to collector and arterial streets.
         (c)   MINOR ARTERIAL. MINOR ARTERIAL ROADS interconnect with the
principal arterial system and provide trips of moderate length with a lower
level of traffic mobility. MINOR ARTERIAL ROADS place more emphasis on land
access than principal arterials.
         (d)   PRINCIPAL ARTERIAL. Principal arterial roads are intended to
serve the major centers of activity, the highest traffic volume corridors and
the longest trips. PRINCIPAL ARTERIALS serve major traffic movements within the
township.
      (2)   The term STREET shall have the same meaning as the term ROAD as
used in this chapter.
   ROAD COMMISSION. The Ingham County Road Commission.
   SCREEN. A structure or plantings consisting of fencing, berms and/or
evergreen trees or shrubs providing a continuous view obstruction within a site
or property.
   SEDIMENTATION. The movement of soil that has been transported from its site
of origin by water, ice, wind, gravity or other natural means as a product of
erosion.
   SETBACK. The distance between a front, side or rear lot line and the nearest
supporting member of a structure on the lot. The minimum required setback is
the minimum distance between a front, side or rear lot line and the nearest
supporting member of a structure in order to conform to the required yard
setback provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.
   SHADE TREE. A tree in a public place, street, easement or right-of-way
adjoining a street (also referred to as STREET TREE).
   SHOULDER. The portion of the road right-of-way between the edge of the
traffic lane and the intersection of the shoulder slope and side slope planes.
The SHOULDER facilitates road drainage and provides space for emergency stops
and maintenance operations.
   SIDEWALK. A paved path provided for pedestrian use and commonly located at
the side of a road within the right-of-way.
   SIGHT TRIANGLE. A triangular-shaped portion of land established at street
intersections in which nothing is erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow
in such a manner as to limit or obstruct the sight distance of motorists
entering or leaving the intersection. The SIGHT TRIANGLE REQUIREMENT may apply
to the intersection of a public street and a private road or drive.
   SKETCH PLAN. A sketch preparatory to the preliminary plat to enable the
subdivider to reach general agreement with the township as to the form of the
plat and the objectives of the regulations contained in this chapter.
   SLOPE, STEEP. A slope with a "moderate" or "high" erosion hazard (often 7%
or greater) as defined in the Michigan Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control
Guidebook. Percent slope shall be computed by dividing the change in elevation
by the horizontal distance, times 100.
   STORM WATER DETENTION. A provision for storage of storm water run-off and
the controlled release of the run-off during and after a flood or storm.
   STORM WATER RETENTION. See RETENTION BASIN.
   STREET FURNITURE. Human-made, above-ground items that are usually found in
street rights-of-way, including benches, kiosks, plants, canopies, shelters and
phone booths.
   STUB STREET. A portion of a street for which an extension has been proposed.
   SUBDIVIDE, SUBDIVISION. The partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract
of land for the purpose of sale, or lease of more than one year, or of building
development that results in one or more parcels of less than 40 acres or the
equivalent, and that is not exempted from the platting requirements specified
in Public Act 288 of 1967, being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101—560.293, as amended.
SUBDIVIDE or SUBDIVISION does not include a property transfer between two or
more adjacent parcels, if the property taken from one parcel is added to an
adjacent parcel.
(Ord. rev. 4-1-1997)
   SUBDIVISION CONTROL ACT. Michigan Public Act No. 288 of 1967, being M.C.L.A.
§§ 560.101—560.293, as amended, now known as the Land Division Act as a result
of enactment of Michigan Public Act 591 of 1996.
(Ord. rev. 4-1-1997)
   SURVEYOR. A person who, by reason of knowledge of law, mathematics, physical
sciences and techniques of measuring acquired by professional education and
practical experience, is licensed to engage in the practice of professional
surveying.
   TOPOGRAPHICAL MAP. A map prepared by a professional surveyor showing
existing physical characteristics, with contour lines at sufficient intervals
to permit determination of proposed grades and drainage.
   TOWNSHIP. The Williamstown Township, Michigan.
   TOWNSHIP ENGINEER or ENGINEER. The staff engineer or consulting engineer
designated by the Township Board to advise the township administration,
Township Board and Planning Commission on drainage, grading, paving, storm
water management and control, utilities and other related site engineering and
civil engineering issues.
   TRACT. Two or more parcels that share a common property line and are under
the same ownership.
(Ord. rev. 4-1-1997)
   TRAFFIC ASSESSMENT. A type of traffic impact study for low traffic
generating uses which focuses on the impacts at proposed site access points.
   TRAFFIC IMPACT STUDY. The analysis of the effect of traffic generated by a
development on intersection "level of service" and the safety and operation of
the public street and highway system. A traffic impact study evaluates the
impacts on streets and highways adjacent to the proposed subdivision as well as
specified nearby intersections.
   VARIANCE. A modification of the literal provisions of
Chapter 156 of this code granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals when strict
enforcement of
Chapter 156 of this code would cause practical difficulties owing to
circumstances unique to the individual property on which the variance is
granted.
   VESTED RIGHT. The right to initiate or continue the establishment of a use
that will be contrary to a restriction or regulation coming into effect when
the project associated with the use is completed.
   WETLAND, REGULATED. A wetland regulated by the Michigan Department of
Environmental Quality (MDEQ) under the provisions of Act 203 of the Public Acts
of 1979, as amended, and generally defined as land characterized by the
presence of water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that
under normal circumstances does support wetland vegetation or aquatic life and
is commonly referred to as a bog, swamp, or marsh and which is any of the
following:
      (1)   Contiguous to an inland lake or pond, or a river or stream;
      (2)   Not contiguous to an inland lake or pond, or a river or stream, and
more than five acres in size;
      (3)   Not contiguous to an inland or pond, or river or stream; and five
acres or less in size if the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality
(MDEQ) determines that protection of the area is essential to the preservation
of the natural resources of the state from pollution, impairment or destruction
and the department has so notified the property owner.
   ZONING ORDINANCE or
CHAPTER 156 OF THIS CODE. The Williamstown Township Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. passed 3-18-1997)
PLAT REVIEW PROCEDURES
§ 155.20 SUMMARY OF REVIEW PROCEDURES.
   The plat review process shall consist of the following steps (the process is
also outlined graphically in Appendix A attached to Ord. passed 3-18-1997):
   (A)   Optional sketch plan review, involving Planning Commission review, but
no formal action. The purpose of sketch plan review is to provide the
proprietor with information needed to complete the plat, to explain applicable
standards and regulations, and to acquaint the township with the proposed plat.
Comments made during sketch plan review about the proposed plat shall not be
binding on the township or the developer (see §
155.24);
   (B)   Tentative preliminary plat review involving review and action to
recommend approval or denial of the plat by the Planning Commission within 60
days from the date of filing, followed by review and action to approve or deny
the plat by the Township Board within 90 days from the date of filing (see §
155.25);
   (C)   Final preliminary plat review involving review by outside agencies
(state and Ingham County agencies) prior to action by the Township Board. The
Township Board shall approve or deny the final preliminary plat within 20 days
from the date of filing (see §
155.26); and
   (D)   Final plat review, involving review and action to approve or deny the
plat by the Township Board within 20 days of the date of filing (see §
155.28).
(Ord. passed 3-18-1997)
§ 155.21 EXTENSION OF REVIEW DEADLINES.
   Deadlines for the township to take action on a preliminary or final plat, as
specified in the Land Division Act and reiterated in this chapter, may be
extended by mutual written consent of the proprietor and the township. A waiver
of the review deadlines may be required to permit concurrent processing of
related review applications. In the absence of written consent for such a
waiver, denial of a plat shall be considered appropriate if the proprietor has
been unable to bring the plat into compliance with chapter regulations within
the review deadline.
(Ord. passed 3-18-1997)
§ 155.22 COORDINATION OF DEVELOPMENT OPTIONS WITH SUBDIVISION APPROVAL.
   (A)   Simultaneous review. It is the intent of these regulations that
subdivision review be carried out simultaneously with the review of development
options permitted under
Chapter 156 of this code (such as planned development). To achieve simultaneous
review, the plans required for the development options shall be submitted in a
form to satisfy the requirements of the subdivision regulations.
   (B)   Subdivision approval required. Whenever
Chapter 156 of this code authorizes development options which permit uses of
land and density of buildings and structures different from those which are
allowed as of right within the zoning district in which the land is situated,
and the application entails the subdivision of land, as defined herein, whether
residential or non-residential, subdivision approval shall be required in
addition to all other procedures and approvals required in
Chapter 156 of this code.
   (C)   Rezoning. Since proper zoning is required as a condition of plat
approval, whenever a development option involves rezoning of the land, approval
of the rezoning shall be required prior to any formal action by the township to
approve or deny the tentative preliminary plat.
   (D)   Issuance of permits. No building permits or certificates of occupancy
shall be issued until the township has granted final approval of the zoning
application and the final plat has been properly recorded, except as specified
in this chapter.
(Ord. passed 3-18-1997)
§ 155.23 PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE.
   Prior to submitting an application for plat approval, the proprietor may
request a conference with township staff to achieve an understanding of
subdivision regulations and procedures. There shall be no charge for such a
conference, unless consultant services are required or requested, in which case
the proprietor shall be required to cover the cost of the services.
(Ord. passed 3-18-1997)
§ 155.24 SKETCH PLAN REVIEW.
   (A)   Purpose. Pursuant to § 107(1) of the Land Division Act, a proprietor
may submit a proposed plat for sketch plan review. The purposes of the sketch
plan review are as follows:
      (1)   To determine if the land is appropriately zoned;
      (2)   To acquaint the township staff and Planning Commission with the
proposed plat;
      (3)   To inform the proprietor of the procedures for approval of the
plat;
      (4)   To inform the proprietor of applicable township ordinances and
regulations related to subdivision and improvement of land, including this
chapter,
Chapter 156 of this code and engineering design and construction standards;
      (5)   To inform the proprietor generally about requirements regarding
layout of streets, street improvements and relationship of subdivision streets
to the overall township street network and to major thoroughfares;
      (6)   To inform the proprietor generally about the requirements for and/
or availability of public facilities and services, including water, drainage,
sanitary sewers and waste water treatment, fire and police protection,
recreation and open space and schools;
      (7)   To determine the impact of floodplains and wetlands on the use of
land and design of the plat;
      (8)   To identify woodlands, topography, watercourses and other natural
features that should be protected;
      (9)   To inform the proprietor about development options that would
achieve the planning goals of the township while satisfying the proprietor's
objectives; and
      (10)   To provide the proprietor with any other information to aid in the
preparation of the preliminary plat.
   (B)   Submittal requirements.
      (1)   Except in the R-1 District, a minimum of two sketch plans shall be
submitted for review. The first shall illustrate in schematic form the proposed
subdivision layout based on the uses of land, dimensional requirements and
density allowed by right in the district in which the land is located (i.e., a
conventional development). One of the purposes of this plan is to establish the
maximum feasible development density. The one or more additional sketch plan(s)
shall illustrate alternative subdivision layouts, including at least one layout
based on the Rural Open Space (see § 156.142(C)).
      (2)   The sketch plans shall illustrate in conceptual form the proposed
subdivision and existing features on the site and on surrounding properties
that may affect the design of the subdivision. Accordingly, the following
information shall be provided for sketch plan review (see illustrations in
Appendix B attached to Ord. passed 3-18-1997):
         (a)   A completed application for sketch plan review;
         (b)   The name, mailing address and telephone of the proprietor(s);
         (c)   The name, mailing address, and telephone of the professional
person(s) responsible for the subdivision design, for the design of public
improvements and for surveys;
         (d)   The name, mailing address, and telephone of the legal owner(s)
or agent(s) of the property;
         (e)   The proprietor's interest in the property;
         (f)   Location of the property by section, town and range, or by other
legal description along with a vicinity map showing the general relationship of
the proposed subdivision to the surrounding area;
         (g)   Existing conditions and characteristics of the site and adjacent
land, including:
            1.   Approximate boundaries of woodlands, wetlands, floodplains and
watercourses;
            2.   The approximate location and intended future use of existing
structures on the site;
            3.   Existing land use on surrounding properties; and
            4.   Location of existing easements on the site.
         (h)   For each sketch plan, the proposed approximate layout of
streets, blocks and lots; and
         (i)   For each sketch plan, the approximate location, dimensions and
area of all parcels of land proposed to be set aside for park or playground use
or other public use, or for the use of property owners in the proposed
subdivision.
   (C)   Review procedures.
      (1)   Copies. The proprietor shall submit a minimum of two copies of each
sketch plan design to the township along with the review fee authorized by the
Township Board.
      (2)   Review authority. Within 60 days of the date of filing, the
Planning Commission or a subcommittee of the Planning Commission along with
appropriate township staff shall review the plans with the proprietor and/or
the proprietor's agents and consultants. The Commission may also request that
copies of the sketch plan be submitted to other public agencies having
jurisdiction over various aspects of the plat.
      (3)   Comments. Planning Commissioners, staff and consultants shall offer
comments and suggestions concerning the proposed development in the interest of
achieving the purposes of sketch plan review and the planning goals of the
township. The Planning Commission shall take no formal action to approve or
deny a sketch plan, but may offer suggestions as to which sketch plan design
best meets the intent and requirements of this chapter,
Chapter 156 of this code and the Master Plan. Comments and suggestions made
during sketch plan review about the proposed plat shall not be binding on the
township or the developer.
(Ord. passed 3-18-1997)
§ 155.25 TENTATIVE PRELIMINARY PLAT REVIEW.
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   Preliminary plat review provides for formal application by a
proprietor for township approval of a subdivision plat as described in this
chapter and the Land Division Act. Preliminary plat review also provides the
township with the opportunity to review a proposed plat to determine whether it
is in compliance with township ordinances and regulations, and to approve or
deny the plat on the basis of that determination.
      (2)   Preliminary plat review involves two steps:
         (a)   Tentative preliminary plat review, which provides for review of
all of the salient features of a proposed subdivision, except detailed
engineering and approvals from other authorities; and
         (b)   Final preliminary plat review, which includes review of
engineering plans and requires approvals from other authorities.
   (B)   Submittal requirements.
      (1)   If the proprietor previously obtained sketch plan review in
accordance with §
155.24, or if the proprietor previously obtained approval of a layout based on
the development options cited in §
155.22, then only one tentative preliminary plat design shall be required.
Otherwise, a minimum of two preliminary plat designs shall be submitted for
review (except in the R-1 District). The first shall illustrate the proposed
subdivision layout based on the uses of land, dimensional requirements and
density allowed by right in the district in which the land is located (i.e., a
conventional development). One of the purposes of this plan is to establish the
maximum feasible development density. The one or more additional plan(s) shall
illustrate alternative subdivision layouts, including at least one layout based
on the open space preservation option (see § 156.142(C)).
(Ord. rev. 2-3-2004)
      (2)   The preliminary plat submitted for tentative approval shall show
all of the salient features of the proposed subdivision to allow the township
to determine whether the proposal is in compliance with this and other
applicable ordinances. The lack of information related to any item specified
herein, or improper information supplied by the applicant, shall be cause for
disapproval of a tentative preliminary plat.
      (3)   The following information shall be provided for tentative
preliminary plat review (see illustrations in Appendix B attached to Ord.
passed 3-18-1997):
         (a)   Application. A completed application for tentative preliminary
plat review shall be submitted, which shall contain the following information:
            1.   The name, mailing address and telephone of the proprietor(s);
            2.   The name, mailing address and telephone of the professional
person(s) responsible for the subdivision design, for the design of public
improvements and for surveys;
            3.   The name, mailing address, and telephone of the legal owner(s)
or agent(s) of the property. The citation of the last instrument conveying
title to each parcel of property in the proposed subdivision shall be provided;
and
            4.   The proprietor's interest in the property. The proprietor
shall submit proof of ownership in the form of a title insurance policy or a
title opinion prepared by an attorney licensed in Michigan. The documentation
or other legal opinion shall be required showing the legal and equitable owners
(including mortgagees, contract purchasers and fee owners) of the land to be
platted, plus all grants, reservations, deed restrictions and easements of
record which may condition the use of the property.
         (b)   Tentative preliminary plat.
            1.   Thirteen full size copies and one 11-inch by 17-inch copy of
the tentative preliminary plat, sealed by the professional surveyor who
prepared the plat, shall be submitted to the Township Planning Coordinator,
along with the completed application and the fee authorized by the Township
Board. The Planning Coordinator shall record the submittal date. These
materials must be submitted at least 21 days prior to the Planning Commission
or Township Board meeting where review is desired.
(Ord. rev. 2-3-2004)
            2.   The tentative preliminary plat shall be on paper that is no
greater than 24 inches by 36 inches, and shall be drawn at a scale of not more
than 200 feet to one inch. The plat shall provide a scale, north arrow and date
of original submittal and dates of any revisions. The sheets shall be numbered
in sequence if more than one sheet is used.
         (c)   Tentative preliminary plat; existing conditions. The tentative
preliminary plat shall include one or more sheets containing the following
information, at minimum, regarding existing conditions:
            1.   Location of the property by section, town and range or by
other legal description;
            2.   An area map showing the general relationship of the proposed
subdivision to the surrounding area, to nearby community facilities, such as
parks, schools, bicycle path systems and existing or planned open space, and to
shopping centers. The map should also identify the boundaries of school
districts serving the development;
            3.   Boundary of the proposed subdivision and the location of any
easements with dimensions of the overall property and of the individual
easements;
            4.   Property lines of adjacent land within 300 feet of the
proposed subdivision and across abutting roads. The plat shall identify the
owners of all adjacent properties based on the most current assessment roll and
the names of adjoining developments, including developments across abutting
roads. The plat should also identify the names of adjacent subdivisions; and
            5.   A site analysis consisting of maps and written analysis which
identify, describe and quantify the following features, at minimum:
               a.   Existing woodlands. Where woodlands will be cut as a result
of construction of roads, stormwater drainage facilities and other subdivision
improvements, the woodlands inventory shall identify the location and species
of all trees eight inches or greater in caliper, measured four feet above the
ground. The character of other vegetation on the site shall also be noted on
the plat;
               b.   Boundaries and character of any water bodies, watercourses,
wetlands (including the required setback from wetlands or water features
located on adjacent sites), and 100-year floodplain datum. Wetland boundaries
shall be determined by a qualified wetlands consultant and surveyed by a
professional surveyor. Documentation supporting the wetland delineation shall
be submitted, including but not necessarily limited to: dominant vegetation,
wetland indicators and a description of the soil profile;
               c.   Groundwater recharge areas, to the extent that such
information is available from existing data sources;
               d.   Existing stormwater drainage patterns, systems and
structures, including approximate locations of farm field drain tiles, if
known;
               e.   Soils (based on U.S. Soil Conservation Survey or soil
borings);
               f.   Habitats of threatened and endangered species (i.e.,
federal and state listed species), if known;
               g.   Sight distance limitations along existing or proposed
roads;
               h.   Topographic relief of the site and within 200 feet of the
site at two-foot contour intervals, referenced to U.S.C. and G.S. elevation
datum;
               i.   If any streets are proposed as dead-end streets at or near
the subdivision boundary which abuts vacant land, the general topography and
features of the adjacent land shall be delineated. This information shall be
used to determine if future street extensions are desirable; and
               j.   Other features uniquely affecting the site.
            6.   Zoning classification of the proposed subdivision and all
adjoining properties;
            7.   Name, location and right-of-way width of any existing public,
private, or platted streets, roads, highways or railroads abutting or on the
subdivision site or within 300 feet of the subdivision site. The number of
lanes and the most current traffic volumes shall be noted for existing streets
roads and highways;
            8.   Locations and sizes of any existing sanitary or storm sewers,
existing county or private drains, cross culverts under existing roads, and
other underground structures within the subdivision site or immediately
adjacent to it;
            9.   Locations of other above- or below-ground utilities within the
subdivision site or immediately adjacent to it, including but not limited to
gas, electric, telephone and cable television utilities.
            10.   Location of existing permanent structures on and within 100
feet of the subdivision site. Structures to be removed shall be so marked; and
            11.   The water elevations of lakes, streams and other water bodies
on or adjacent to the site, and the ordinary high- and low-water elevations of
such water bodies.
         (d)   Tentative preliminary plat; proposed improvements. The tentative
preliminary plat shall contain the following information regarding proposed
improvements, at minimum:
            1.   Name of the proposed subdivision. The proposed name shall not
duplicate the name of any plat previously recorded unless the proposed
subdivision is an addition contiguous to a plat with the same name or the
proposed subdivision is a part of a previously approved plat of the same name;
            2.   Layout, right-of-way width, typical cross-section and names of
proposed public or private streets or roads. The plat should also indicate if
on-street parking will be permitted;
            3.   Sight distance plan and profile at each intersection of a
proposed subdivision street with any existing or proposed public road or
street;
            4.   The locations, width, and type of construction of any
sidewalks, bicycle paths or multi-use paths;
            5.   The location, width and purpose of any proposed easements;
            6.   The location, approximate dimensions and approximate area of
all proposed lots. Lots shall be numbered consecutively beginning with lot
number one. The front and rear yards shall be identified on all corner lots and
lots located on cul-de-sacs;
            7.   The tentative preliminary plat shall have a table that
provides the following information for each lot: lot area (in square feet),
road frontage and lot width measured at the front setback line;
            8.   The location and dimensions of required front, side and rear
yard setbacks on each lot (i.e., the building envelope), as well as the
required setbacks from any wetland or shoreline;
            9.   The location, approximate dimensions, approximate area and
proposed use of all parcels of land proposed to be set aside for park or
playground use or other public use, or for the use of property owners in the
proposed subdivision. The conditions, if known, of any such dedication or
reservation shall be specified;
            10.   Where a proprietor proposes to subdivide land in phases, the
tentative preliminary plat shall include a general layout for the entire
development. The initial phase and the method of temporary construction and
permanent access to subsequent phases shall be clearly identified;
            11.   An indication of the ownership and existing and proposed uses
of any parcels identified as "excepted" on the tentative preliminary plat. If
the proprietor has an ownership interest in any excepted parcel, the tentative
preliminary plat shall indicate how this parcel could be developed in
accordance with the requirements of the existing zoning district in which it is
located and in a manner that is compatible with and relates to the proposed
plat in terms of utilities, streets and land uses;
            12.   If the subdivision abuts undeveloped residentially zoned land
or includes any outlots or excepted parcels, information shall be provided to
demonstrate that the adjacent or remaining land can be used or subdivided in
conformance with township standards; and
            13.   Landscape plan, which shall identify existing trees to be
saved and removed, and species, locations and sizes of all proposed plantings.
         (e)   Tentative preliminary plat; other submittals.
            1.   The following additional information shall be provided, unless
otherwise indicated, with the application for tentative preliminary plat
review:
               a.   If the proprietor chooses, he or she may cause temporary
stakes to be located on site to enable the township officials to find and
evaluate features of the tentative preliminary plat in the field;
               b.   If the intended use of the proposed plat is not entirely
residential single family then a written statement specifying the intended use
should be submitted. The location and size of proposed multiple-family
dwellings, shopping centers, churches, commercial or industrial facilities
should be noted; and
               c.   A "traffic assessment" shall be required for developments
that would generate between 50 and 99 directional trips during a peak hour of
traffic, and a "traffic impact study" shall be required for new developments
that would generate over 100 direction trips during a peak hour or over 750
trips on an average day.
            2.   The threshold conversions shall be based on the current Trip
Generation Manual, which is published by the Institute of Transportation
Engineers (ITE), and updated as needed;
            3.   The requirement for a traffic assessment or traffic impact
study may be waived by the Planning Commission or Township Board in the
following instances:
               a.   The existing level of service is not expected to be
significantly impacted by the proposed development due to the nature of the
request or specific conditions at the subject site; and/or
               b.   A similar traffic study was previously prepared for the
subject site and is still considered applicable.
            4.   The proprietor shall submit copies of the tentative
preliminary plan to county, regional and state agencies that have jurisdiction
over any aspect of the subdivision including, where applicable, the Ingham
County Road Commission, Ingham County Drain Commission, Michigan Department of
Transportation, Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, Ingham County
Health Department, Tri-County Regional Planning Commission and the Ingham
Natural Resources and Soil Conservation Service. Although approval from these
agencies is not required for tentative preliminary plat approval, any written
comments received from these agencies shall be submitted to aid the township
review process.
   (C)   Planning Commission review procedures.
      (1)   Initial review. Upon receipt of the tentative preliminary plat, the
township staff shall check it for completeness. If required data specified in
this chapter has been omitted, the proprietor shall be notified of the
additional data required and that the application will be delayed until the
required data are received. The "date of filing" shall be considered the date
on which a plat containing all required data is received by the township.
      (2)   Placement on Planning Commission agenda. When the information is
complete, the proposed tentative preliminary plat shall be placed on the agenda
of the next regular Planning Commission meeting, and copies shall be
distributed to appropriate township staff and consultants to obtain planning,
preliminary engineering, wetland and public safety review.
      (3)   Public notice. Prior to action on the tentative preliminary plat by
the Planning Commission, notice shall be sent to all property owners within 500
feet of the boundary of the proposed subdivision, based on the township's
assessment records. The notice shall be mailed at least five days prior to the
Planning Commission meeting. The notice shall explain that a subdivision has
been proposed, give the location and general information and note the time and
place where the public can attend the meeting when the subdivision proposal
will be discussed. The purpose of the notification is to inform the public of
the project; it is not a "public hearing". The Planning Commission, however,
may elect to accept comments from the public during the informational meeting.
      (4)   Planning Commission review. The Planning Commission shall review
the tentative preliminary plat with respect to the requirements of this
chapter,
Chapter 156 of this code, other applicable ordinances and standards and the
Master Plan.
      (5)   Planning Commission recommendation.
         (a)   The Planning Commission shall recommend approval, conditional
approval or denial of the proposed tentative preliminary plat, as indicated
below, within 60 days after the plat was filed with the township unless the
proprietor has waived the review deadlines in writing, pursuant to §
155.21. If no action is taken within 60 days and the review deadline has not
been waived, the tentative preliminary plat shall be deemed "recommended
approved" by the Planning Commission.
         (b)   If the proprietor submitted more than one tentative preliminary
plat design for review pursuant to §
155.25, the Planning Commission shall review each design but only one such
design shall be recommended for approval or conditional approval to the
Township Board. The Planning Commission may, however, recommend denial of all
tentative preliminary plat designs submitted for review.
            1.   Conditional approval shall be granted only if the proprietor
has waived the review deadlines in writing, pursuant to §
155.21, in which case the tentative preliminary plat shall not be forwarded to
the Township Board until the conditions have been properly addressed on a
revised tentative preliminary plat and with supporting documentation. At its
discretion, the Planning Commission may waive its right to review the revised
plat in lieu of administrative review by township staff or Township Planner.
            2.   Upon determination that the tentative preliminary plat does
not comply with the standards and regulations in this chapter and other
applicable ordinances, standards and plans, the Planning Commission shall
recommend denial. The reasons for denial shall be recorded in the meeting
minutes and a copy of the minutes and the tentative preliminary plat shall be
forwarded to the Township Board and proprietor.
            3.   Upon determining that the tentative preliminary plat is in
compliance with the standards and regulations in this chapter and other
applicable ordinances, standards and plans, the Planning Commission shall
recommend approval and the Planning Coordinator shall make a notation to that
effect on each copy of the tentative preliminary plat. One copy of the approved
plat shall become a matter of permanent record in the Commission files, one
copy shall be returned to the proprietor and the remaining copies shall be
forwarded to the Township Board with a copy of the Planning Commission minutes.
   (D)   Township Board review procedures.
      (1)   Notification of Planning Commission action. The Township Board
shall not receive or take action on a preliminary plat until it has received
the review and recommendations from the Planning Commission or until the Board
has been notified that the review period for the Planning Commission expired.
The Planning Commission's recommendations may be transmitted to the Township
Board in the form of minutes from the meeting at which action was taken. A
draft copy of the minutes may be transmitted to the Township Board prior to
being approved by the Planning Commission, provided that it is noted that the
minutes are subject to approval and provided that adopted minutes are
transmitted as soon as feasible.
      (2)   Review deadline. Following receipt of the Planning Commission's
action, the Township Board shall take action on the preliminary plat within 90
days of the date of filing of the tentative preliminary plat with the Township
Clerk, unless the proprietor has waived the review deadlines in writing,
pursuant to §
155.21.
      (3)   Township Board action. The Township Board shall approve,
conditionally approve or disapprove the proposed plat, as follows:
         (a)   Conditional approval shall be granted only if the proprietor has
waived the review deadlines in writing, pursuant to §
155.21. The proprietor may resubmit the plat to the Township Board for approval
after the conditions have been properly addressed. At its discretion, the
Township Board may waive its right to review the revised plat in lieu of
administrative review by township staff or Township Planner.
         (b)   Upon determination that the preliminary plat does not comply
with the standards and regulations in this chapter and other applicable
ordinances, standards, and plans, the Township Board shall deny the tentative
preliminary plat.
         (c)   Upon determining that the preliminary plat is in compliance with
the standards and regulations in this chapter and other applicable ordinances,
standards, and plans, the Township Board shall approve the tentative
preliminary plat.
      (4)   Notification. The Clerk or the Clerk's designee shall promptly
notify the proprietor, the Planning Commission, and all other agencies involved
in the plat review process of approval or disapproval in writing, and the
reasons if the plat was disapproved. One copy of the approved or disapproved
plat shall become a matter of permanent record in the township files and one
copy appropriately designated "Approved" or "Denied" shall be transmitted to
the applicant.
      (5)   Effect of approval.
         (a)   Approval of the tentative preliminary plat by the Township Board
shall confer upon the proprietor for a period of one year from the date of
approval, approval of lot sizes, lot orientation and street layout. The one-
year period may be extended if applied for in writing by the proprietor prior
to the expiration date and granted by the Township Board in writing. The
Township Board may seek the Planning Commission's recommendation on any such
extension. If the extension is granted, the Township Clerk shall notify the
other approving authorities. In approving an extension, the Township Board may
impose new standards (not necessarily related solely to lot size, lot
orientation and street layout) as a result of new standards, changing
conditions on surrounding parcels or other considerations; provided that, the
revised plat shall still be considered substantially conforming to the
previously approved tentative preliminary plat, as outlined in §
155.26(C).
(Ord. rev. 2-3-2004)
         (b)   Tentative approval of the preliminary plat grants the proprietor
no rights to begin installation or construction of improvements, including
grading, tree removal or land balancing.
(Ord. passed 3-18-1997)
§ 155.26 FINAL PRELIMINARY PLAT REVIEW.
   (A)   Submittal requirements.
      (1)   Sixteen copies of the final preliminary plat, sealed by the
engineer or surveyor who prepared the plat, shall be submitted along with the
completed application, the fee authorized by the Township Board and a copy of
the drawings in digital format. These materials must be submitted at least ten
days prior to the Township Board meeting where review is desired.
(Ord. rev. 12-1-1998; Ord. rev. 5-1-2001)
      (2)   The final preliminary plat shall be on paper that is no greater
than 24 inches by 36 inches, and shall be drawn at a scale of not more than 200
feet to one inch. The plat shall provide a scale, north arrow and date of
original submittal and dates of any revisions. The sheets shall be numbered in
sequence if more than one sheet is used. The digital files shall be provided to
township on a CD or via email, in either .dwg or .dxf file format, or another
file format that is deemed acceptable to the township.
(Ord. rev. 5-1-2001)
   (B)   Final preliminary plat; required information. The final preliminary
plat submittal shall contain all of the information required for the tentative
preliminary plat listed in §
155.25(B), plus the following information:
      (1)   Copies of proposed restrictive or protective covenants and deed
restrictions (required to determine consistency with this chapter,
Chapter 156 of this code and other applicable ordinances and regulations and to
determine that maintenance and funding of public spaces have been adequately
addressed). The covenants shall indicate that maintenance of improvements
illustrated on the approved final preliminary plat and final plat and in
supporting documentation shall be a continuing responsibility of the
subdivision association and individual owners of lots on which the improvements
are located;
(Ord. rev. 3-6-2001)
      (2)   A written explanation of any proposed restrictions on construction
traffic;
      (3)   Preliminary engineering plans shall be provided as follows.
         (a)   The preliminary engineering plans shall be submitted in
sufficient detail to enable the Planning Commission, Township Board, Township
Engineer and other reviewing authorities to make a preliminary determination
that the proposed improvements comply with applicable regulations and standards
of the township and other agencies.
         (b)   At minimum, the preliminary engineering plans shall show the
locations of and provide preliminary specifications for sewage disposal
systems, water supply systems (including fire hydrants), stormwater drainage
systems, site grading, street trees, street lighting, street signs, and
sidewalks. Stormwater run-off calculations shall be provided to analyze the
adequacy of proposed drainage facilities.
         (c)   The preliminary engineering plans shall show connections to any
existing or proposed gas, electric, telephone, cable television or other
utility systems.
         (d)   If the subdivision will not be served by sanitary sewers, the
plans shall show the locations and results of all soil borings.
      (4)   A detailed drawing to scale of any proposed entry features
including specifications and locations of walls, landscaping, signs and
lighting;
      (5)   General information concerning the proposed construction operations
plan, as described in §
155.27(D);
      (6)   The proprietor shall submit a list of all agencies to which the
proprietor has sent copies of the final preliminary plat, certifying that the
list shows all authorities listed in this division. The proprietor shall also
submit copies of the final preliminary plat bearing the necessary approvals of
all authorities as required by the Land Division Act and this chapter,
including:
         (a)   Ingham County Road Commission;
         (b)   Ingham County Drain Commissioner;
         (c)   Michigan Department of Transportation, if any of the proposed
subdivision includes or abuts a state trunk line highway, or includes streets
or roads that connect with or lie within the right-of-way of state trunkline
highways;
         (d)   Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, if the land
proposed to be subdivided abuts a lake or stream, or abuts an existing or
proposed channel or lagoon affording access to a lake or stream where public
rights may be affected, or contains regulated wetlands, or lies wholly or in
part within a floodplain of a river, stream, creek or lake;
         (e)   Ingham County Health Department, if public water or sanitary
sewers are not available and accessible to the land proposed to be subdivided,
and for appropriate comment on matters under the Health Department's
jurisdiction;
         (f)   The Tri-County Regional Planning Commission for verification
that proposed street names do not duplicate or conflict with existing street
names, and for appropriate comment on other matters under the Planning
Commission's jurisdiction;
         (g)   The Ingham Natural Resource and Soil Conservation Service for
review of soil limitations if public sanitary sewer and water are not available
to the subdivision, and for appropriate comment on other matters under the Soil
Conservation Service's jurisdiction; and
         (h)   The plat shall also be submitted to the county plat board,
utilities serving the area, the post office and the school board(s) of the
school district(s) serving the area, for informational purposes. The school
district(s) shall be requested to specify school bus loading/unloading
requirements. The post office shall be requested to specify mailbox
requirements, including whether cluster mail boxes will be required.
   (C)   Conformance to tentative preliminary plat. The final preliminary plat
shall conform substantially to the tentative preliminary plat as approved. In
determining whether the final preliminary plat satisfies this requirement, the
Township Board shall consider the following.
      (1)   A final preliminary plat shall be considered no longer
substantially conforming to the tentative preliminary plat if any of the
following revisions have been made; provided that, the Township Board may
exercise discretion in applying these criteria where changes to the plat beyond
the limits described below were required by an outside agency having
jurisdiction over some portion of the plat:
         (a)   An increase in the number of lots;
         (b)   An increase or decrease in the buildable area of any lot by over
10%;
         (c)   A change in the boundary of a regulated wetland or floodplain
that reduces the building envelope on any lot below minimum requirements or
would create nonconformance with required water feature setbacks;
         (d)   Expansion of a construction zone into areas which were
previously shown as "not to be disturbed";
         (e)   Realignment of proposed roads and intersections;
         (f)   Change in the basic layout of the subdivision and lots;
         (g)   An increase in the volume or surface coverage of a detention or
retention basin by more than 10%; and
         (h)   Deletion of sidewalks, bicycle paths or nature trails.
      (2)   A final preliminary plat shall still be considered substantially
conforming to the tentative preliminary plat if any of the following revisions
have been made; provided that, the Township Board may determine that several of
the following revisions implemented in combination may be deemed no longer
substantially conforming.
         (a)   Decrease in the number of lots without changing the basic
layout;
         (b)   Revisions to horizontal or vertical alignment of streets to
satisfy Road Commission standards, provided that such revisions do not affect
the overall arrangement of streets;
         (c)   Adjustment to lot lines or setbacks due to a more precise
wetland or floodplain boundary where such an adjustment has an insignificant
impact on lot area, setbacks or buffer zone requirements;
         (d)   Change in location of monuments or lot markers to correct
surveying errors;
         (e)   Increase in the amount of landscaping;
         (f)   Replacement of landscape species with other species;
         (g)   The addition of sidewalks, bicycle paths and nature trails;
         (h)   A change in entranceway design that still meets ordinance
requirements; and
         (i)   Minor relocation of a stormwater detention or retention basin.
   (D)   Review procedures.
      (1)   Initial review. Upon receipt of the final preliminary plat, the
township staff shall check it for completeness. Should any of the required data
specified in this chapter be omitted, the proprietor shall be notified of the
additional data required and that the application will be delayed until the
required data are received. The "date of filing" shall be considered the date
on which a plat containing all required data is received by the township.
      (2)   Placement on Township Board agenda. When the information is
complete, the proposed final preliminary plat shall be placed on the agenda of
the next regular Township Board meeting.
      (3)   Distribution for review. Copies of the plat shall be distributed to
the Planning Commission and appropriate township staff and consultants to
obtain planning, engineering and public safety review and to determine if the
final preliminary plat conforms substantially to the approved tentative
preliminary plat. The Planning Commission shall review the final preliminary
plat and make a recommendation to approve, approve with conditions or deny the
plat.
      (4)   Review deadline. The Township Board shall take action on the final
preliminary plat at its next regular meeting or within 20 days of the date of
filing the plat with the township, unless the proprietor has waived the review
deadlines in writing, pursuant to §
155.21.
      (5)   Township Board action. The Township Board shall approve,
conditionally approve or disapprove the proposed final preliminary plat, as
follows.
         (a)   Conditional approval shall be granted only if the proprietor has
waived the review deadlines in writing, pursuant to §
155.21. The proprietor may resubmit the plat to the Township Board for approval
after the conditions have been properly addressed. At its discretion, the
Township Board may waive its right to review the revised plat in lieu of
administrative review by township staff or Township Planner.
         (b)   Upon determination that the final preliminary plat does not
comply with the standards and regulations in this chapter and other applicable
ordinances, standards and plans, the Township Board shall deny the final
preliminary plat.
         (c)   Upon determining that the final preliminary plat is in
compliance with the standards and regulations in this chapter and other
applicable ordinances, standards, and plans, the Township Board shall approve
the final preliminary plat.
      (6)   Notification. The Planning Coordinator shall promptly notify the
proprietor, the Planning Commission, and all outside agencies involved in the
plat review process of approval or disapproval in writing, and the reasons if
the plat was disapproved. One copy of the approved or disapproved final
preliminary plat shall become a matter of permanent record in the township
files and one copy appropriately designated "Approved" or "Denied" shall be
transmitted to the applicant.
   (E)   Effect of approval. Approval of the final preliminary plat by the
Township Board shall confer upon the proprietor for a period of two years from
the date of approval, the conditional right that the general terms and
conditions under which preliminary approval was granted will not be changed.
The two- year period may be extended if applied for in writing by the
proprietor prior to the expiration date and granted by the Township Board in
writing. The Township Board may seek the Planning Commission's recommendation
on any such extension. If the extension is granted, the Planning Coordinator
shall notify the other approving authorities.
(Ord. rev. 2-3-2004)
(Ord. passed 3-18-1997)
§ 155.27 COMPLETION OF SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Condition of final plat approval. Before the final plat is approved by
the township, the proprietor shall be required to complete all of the following
improvements at his or her expense and without reimbursement from any public
agency or any improvement district (except as may be permitted by state law),
and in accordance with the conditions and specifications contained in this
chapter, except as provided in §
155.27(C), following. If the proprietor does form or cause to be formed a
special district or districts to finance or construct required improvements,
such action does not release the developer from his or her obligations to
complete the improvements. Where applicable, the proprietor shall dedicate
these improvements to the township or other applicable governmental unit, free
and clear of all liens and encumbrances on the dedicated property and public
improvements. These improvements shall be completed in accordance with the
approved preliminary plat, the approvals of other authorities, the regulations
in this chapter (particularly §§
155.40 through
155.49), and the requirements of other applicable ordinances, laws and
regulations, and shall be subject to inspection by the Township Engineer and
other authorities having jurisdiction over such improvements. Required
improvements include, where applicable:
      (1)   Monuments shall be set in accordance with Michigan Public Act 288
of 1967, being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101—560.293, as amended (the Land Division Act),
and the rules of the Michigan Department of Commerce. If any monument or lot
marker is removed during construction the responsible party shall secure the
services of a professional surveyor to replace the monument or lot marker;
      (2)   Streets (including curbs and gutters, where applicable);
      (3)   Utility lines;
      (4)   Storm drainage;
      (5)   Water supply system;
      (6)   Sanitary sewer system;
      (7)   Street signs;
      (8)   Sidewalks, pedestrian-bicycle pathways and crosswalks;
      (9)   Landscaping, including street trees;
      (10)   Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures; and
      (11)   Mailbox clusters, if required by the U.S. Postal Service.
   (B)   Self-imposed improvements and restrictions. If the proprietor proposes
any improvements or places restrictions on any of the land contained in the
subdivision that exceed the requirements in this chapter or the Zoning
Ordinance, such improvements and restrictions shall be indicated on the plat
and recorded in the subdivision restrictive covenants in a form to be approved
by the Township Attorney.
   (C)   Construction plans and specifications. No installation or construction
of any improvements shall be made before construction/engineering plans and
specifications have been approved by the Township Engineer and by other
authorities that have jurisdiction over the improvements. Where a plat
straddles municipal boundaries, no permits for construction shall be issued
until verification has been received that the preliminary plat has been
approved by both municipalities.
   (D)   Alternative to completing improvements; subdivision improvement
agreement. In lieu of completion of all applicable public improvements prior to
approval of the final plat, the Township Board may permit the developer to
enter into a subdivision improvement agreement by which the developer covenants
to complete all required public improvements no later than two years following
the date on which the final plat is signed by the township. The subdivision
improvement agreement shall provide for the following:
      (1)   Performance guarantee. The proprietor shall agree to furnish a
performance guarantee in an amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of
installation of the improvements. The performance guarantee shall be in a form
specified in §§
155.40 through
155.49.
      (2)   Subdivision improvement agreement. The subdivision improvement
agreement shall provide that the covenants contained in the agreement shall run
with the land and bind all successors, heirs and assignees of the proprietor.
The subdivision improvement agreement shall be adopted by the Township Board
and recorded pursuant to applicable state and local laws and ordinances.
      (3)   Completion of improvements. Upon substantial completion of all
required improvements, the proprietor shall notify the township in writing of
the completion or substantial completion of improvements, and shall send a copy
to the Township Engineer and other agencies that have authority over the
project. The Township Engineer shall inspect all improvements identified in the
notice and shall file a detailed report, in writing, with the Township Board
indicating either approval, partial approval or rejection of the improvements
with a statement of reasons for any rejection. The cost of the improvements as
approved or rejected shall be listed.
      (4)   Approval of improvements. The Township Engineer shall either
approve, partially approve or reject the improvements and shall notify the
proprietor in writing of the contents of the report and the action taken no
later than 30 days after receipt of the notice from the developer of the
completion of the improvements. Failure of the Township Engineer to send or
provide the notification within 30 days shall be deemed to constitute approval,
and the obligor and surety, if any, shall be released from all liability
pursuant to the performance guarantee.
      (5)   Partial approval. Where partial approval is granted, the developer
shall be released from all liability except for that portion of improvements
not yet approved.
      (6)   Sidewalk installation. Required sidewalks shall be completed within
three years after final plat approval. If all sidewalks have not been installed
upon expiration of this three-year period, the developer shall provide a
performance guarantee in a form specified in §§
155.60 through
155.68.
   (E)   Review of construction plans and specifications. Review of the
construction plans and specifications by the township shall be initiated by
submitting the plans and specifications in the form and quantity and according
to the process specified by the Building Inspector.
      (1)   Required plans. Plans and specifications shall be submitted for all
proposed improvements including, where applicable: sanitary sewers; public
water; storm sewers; sidewalks; soil erosion and sedimentation control
measures; site grading (including all information required by the Township
Engineer); roads (including road and paving cross-sections and profiles);
street lighting; landscaping; and signs. Cost estimates for each such
improvement shall be included.
      (2)   Construction operations plan. The proprietor shall also submit a
construction operations plan for review and approval, which shall include the
following information:
         (a)   The routes to be used by all construction traffic in the first
phase and in subsequent phases. Construction traffic shall be routed to
minimize impact on existing residential development, to the extent feasible;
         (b)   The method of storage, frequency of removal, type of covering
and disposal destination of all construction debris. No cut trees, timber,
debris, rocks, junk, rubbish or other waste materials of any kind shall be
buried within the subdivision, or left or deposited on any street. Removal of
the waste materials shall be required at the time of expiration of any
subdivision improvement agreement or dedication of public improvements,
whichever is sooner, unless weight restrictions on roads prevent removal, in
which case the township may extend the time limit for removal. As a condition
of extending the time limit, the township may require a performance guarantee
to assure removal of waste materials;
         (c)   The methods and frequency of dust control (including dust, dirt
and other material deposited or tracked onto public streets);
         (d)   Methods to protect adjacent property, including wetlands, other
natural areas and residential developments, from construction impacts (e.g.,
temporary screen walls, fencing, landscaped buffer, silt fencing and other
appropriate actions, including actions necessary to comply with the Michigan
Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, being M.C.L.A. §§ 324.101 –
324.90106, and other applicable statutes);
         (e)   The approximate construction timetable on a month-by-month
basis, the days of the week when construction will occur, and the maximum daily
starting and ending times for construction;
         (f)   The methods that will be used to notify subcontractors of the
requirements in the construction operations plan; and
         (g)   Methods established to control impacts from construction in
accordance with an approved construction operations plan shall be maintained on
a continuing basis for the duration of the construction project.
      (3)   Covenants and restrictions. If a homeowners' association is
proposed, the developer shall submit a copy of the declaration of covenants and
restrictions that will govern the association. If the homeowners' association
is proposed as the method by which common areas and facilities will be
maintained, then these covenants and restrictions shall specify, at a minimum,
when the homeowners' association will be established; whether membership will
be mandatory for each home buyer and any successive home buyer; whether the
association or another entity will be responsible for liability insurance,
applicable taxes and the continuing upkeep and proper maintenance of
recreation, open space and other common facilities; whether homeowners will be
required to pay their pro rata share of the cost of maintenance, and how unpaid
assessments will be collected; and how the association will adjust any
assessment to meet changing needs.
      (4)   Alternative method of maintenance. If a homeowners' association is
not proposed then the person or organization responsible for the continuing
upkeep and proper maintenance of recreational, open space and other common
facilities shall be identified, and the method of financing such maintenance
shall be outlined.
      (5)   Review by other authorities; proprietor's responsibility. It shall
be the responsibility of the developer to obtain review and approval of
construction plans and specifications for public improvements that are under
the jurisdiction of other authorities. Evidence of all approvals required from
other authorities shall be submitted in the form specified by the township
prior to issuance of any permits for construction.
   (F)   Authorization to proceed.
      (1)   Developer requirements. Authorization to proceed with construction
may be granted after:
         (a)   Construction plans and specifications have been approved by the
township and other applicable authorities;
         (b)   The developer has submitted evidence of public liability and
property damage insurance in a form and amount specified by the township;
         (c)   The developer has submitted evidence of public liability and
property damage insurance in a form and amount specified by the Building
Inspector; and
         (d)   The developer has submitted an inspection fee deposit in an
amount specified by the township.
      (2)   Grading permit. Notwithstanding the preceding requirements,
subsequent to final preliminary plat approval the developer may apply for a
topsoil, tree removal and excavation permit from the Building Inspector;
provided that, the final grading plan has been approved by the township. Upon
receipt of the grading permit, the developer may commence construction to the
grades and elevations specified on the approved grading plan.
      (3)   Construction of homes prior to final approval. The Building
Inspector may permit construction of up to three homes which may be used as
model homes prior to final plat approval, subject to applicable zoning
standards and the following conditions.
         (a)   The lots on which the homes are constructed shall have direct
access to an existing county road or state highway, except as noted in division
(E)(3)(b) below.
         (b)   The developer shall submit plans and specifications and a
performance guarantee to cover the cost of all improvements (including
improvements required to provide proper access to a public road) that would be
necessary to achieve a certificate of occupancy for single-family homes in the
event that the remainder of the subdivision is not constructed.
         (c)   The model homes shall not be offered for sale until certificates
of occupancy have been properly issued and approval has been obtained from
other local, county or state agencies, as necessary.
   (G)   Pre-construction meeting.
      (1)   At least ten days prior to construction of subdivision
improvements, including site grading, the contractor shall contact the township
representative to establish a date and time for a pre-construction meeting
which should occur at least five days prior to commencement of construction.
The proprietor shall be responsible for making all arrangements and notifying
meeting attendees.
(Ord. rev. 12-1-1998)
      (2)   Except where proposed improvements include only site grading, those
invited to attend shall include, but not necessarily be limited to: the
proprietor, the proprietor's engineer, the contractor and the contractor's on-
site superintendent, subcontractor representatives, the Township Engineer,
representatives from the Ingham County Road Commission, representatives from
the Ingham County Drain Commission, Michigan Department of Transportation (if
the project abuts a state highway) and the Williamstown Township Building
Inspector. In addition, utility companies and other state, county, or local
governmental agencies that have facilities that may be affected by the proposed
development, or that may be able to contribute information of use to the
construction project, shall be informed of and invited to attend the pre-
construction meeting.
      (3)   If proposed improvements involve only site grading, those invited
to attend shall include the proprietor, the proprietor's engineer, the
contractor and the contractor's on-site superintendent, the Township Engineer,
the Township Building Inspector and representatives from the Ingham County
Drain Commission.
   (H)   Inspections.
      (1)   No work on water mains, sanitary sewers, storm drains and retention
basins and paving shall proceed without prior notification of the Township
Building Inspector to allow the township to schedule inspections, as deemed
necessary. The contractor or proprietor shall contact the Township Building
Inspector at least 48 hours prior to the start of construction to arrange for
the inspection and to deposit the required inspection fee.
      (2)   Work installed without required inspections may not be accepted for
dedication to the township and may not be allowed to connect to the public
system and/or be issued a certificate of occupancy.
   (I)   Field changes. Where actual conditions encountered on the construction
site warrant design modifications, the modifications may be permitted in
accordance with the usual procedures established by the township for review and
approval of the modifications; and, provided further that, all such
modifications comply with the regulations in this and other applicable
ordinances and laws, and provided that such modifications do not result in any
significant change to the subdivision layout or lot sizes or dimensions.
Changes to the subdivision layout or lot size or dimensions, where the changes
result in an increase or decrease of greater than 10% in lot size, lot width or
lot depth for any lot, shall be subject to Planning Commission review and
Township Board approval.
   (J)   Escrow deposits for seasonal improvements. If certain lot improvements
cannot be completed because of the season of the year, the Township Building
Inspector may issue a certificate of occupancy, provided there is no danger to
health, safety or general welfare, upon accepting a cash escrow deposit or
certified letter of credit for the full cost of the improvements. All required
improvements for which escrow funds have been accepted shall be installed by
the developer within a period of nine months from the date of deposit and
issuance of the certificate of occupancy. If the improvements have not been
properly installed at the end of this time period, the Building Inspector shall
give notice to the developer that the improvements shall be installed within
two weeks. If the improvements are not properly installed after two weeks, the
Building Inspector may request the Township Board to proceed to contract out
the work for installation of the improvements for a cost not to exceed the
amount of the escrow deposit. At the time of issuance of the certificate of
occupancy for which escrow monies are being deposited, the developer shall file
a notarized statement from the purchaser or purchasers of the premises
authorizing the township to install the improvements at the end of the nine-
month period if the improvements have not been properly installed by the
developer.
   (K)   Final inspections and acceptance.
      (1)   Final inspection and tests. Prior to acceptance of public
facilities or utilities for use and maintenance by the township or other public
entity having jurisdiction, all improvements shall have been completed and
equipment removed from the site, and the final inspection and all required
tests shall be completed. Any tests which fail shall be repeated after repairs
have been made. Any portions of the work found to be unacceptable shall be
repaired or replaced prior to acceptance.
      (2)   As-built drawings. As-built (record) drawings showing the final
locations and grades of all utilities and other improvements shall be submitted
to the township for review and acceptance.
(Ord. passed 3-18-1997)
§ 155.28 FINAL PLAT APPROVAL.
   (A)   Submittal requirements. The following information shall be submitted
to the township, along with the completed application, the review fee
authorized by the Township Board and the recording and filing fee required by
the Land Division Act. These materials shall be submitted at least ten days
prior to the Township Board meeting at which review is desired.
      (1)   The final plat shall be prepared and submitted in a form that is
consistent with the requirements in the Land Division Act, Michigan Public Act
288 of 1967, being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101—560.293, as amended by Michigan Public
Act 591 of 1996, as amended.
(Ord. rev. 12-1-1998)
      (2)   The final plat shall conform substantially to the final preliminary
plat as approved. In determining whether the final plat satisfies this
criterion, the Township Board shall use the criteria set forth in §
155.26(C).
      (3)   The proprietor shall submit an abstract of title, a policy of title
insurance or an attorney's title opinion based on the abstract of title, in
accordance with § 245 of Michigan Public Act 288 of 1967, being M.C.L.A. §§
560.101—560.293, as amended.
      (4)   All easements and utility agreements shall be executed by the
township and/or appropriate utility authority and the subdivider, setting forth
the terms of utility arrangements and the use and/or development of any land
reserved for the use of the public and/or future subdivision property owners.
      (5)   The proprietor shall submit copies of deed restrictions and
protective covenants in their final recordable form.
   (B)   Submittal to approving authorities. The proprietor shall submit the
final plat and as-built engineering plans, where required for approval, to
obtain final approval signatures on the final plat Mylar as required by § 142
of the Land Division Act, Michigan Public Act 288 of 1967, being M.C.L.A. §§
560.101—560.293, as amended.
   (C)   Initial review. Upon receipt of the final plat, the township staff and
Township Planner shall check the plat for completeness. Should any of the
required data specified in this chapter be omitted, the proprietor shall be
notified of the additional data required and that review will be delayed until
the required data are received. The date of filing shall be considered the date
on which a plat containing all required data is received by the township.
   (D)   Placement on Township Board agenda. When the information is complete,
the proposed final plat shall be placed on the agenda of the next regular
Township Board meeting.
   (E)   Distribution for review. Copies of the final plat shall be distributed
to the Planning Commission, the Township Planner, the Township Engineer and the
Building Inspector for review. The Planner, Engineer and Building Inspector
shall determine if the final plat is in compliance with the approved final
preliminary plat and with plans for utilities and other improvements, and shall
inform the Planning Commission of their findings. The Planning Commission shall
review the final plat and make a recommendation to approve, approve with
conditions or deny the final plat.
   (F)   Township Board action. Within 20 days of the date of filing, the
Township Board shall review the proposed final plat to determine conformance
with the Land Division Act, this chapter, the preliminary plat and any
conditions of approval attached to the preliminary plat. The Township Board may
approve or deny the final plat as follows:
      (1)   Upon determination that the final plat does not comply with the
standards and regulations in this chapter and other applicable ordinances and
laws, the Township Board shall deny the final plat, record the reasons for
denial in the official minutes and refund the filing recording fee.
      (2)   Upon determining that the final plat is in compliance with the
standards and regulations in this chapter and other applicable ordinances and
laws, the Township Board shall approve the final plat and direct the Township
Clerk to sign the plat. The Township Clerk shall forward all copies of the plat
to the clerk of the County Plat Board, together with the filing and recording
fee.
(Ord. passed 3-18-1997)
§ 155.29 BUILDING PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   Proposals to construct residential or non-residential structures shall
comply with the review and permit requirements in the adopted Building Code and
Zoning Ordinance.
   (B)   When a subdivision improvement agreement and performance guarantee
have been required for a subdivision, no certificate of occupancy for any
building in the subdivision shall be issued prior to the completion of the
required public improvements and the acceptance of dedication of those
improvements by the township or other authority having jurisdiction.
(Ord. passed 3-18-1997)
DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 155.40 OBJECTIVES.
   The design standards in this subchapter are intended to achieve an
arrangement of lots, streets and utilities which accomplish the following
objectives:
   (A)   A development pattern consistent with that described in the Township
Master Plan;
   (B)   Respect for the natural features on the site and preservation of
significant environmental resources;
   (C)   Minimize negative impacts on adjacent properties, both during and
after construction;
   (D)   Promote continuity in the public street and utility systems;
   (E)   Help ensure adequate accessibility for emergency vehicles;
   (F)   Provide links to non-motorized facilities and links between open
space, whether public or private; and
   (G)   Help ensure consistency with standards of the other agencies which
review the proposed subdivision.
(Ord. passed 3-18-1997)
§ 155.41 PRESERVATION OF NATURAL FEATURES.
   (A)   To the maximum extent feasible, the subdivision shall be designed to
preserve the natural character and natural features of the land, including
woodlots, wetlands, watercourses, natural drainage courses and stream channels,
wildlife habitats and other valuable natural assets. In order to accomplish
these objectives, dedication of easements, creation of protective barriers and
similar measures should be considered.
   (B)   In addition, the following standards shall be met.
      (1)   Wetlands. The design of subdivisions shall comply with the
Goemaere-Anderson Wetlands Protection Act (Michigan Public Act 203 of 1979, as
amended). Wetlands shall be delineated by a qualified wetland consultant and
shown on the preliminary plat (see requirements for a wetland within a lot and
water features setback in §
155.42 below).
      (2)   Woodlands and mature trees. Woodland areas are to be identified in
the preparation of plans submitted to the township for the development of a
subdivision. Significant trees or tree stands, defined as the largest known
individual species in the state, large trees approaching the diameter of the
known largest tree or species or clumps of trees that are rare to the area, of
particular horticultural or landscape value, or that provide habitat for
endangered wildlife shall be identified on the preliminary plat and preserved
to the extent consistent with the reasonable utilization of land and in
accordance with township or state regulations.
      (3)   Floodplains.
         (a)   Areas of special flood hazard within Williamstown Township have
been identified by the Federal Insurance Administration in a scientific and
engineering report. Those areas so designated have been mapped on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map. The flood insurance map and study are on file at the
township offices.
         (b)   Portions of plats located within any area of special flood
hazard shall be subject to the provisions of § 60.3(d) of the Rules and
Regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program (44 C.F.R. parts 59 et
seq., formerly 1901). If any part of a proposed subdivision lies within a
floodplain, deed restrictions or covenants shall be recorded with the final
plat which specify that the original discharge capacity of the floodplain will
be preserved and stream flow will not be altered in a manner that would affect
the riparian rights of others, or conflict with federal or state laws or
regulations governing the use of floodplains.
(Ord. passed 3-18-1997)
§ 155.42 LOTS.
   Lots within subdivisions shall conform to the following standards:
   (A)   General lot arrangement.
      (1)   Every lot in a subdivision shall front on and have direct access to
a public road.
      (2)   Side lot lines shall generally be within five degrees of being at
right angles or radial to the street centerlines. A greater degree of variation
may be permitted where the lot lines would create irregularly shaped lots which
would unreasonably limit construction, or where adjustments to the standard lot
configuration would protect regulated wetlands or preserve other natural
features, such as topography.
      (3)   Residential lots abutting arterial streets shall be platted with
reverse frontage lots or with side lot lines parallel to the arterial streets,
or shall provide extra depth to permit greater distances between buildings and
the arterial street. The arterial frontage shall be developed as a greenbelt as
specified in §
155.46. Alternatively, lots may front on an arterial street provided that
access to the lots is provided by a public secondary access road parallel to
the arterial street, subject to Township Engineer approval.
      (4)   Lots shall have a front-to-front relationship across all streets
where possible.
      (5)   Through lots are prohibited, except as permitted in division (A)(3)
above.
      (6)   Except for corner lots, lots less than one acre in area shall not
have frontage on more than two public streets.
      (7)   Lots facing a three-way intersection should be aligned to prevent
on-coming headlight glare into the building envelope of the living area.
      (8)   Blocks shall generally be designed with tiers of two lots placed
back to back, except where lots back onto an arterial road, railroad, natural
feature or subdivision boundary.
      (9)   Corner lots shall have access to the lesser traveled roadway.
      (10)   If the plat extends into an adjacent community, boundaries for
individual lots shall be within one community to the extent feasible. In no
case shall a building envelope result in a situation where a home crosses a
community or school district boundary.
      (11)   Lots which abut an active rail line shall have sufficient depth to
comply with the minimum setback requirements from the railroad right-of-way
line as specified in
Chapter 156 of this code.
   (B)   Lot sizes and shapes.
      (1)   Lot area and width. Each lot shall comply with the minimum area and
width requirements of
Chapter 156 of this code for the district in which the subdivision is proposed.
      (2)   Area calculation of ponds and lakes. Areas of the subdivision plat
that contain ponds, lakes or similar bodies of water shall not be platted as
subdivision lots nor calculated as a portion of the minimum lot area as
required by
Chapter 156 of this code.
      (3)   Lots occupied by wetlands. A portion of each lot may be occupied by
wetlands provided that, if wetlands are present on the lot, the applicant shall
demonstrate that adequate buildable area exists on each lot without intruding
into the required setbacks, including the required wetland or water features
setback.
      (4)   Natural water features setback and required natural vegetation
strip. A minimum setback and natural vegetation strip shall be maintained for
structures and grading adjacent to any water feature, including wetlands,
rivers, drains, creeks and lakes, as required by
Chapter 156 of this code.
      (5)   Area in floodplain. Lands within the 100-year intermediate regional
floodplain shall not be included within platted lots for residential uses or
uses which the Planning Commission determines may increase the flood hazard or
endanger life, health, general welfare or property values. The land may be set
aside as open space or park land.
       (6)   Width-to-depth ratio. Narrow, deep lots shall be avoided. A depth-
to-width ratio of three to one shall be considered a maximum, except where the
proprietor demonstrates that a deeper lot will protect natural resources, such
as woodlands, wetlands or wildlife habitat.
      (7)   Lot frontage. Each lot shall comply with the minimum road frontage
required for the zoning district.
      (8)   Building setbacks. Lots shall be of sufficient size and proportion
to accommodate the minimum required building setbacks listed in
Chapter 156 of this code for the district in which the subdivision is located.
      (9)   Corner lot setbacks. Corner lots shall have additional depth and/or
width to provide the required front yard setback along all sides facing a
public street, leaving a buildable area of sufficient size to accommodate an
average-sized home without variances.
      (10)   Non-residential lots. Lots intended for purposes other than
residential use shall be specifically designated for such purposes, and shall
have adequate provision for off-street parking, setbacks and other requirements
in accordance with
Chapter 156 of this code.
(Ord. passed 3-18-1997)
§ 155.43 ROADS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be the minimum requirements for roads
and intersections. If any other public agency having jurisdiction, including
the Ingham County Road Commission, shall adopt any statute, ordinance, rule or
regulation imposing additional, or more rigorous requirements, then the
provisions of the statute, ordinance, rule or regulations shall govern.
   (A)   Compliance with Ingham County and Michigan Department of
Transportation standards. The standards of this section are intended to comply
with the public road standards of the Ingham County Road Commission and the
Michigan Department of Transportation. The township reserves the right to adopt
written standards which are more restrictive, upon a determination that the
additional regulations meet special needs or goals in the township which may
not be appropriate on a county-wide basis.
   (B)   Conformance with Township Master Plan and County Street Plan. The
layout of the street system shall conform to the goals, policies, street
functional classification system, alignment and minimum rights-of-way
recommended in the transportation element of the Township Master Plan. Street
functional classification, rights-of-way and alignments shall also conform with
any street or road plan of the County Road Commission or the Michigan
Department of Transportation.
   (C)   Relationship to natural features and grades. Streets shall be aligned
to maximize the preservation of natural features and existing grades to the
extent feasible.
   (D)   Continuity of road system. The arrangement of roads shall provide for
the continuation of existing roads from adjoining areas into new subdivisions,
unless otherwise approved by the Township Board due to documented environmental
constraints or where the abutting road system is not deemed capable of safely
handling additional traffic volumes. Where adjoining vacant areas are zoned or
planned for development similar to the proposed subdivision, roads shall be
extended to the boundary line of the parcel to make provision for the future
road connections. The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed stub road
is a reasonable location for extension into the adjacent lands, in
consideration of such factors as grades, water bodies, wetlands and lot
configuration. A temporary cul-de-sac shall be provided if any lots front
solely on the stub road; if no lots front solely on the stub road, then a T-
turnaround shall be permitted, subject to approval by the Ingham County Road
Commission. A sign shall be placed at the end of the stub road or cul-de-sac
with a sign face on both sides stating "Future Street Extension".
   (E)   Minor roads (collectors and local roads).
      (1)   The proposed subdivision road layout shall be designed to
discourage through traffic and excessive speeds. This shall be accomplished by
incorporating offset street intersections within the subdivision, curvilinear
street alignments and discontinuities in the street pattern where appropriate.
In general, straight sections of roads shall not exceed 1,320 feet in length,
except that at subdivision entrances the straight sections of subdivision
streets that intersect arterial streets shall generally not exceed 660 feet in
length.
      (2)   These restrictions shall not prevent continuation of roads to
adjoining properties where deemed desirable by the township. In determining the
need for the connections, the township shall consider the need for adequate
access and response time for emergency vehicles, the impacts such connections
may have on reducing congestion along arterials, the projected traffic volumes
and the compatibility with adjacent developments.
   (F)   Alleys. Alleys shall not be permitted in areas of detached single- or
two-family residences. Alleys shall be allowed in multiple dwelling or
commercial subdivisions unless other provisions are made for service access,
off-street loading, and parking. Dead-end alleys are prohibited.
   (G)   Half roads. Half roads shall be prohibited. Wherever a half road
exists adjacent to the parcel to be subdivided a dedicated or platted and
recorded, the other half shall be platted.
   (H)   Existing roads. Where a subdivision incorporates existing roads which
are not in conformance with current standards, such facilities shall be
reconstructed as necessary to improve the road to the extent required by the
County Road Commission.
   (I)   Maximum length for blocks.
      (1)   Blocks, or the length of any road constructed for any phase of a
subdivision, shall not be less than 500 feet long, nor longer than 1,320 feet
measured from centerline to centerline of the intersections at each end of the
block, except that the Township Board, upon recommendation from the Planning
Commission, may approve a plat which varies from these dimensions upon
consideration of the following:
         (a)   Documented evidence that significant natural features will be
preserved or stub road to connect to vacant land are being provided which will
result in a conforming condition in the future;
         (b)   Recommendations from the police and fire departments;
         (c)   Recommendations from the Ingham County Road Commission; and
         (d)   Evidence that the longer block length will not create a threat
to public safety.
      (2)   The minimum block length dimensions do not apply to approved stub
roads.
   (J)   Cul-de-sac dead-end and loop roads.
      (1)   The length of cul-de-sac and dead-end roads shall not exceed 660
feet measured from the centerline of the street to the center point of the cul-
de-sac or end of the traveled portion of the dead- end street, unless a longer
street is necessary and appropriate because of topography or other natural
features, existing conditions or other circumstances as may be approved by the
Township Board and the County Road Commission. Each cul-de-sac street, dead-end
street, or loop road having more than 35 single-family lots or uses shall
intersect with a road that provides access from two different directions.
Thirty-five lots would result in approximately 350 trips or more per average
weekday, based on the most recent edition of Trip Generation, published by the
Institute of Transportation Engineers.
      (2)   All lots that have their sole means of vehicular access to a cul-
de-sac or dead-end street, or extension thereto, shall be counted when
determining the number of lots on the cul-de-sac or dead-on street. For the
purposes of this regulations, therefore, the cul-de-sac or dead-end street
shall include:
         (a)   The turnaround circle at the end of a cul-de-sac; plus
         (b)   The dead-end road; and
         (c)   Any road extension of the cul-de-sac or dead-end road that have
no other outlet except through the cul-de-sac or dead-end road.
   (K)   Minimum right-of-way widths. The minimum road right-of-way (r.o.w.)
width for subdivisions shall be based on applicable Ingham County Road
Commission or Michigan Department of Transportation standards. However, a
greater right-of-way may be required by the township or the Road Commission in
consideration of the intensity of development, the expected traffic volumes,
the need for additional area for utilities or grading or to accommodate planned
or expected street cross sections, and the expected traffic volumes and
characteristics associated with the types of uses which may access the street
based on the zoning.
   (L)   Location of major entrances along principal and minor arterial
streets.
      (1)   The intersection of subdivision streets with arterial streets
should be limited to half-mile or quarter-mile points along the arterial
streets where both of the following conditions exist:
         (a)   The subdivision street is expected to have an average daily
traffic volume of over 2,000 trips per day; and
         (b)   The potential for traffic signalization exists on the arterial
in the future.
      (2)   Intersections that do not meet these conditions shall comply with
the spacing requirements in division (M) below. Deviations from this standard
shall be permitted if needed to provide adequate sight distance or if a
modification is supported by a traffic impact study provided by the proprietor.
   (M)   Spacing of intersections along principal and minor arterials or
collector roads. Except as noted in the previous division (L), streets
intersecting an arterial or collector road shall be spaced at least 660 feet
from the intersection of another platted street on the same side of the street,
and shall be aligned with public streets or private roads across the street, or
offset at least 250 feet from the streets or roads, measured between
centerlines. Lesser offsets may be approved where there are numerous streets or
where adequate sight distance would be compromised.
   (N)   Design at entrances. Streets which intersect with a paved arterial or
collector road shall provide a paved deceleration lane with an adequate taper
if more than 50 right turns would expected during a peak hour. Deceleration and
acceleration lanes and tapers shall also be provided if required by the County
Road Commission. A passing lane shall be provided at any entrance where more
than 50 left turns are expected during a peak hour, where projected
intersection level of service would be D or worse, or where required by the
County Road Commission. Deceleration and acceleration facilities and passing
lanes shall be designed according to the standards of the County Road
Commission or Michigan Department of Transportation, as applicable. Boulevard
entrances to subdivisions shall be permitted by the Township, subject to the
County Road Commission approval.
   (O)   Internal street offsets. Three-way intersections ("T" type
intersections) are encouraged within the plat, rather than four-way
intersections. No more than two streets shall cross at any intersection. Street
intersections within a plat shall be offset at least 250 feet, measured between
centerlines. Lesser offsets may be approved where less than ten homes are
served by the intersection or where significant natural features would be
preserved that would otherwise be destroyed.
   (P)   Road geometrics. Road geometrics, including horizontal curves,
tangents between reverse curves, sight distance at intersections, street
gradients and vertical alignment at intersections, shall comply with the
standards of the Ingham County Road Commission or Michigan Department of
Transportation, as applicable.
   (Q)   Intersection angles. Streets shall be laid out to intersect as nearly
as possible to 90 degrees; in no case shall the intersection be less than 80
degrees.
   (R)   Street names. Street names shall be sufficiently distinct from other
street names in the area to avoid confusion, particularly for emergency service
providers. A review of the master list of existing street names retained by the
Tri-County Regional Planning Commission is required to avoid duplicate names.
Proposed street names shall be reviewed by the Tri-County Regional Planning
Commission and approved by the Road Commission as a part of the preliminary
plat approval process.
   (S)   Signs. The developer shall be responsible for placement of street name
signs at all street intersections in accordance with the requirements of the
County Road Commission. The developer shall also be responsible for placement
of pavement markings and regulatory street signs (such as no parking signs,
stop or yield signs, speed limit signs and warning signs) as requested by the
township or the Road Commission. All regulatory signs shall be in conformance
with the Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
   (T)   Stormwater drainage. Open drainage along roads may be permitted by the
township, except where curb and gutters are required by the County Road
Commission or Michigan Department of Transportation. Open drainage or curb and
gutter design and construction shall be in accordance with the specifications
of the County Road Commission or the Michigan Department of Transportation, as
applicable.
   (U)   Street lighting. Street lighting may be required throughout the
subdivision or at road intersections for the purposes of public safety. When
determining the need for street lights consideration shall be given to the
location of the subdivision, density of development, existing traffic
conditions, desire to maintain rural character and other public safety
criteria.
   (V)   Street construction requirements. All streets and appurtenances
thereto shall be constructed in accordance the specifications of the Ingham
County Road Commission or the Michigan Department of Transportation, as
applicable; except private roads built to township standards may be permitted,
if approved by the township.
   (W)   Phasing. Each phase of the plat shall be designed to meet the street
requirements above, regardless of whether future phases are constructed.
(Ord. passed 3-18-1997)
§ 155.44 SIDEWALKS AND BICYCLE PATHS.
   (A)   Sidewalks, bicycle paths and/or bicycle lanes (a portion of the road
that has been designated by striping and signs) may be required by the township
on one or both sides of subdivision streets or roads where deemed necessary to
achieve safe pedestrian and non-motorized travel. The determination of need for
the facilities shall be based on consideration of such factors as the density
of and size of the development, age characteristics of the expected residents,
expected traffic volumes along the street, existing conditions on roads in the
vicinity, proximity to other sidewalk systems and proximity to schools, parks
and public institutions.
   (B)   Pedestrian through-block connectors may be required in the middle of
any block over 1,320 feet in length to obtain satisfactory pedestrian
circulation within the subdivision, to provide access to parks or open space,
to provide links with an adjacent development, and/or to provide access to an
activity center. Where the pedestrian through-block connectors are required, a
ten-foot wide easement, a dedicated common area or other means of securing the
land for the connector shall be required. The township may require placement of
a fence along the easement to ensure the location is visible and to protect the
adjacent property owners.
   (C)   Any yard which abuts a pedestrian easement shall provide the required
minimum building setback, as applicable, from the easement.
   (D)   All sidewalks shall be paved, have a minimum width of five feet, and
be constructed to the specifications of the County Road Commission and Township
Engineer.
   (E)   Bicycle paths shall be at least eight feet wide and constructed in
accordance with the specifications of the Township Engineer.
   (F)   Grades shall be clearly illustrated on the plans to ensure proper
connection to sidewalks and bicycle paths on adjacent lands.
   (G)   Sidewalks and bicycle paths shall be installed by the proprietor
within the dedicated road right-of-way, except that placement within private
access easements may be permitted where grades or other factors prevent
placement within the road right-of-way.
   (H)   Crosswalk pavement markings and signs may be required by the township.
Crosswalks shall be in accordance with the requirements of the County Road
Commission.
(Ord. passed 3-18-1997)
§ 155.45 MAILBOX CLUSTERS.
   Where the United States Postal Service requires that new subdivisions be
served by clusters of mailboxes serving several lots rather than individual
mailboxes serving individual lots, the clusters shall comply with the following
requirements.
   (A)   Procedure. Mailbox clusters of four or more, if required by the United
States Postal Service, must be indicated on the preliminary plat in accordance
with the location criteria set forth below. The plan shall indicate, by means
of symbols and/or numbers, the location of clusters and number of boxes in each
mailbox cluster. The plan shall be submitted to the United States Postal
Service having jurisdiction in the area. Any approvals or recommendations of
the United States Postal Service shall be submitted with the plat. Changes in
the location of mailbox clusters may be made with the approval of the Planning
Commission.
   (B)   Location criteria.
      (1)   Cluster mail boxes shall be located a safe distance from
intersections (to allow vehicle stacking without blocking intersections).
      (2)   Where possible, mail box clusters should be located along or near
side lot lines, at corner lots (block ends) or at entrances to open spaces;
provided that, access for maintenance vehicles remains.
   (C)   Design criteria. A paved area shall be provided for residents in their
vehicles to pull off of the road while retrieving their mail. If mailbox
clusters are not located within a building, then they shall be screened on
three sides with evergreen landscaping.
(Ord. passed 3-18-1997)
§ 155.46 LANDSCAPING.
   The selection, size, spacing and planting of all landscaping within a
subdivision shall comply with the Zoning Ordinance and the following standards.
   (A)   General standards.
      (1)   Plantings within 15 feet of a fire hydrant shall be no taller than
six inches.
      (2)   The development and planting of required landscaping shall be the
responsibility of the proprietor, not the individual lot owner.
      (3)   Fewer trees may be required if the proprietor provides evidence
that existing trees over three-inch caliper or natural habitat areas will be
preserved during and after construction.
      (4)   The landscape plan shall be approved by the Township Board, upon
recommendation of the Planning Commission, in consideration of the above and
compatibility with the visual character of the surrounding area.
      (5)   Landscaping shall comply with minimum sight line standards required
by the County Road Commission or Michigan Department of Transportation,
whichever agency has jurisdiction.
      (6)   To prevent conflict with utilities, compliance with the following
guidelines shall be required:
         (a)   Guidelines for above-ground utilities:
 
Distance from Centerline of Utility Easement Maximum Height of Trees or Shrubs
Within 10 feet                               15 feet
10.1 to 20 feet                              25 feet
20.1 to 30 feet                              40 feet
 
         (b)   Plantings directly underneath above-ground wires or directly
over underground utilities shall be avoided; and
         (c)   The following clearances shall be provided around equipment
cabinets:
 
                           Minimum Landscaping Setback
In front of cabinet door   10 feet
In back or side of cabinet 4 feet
 
   (B)   Street trees.
      (1)   One canopy tree shall be planted for each 50 feet of frontage along
a street or private road, including all frontages for a corner lot, rounded up
to the next whole number, and one canopy tree shall also be planted for each 50
linear feet along a median boulevard, except where the trees would conflict
with traffic control devices, driveways, street lights, fire hydrants and
utility locations.
      (2)   The minimum size of all street trees shall be two and one-half
inches caliper.
      (3)   Tree species should selected for tolerance of the harsh roadside
conditions in central Michigan, for compliance with overhead clearance and
sight distance requirements, to ensure maintenance of accessibility to fire
hydrants, and to avoid interference overhead or underground utility lines,
street lights or street pavement. To control tree loss due to insects or
disease, more than one species shall be planted. Trees shall be selected from
the list of approved species specified by the County Road Commission.
      (4)   Street trees shall be planted so that each lot has at least one
canopy tree and each corner lot has at least three canopy trees. Street trees
shall be placed to avoid future driveway locations, if known.
      (5)   Street trees shall be at least 50 feet from the intersection of two
street right-of-way lines or access easements.
      (6)   Street trees shall be planted in accordance with the setback
standards established by the Ingham County Road Commission (minimum of 15 feet
from the nearest edge of the curb or 19 feet from the nearest edge of pavement
if there is no curb) or Michigan Department of Transportation. Trees shall be
outside of areas needed for open ditches or potential future sidewalks. Street
trees may be located on private property as close to the front line as possible
for those lots where tree location in the public right-of-way is not possible
due to conflicts with overhead or underground utility lines or restrictions of
the Ingham County Road Commission.
      (7)   The lowest branch of any canopy tree shall provide a minimum 13-
foot clearance over a public street or private road, and a minimum seven feet
above grade from a sidewalk, and a minimum of nine feet above grade from a
bicycle pathway. Greater clearances shall be provided if required by the Ingham
County Road Commission.
   (C)   Landscaping in cul-de-sacs.
      (1)   A minimum of one canopy tree for every 1,000 square feet of ground
area, rounded upward, shall be planted within each cul-de-sac or island (e.g.,
if the island is 2,305 s.f., three canopy trees would be required).
      (2)   Canopy trees shall be maintained so that the lowest branch that is
greater than one inch in diameter is a minimum of 15 feet above the elevation
of the street surface.
      (3)   The island must be planted with grass or ground cover or have four
low shrubs planted for every 1,000 square feet of ground area. The shrubs shall
be maintained at a maximum height of two feet, six inches. If planted with
grass or ground cover, the island shall first be mounded to a height of between
one foot, six inches and two feet, six inches.
   (D)   Subdivision entrances. Subdivision entrances may include landscaping,
lighting, identification signs, wrought iron fences or other architectural
features. All such features shall comply with the Zoning Ordinance. Details of
the entranceway may be submitted at any stage in the plat review process or
after final plat approval.
   (E)   Landscaping as a buffer zone. A landscaped buffer zone shall be
required along those boundaries of a residential subdivision that abut land
that is used for other than single-family residential purposes, including where
the abutting land is occupied by a rail line or high voltage power transmission
lines (69 kV to 765 kV). This buffer zone may include trees, shrubs, berms,
fences, walls or a combination.
   (F)   Required landscape greenbelt. When a subdivision borders on a state
highway, county primary road or street classified as a principal or minor
arterial in the Township Master Plan, and wherever a rear yard abuts a public
or private road, an easement for construction of a minimum 20-foot wide
landscape greenbelt shall be provided. This buffer zone may include trees,
shrubs, berms, walls or a combination designed in accordance with the landscape
standards described in the Zoning Ordinance. Existing natural features shall be
retained wherever possible to promote a natural appearance and to protect the
existing ecosystem within the greenbelt. However, nothing in this section is
intended to prevent a pedestrian-bicycle pathway, sidewalk or underground
utilities within the greenbelt.
(Ord. passed 3-18-1997)
§ 155.47 PUBLIC RESERVATIONS.
   (A)   A proprietor may set aside areas suitably located and of adequate size
for playgrounds, school sites, parks, recreation facilities, open space or
other public use where the need for such facilities or uses is identified in
the Master Plan, Zoning Ordinance or other written analysis or report of public
needs.
   (B)   The proprietor may set aside such areas using any of a variety of
methods, including, but not necessarily limited to:
      (1)   Dedication to the township;
      (2)   Reservation of land for the use of property owners by deed or
covenants;
      (3)   Reservation for acquisition by the township or School Board within
a specified period after recording of the final plat. The reservation shall be
made in such a manner as to provide for a release of the land to the proprietor
in the event that the township, the School Board or other public entity does
not proceed with the purchase; and
      (4)   Landscape requirements and cul-de-sac requirement.
(Ord. passed 3-18-1997)
§ 155.48 EASEMENTS AND RESERVE STRIPS.
   (A)   Utility easements. A ten-foot wide easement shall be provided along
the front lot line of each lot for utilities. Easements may also be required
along side and rear property lines for utility extensions. Recommendations on
the proposed layout of public utility easements shall be sought from all of the
public utility companies serving the area. It shall be the responsibility of
the developer to submit copies of the approved preliminary plat to all
appropriate public utility agencies.
   (B)   Drainageways. Easements for drainageways, detention and retention
ponds and other parts of the stormwater management system shall be provided, as
required by the rules of the Ingham County Drain Commissioner.
   (C)   Municipal services. The township may require easements to provide
access for municipal water and sanitary sewer facilities, and to ensure the
extension of the services into adjoining lands.
   (D)   Common areas. The developer shall provide access easements to parks,
open space and other common areas (see also §
155.45).
   (E)   Reserve strips. Privately held reserve strips controlling access to
streets shall be prohibited. The township may require a one-foot wide reserve
strip deeded to the township at the end of a stub road which terminates at the
subdivision boundary or between half streets unless such a reserve strip would
create a landlocked property.
(Ord. passed 3-18-1997)
§ 155.49 UTILITIES.
   It is the purpose of this section to establish and define the public
improvements which shall be provided by the proprietor, at his or her expense
with or without reimbursement from any public agency or improvement district,
as conditions for final plat approval.
   (A)   Wastewater treatment.
      (1)   When a proposed subdivision is located within the service area of a
public sanitary sewer system with adequate capacity, or when connection to a
public sanitary sewer system having adequate capacity is proposed regardless of
the location of service area boundaries, a sanitary sewer system consisting of
appropriate sewer lines, lift stations and other sanitary sewer system
appurtenances shall be provided by the proprietor. This system shall meet all
requirements of governmental agencies that have jurisdiction.
      (2)   In areas outside of the public sanitary sewer service area septic
tanks and disposal fields may be utilized so long as they comply with all
requirements of Ingham County and the State of Michigan.
      (3)   All or part of a subdivision may be served by an on-site community
wastewater treatment system, subject to the requirements of Ingham County and
the State of Michigan.
   (B)   Water supply.
      (1)   When a proposed subdivision is located within, adjacent to or
reasonably near the service area of a public water system with adequate
capacity, a water distribution system consisting of appropriate water
distribution mains, fire hydrants and other water system appurtenances shall be
provided by the proprietor. This system shall meet all requirements of
governmental agencies that have jurisdiction.
      (2)   In areas outside of the public water system service area,
individual wells or on-site community wells may be permitted. Individual and
community wells shall comply with the requirements of Ingham County, the State
of Michigan and the township.
   (C)   Storm drainage.
      (1)   An adequate storm and surface water drainage system that meets all
requirements of the township and the Ingham County Drain Commissioner shall be
required. The storm drainage system, which may consist of storm sewers, drain
inlets, manholes, culverts, bridges, sedimentation basins, sump pumps and
natural and constructed components, shall be subject to Drain Commissioner
approval.
      (2)   A subdivision grading plan shall be submitted prior to final
preliminary plat approval. The grading plan and the plan for managing storm
water flow shall be designed to not adversely affect neighboring properties and
natural features, or worsen downstream flooding and water quality. Lots shall
be laid out so as to provide positive drainage away from all buildings and
individual lot drainage shall be coordinated with the general storm drainage
pattern for the area. Drainage shall be designed to avoid increased flow of
storm water from one lot onto adjacent lots.
      (3)   Surface water management systems shall be designed to retain the
natural function and value of any wetland, water body, or watercourse, and to
not increase flooding or the potential for pollution of surface or groundwater,
either on-site or off-site, from such pollutants as sediment, nutrients or
toxic substances.
      (4)   Existing surface water flow entering the site shall be received and
discharged as nearly as possible in the manner prior to the development. Both
peak flow and run-off volumes shall be maintained as nearly as possible at
predevelopment levels.
      (5)   The grading of lots shall be such that surface water drains away
from building foundations and toward swales, ditches, retention areas or
drainage structures. Surface water from all roofs and paved areas shall be
collected at intervals so that it will not obstruct vehicular or pedestrian
traffic and will not create nuisance ponding in paved areas.
      (6)   Wetlands may be used for on-site detention or retention of surface
water if the proprietor demonstrates that such use will not have an adverse
effect upon ecological and hydrological characteristics of the wetland. Final
preliminary plat approval shall not be granted until all necessary federal,
state, county and township wetland permits are obtained.
      (7)   If the township or the County Drain Commissioner accepts or
requires storm water retention or detention ponds, the ponds shall be designed
based on the following guidelines:
         (a)   The maximum side slope for such ponds shall not exceed a one-
foot rise per five-foot run.
         (b)   The outside edges of the ponds shall provide adequate space for
landscaping, which shall be depicted on a landscape plan.
         (c)   Landscaping around ponds that border existing or proposed
single-family residential development shall be consistent with the standards
for greenbelt plantings contained in the Zoning Ordinance.
         (d)   Ponds shall be designed to appear as a natural landscape
feature. Accordingly, a curvilinear shape is generally desired. Where feasible,
ponds shall be incorporated into common subdivision open space.
   (D)   Soil and sedimentation control.
      (1)   In the event that any subdivider or developer intends to make
changes in the contour of any land proposed to be subdivided, developed or
changed in use by razing, excavating, removal or destruction of the natural
topsoil, trees or other vegetative covering thereon, the property owner or his
or her agent shall first apply to the Ingham County Drain Commissioner for
approval of a plan for soil erosion and sedimentation control.
      (2)   No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until:
         (a)   Final grading has been completed in accordance with the approved
final plat;
         (b)   The lot has been covered with soil with an average depth of at
least six inches which shall contain no particles over two inches in diameter,
except those portions covered by buildings or streets, or where the grade has
not been changed or where natural vegetation has not been seriously damaged;
and
         (c)   The lot has been seeded, covered with sod or covered with the
appropriate ground cover. Where, because of seasonal conditions final grading
will be delayed, the township may accept a performance guarantee as described
in §
155.27.
   (E)   Telephone, electric and other cable services.
      (1)   Telephone, electric and other cable services shall be placed
underground throughout the subdivision, except as follows.
         (a)   Primary distribution lines (e.g., five to 35 kV power lines) on
the perimeter of the subdivision may be aboveground when located on or along a
section or quarter section line.
         (b)   The Township Board, upon recommendation from the Planning
Commission, may waive or modify this requirement where it finds that
underground utilities would be impractical.
      (2)   Telephone, electric and other cable services shall also comply with
the following requirements.
         (a)   All such services shall be located in the public road right-of-
way or in an private easement, which shall generally be located at the front of
each lot.
         (b)   If located in a public road right-of-way, the location and
installation of such services shall be planned so as to not conflict with other
utilities.
         (c)   All such services shall be installed in accordance with
standards promulgated by the Michigan Public Services Commission and other
agencies having jurisdiction.
(Ord. passed 3-18-1997)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 155.60 COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   Final approval. No subdivision plat required by this chapter or the
Land Division Act (Michigan Public Act 288 of 1967, being M.C.L.A. §§
560.101—560.293, as amended) shall be admitted to the public land records of
the county or received or recorded by the County Register of Deeds, until the
subdivision plat has received final approval by the Township Board. No public
board, agency, commission, official or other authority shall proceed with the
construction of or authorize the construction of any of the public improvements
required by this chapter unless the public improvements have been accepted or
otherwise permitted in accordance with the terms of this chapter. No public
board, agency, commission, official or other authority shall issue building or
occupancy permits for structures on lands subject to this chapter where the
subdivider has not complied with the requirements set forth herein.
   (B)   Notice to subsequent owners and continued maintenance. Maintenance of
improvements illustrated on the approved final preliminary plat and final plat
and in supporting documentation shall be a continuing responsibility of the
subdivision association and individual owners of lots on which the improvements
are located. The subdivision developer shall place a notice in every deed when
the property is sold that shall indicate as follows: Maintenance of
improvements illustrated on the approved final preliminary plat and in
supporting documentation shall be a continuing responsibility of the grantee of
this deed and shall run with the land.
(Ord. passed 3-18-1997; Ord. rev. 3-6-2001; Ord. rev. 2-3-2004)
§ 155.61 INTERPRETATION, CONFLICT AND SEPARABILITY.
   (A)   Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the
provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements. More
stringent provisions may be required if it is demonstrated that different
standards are necessary to promote the public health, safety and welfare.
   (B)   Conflict. Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this
chapter are either more or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed
by any other provisions of this chapter or of any other applicable law,
ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations which
are more restrictive and impose higher standards or requirements shall govern.
   (C)   Separability. The provisions of this chapter are separable. If a
section, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is adjudged by a court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the decision shall not affect the
remaining portions of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 3-18-1997)
§ 155.62 FEES.
   (A)   The proprietor shall be responsible for payment of all fees, based on
the fee adopted and occasionally updated by the Township Board.
   (B)   Fees may be required for:
      (1)   Planning and engineering review; legal review; municipal review and
administration (including notification and publication costs);
      (2)   Review, filing and recording as specified in the Land Division Act;
      (3)   Inspection; and
      (4)   Connection to public utilities.
(Ord. passed 3-18-1997)
§ 155.63 WAIVERS.
   (A)   Application for waiver. Applications for a waiver from specific
provisions of this chapter may be made in writing by the proprietor prior to
approval of the final preliminary plat. The application shall be supplemented
with maps, plans and other data which may aid the Planning Commission in the
analysis of the proposed waiver.
   (B)   Planning Commission recommendation.
      (1)   The Planning Commission may recommend that the Township Board grant
a waiver from the provisions of this chapter on a finding that undue hardship
or practical difficulties result from strict compliance with specific
provisions or requirements of this chapter, provided that the waiver does not
pertain to requirements of the Zoning Ordinance that are under the jurisdiction
of the Zoning Board of Appeals. In making the finding required herein the
Planning Commission and Township Board shall take into account the nature of
the proposed use of land, the existing use of land in the vicinity, the number
of persons to reside or work in the proposed subdivision, and the probable
effect of the proposed subdivision upon traffic conditions in the vicinity. No
waiver shall be recommended unless the Planning Commission finds, after a
public hearing that:
         (a)   There are such special circumstances or conditions affecting the
property so that the strict application of the provisions of this chapter would
clearly be impractical or unreasonable;
         (b)   The granting of the waiver will not be detrimental to the public
welfare or injurious to other property in the area;
         (c)   The variance or waiver will not violate the provisions of the
Land Division Act (Michigan Public Act 288 of 1967, being M.C.L.A. §§
560.101—560.293, as amended) or create a violation of the Township Zoning
Ordinance;
         (d)   The waiver will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and
purpose of this chapter and the Master Plan of the township; and
         (e)   The need for the waiver has not been self-created by the
applicant and/or the applicant's predecessors.
      (2)   In recommending approval of a waiver request, the Planning
Commission may suggest requirements or conditions that will, in its judgment,
secure the objectives and requirements of this chapter.
   (C)   Township Board action. After receiving the Planning Commission's
recommendation, the Township Board shall make a decision on the waiver request.
In making its decision, the Township Board may establish requirements, time
constraints or conditions that will, in its judgment, secure substantially the
objectives and requirements of this chapter. The Township Board shall state the
reasons for its finding or decisions as part of its official records.
   (D)   Township Board decision is final. The Township Board shall have the
final authority on waivers from or modifications to the standards of this
chapter. Appeals of the Township Board decisions shall be to a court of law.
(Ord. passed 3-18-1997)
§ 155.64 PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE.
   Whenever the Township Board permits or requires a performance guarantee as
security for required improvements, the performance guarantee shall be in the
form of a letter of credit, certified check or cash escrow. Any such security
shall be in an amount equal to 120% of the estimated cost of completion of the
required public improvements, including lot improvements. The issuer of the
letter of credit or the escrow agent, as applicable, shall be acceptable to the
township.
   (A)   Letter of credit. If the developer posts a letter of credit as
security, the credit shall:
      (1)   Be irrevocable;
      (2)   Be for a term sufficient to cover the completion, maintenance and
warranty periods specified in this chapter or in other ordinances or
regulations for the specific improvement; and
      (3)   Require only that the township present the credit with a sight
draft and an affidavit signed by an authorized representative of the township
attesting to the municipality's right to draw funds under the credit.
   (B)   Cash escrow or certified check. If the developer posts a cash escrow
or certified check as security, the escrow instructions shall provide that:
      (1)   The developer shall have no right to a return of any of the funds
except as provided herein; and
      (2)   The escrow agent shall have a legal duty to deliver the funds to
the township whenever an authorized representative of the township presents an
affidavit to the agent attesting to the township's right to receive funds
whether or not the developer protests the right.
   (C)   Release or reduction of security.
      (1)   Certificate of satisfactory completion.
         (a)   The Township Board shall not accept dedication of required
improvements, or release or reduce the amount of any security posted by the
subdivider until the Township Engineer has submitted a certificate stating that
all required improvements have been satisfactorily completed and until:
            1.   The applicant's engineer or surveyor has certified to the
Township Engineer, through submission of a detailed "as-built" survey plat of
the subdivision, indicating location, dimensions, materials and other
information required by the Township Engineer, that the layout of the line and
grade of all public improvements is in accordance with construction plans for
the subdivision; and
            2.   A title insurance policy has been furnished to and approved by
the Township Attorney indicating that the improvements have been completed, are
ready for dedication to the township and are free and clear of any and all
liens and encumbrances.
         (b)   Upon the approval and recommendation by the Township Engineer
and Township Attorney, the Township Board may accept the improvements for
dedication in accordance with the established procedure.
      (2)   Reduction of escrowed funds and security. If the security posted by
the subdivider was a cash escrow, the amount of that escrow shall be reduced
upon actual acceptance of the dedication of public improvements and then only
to the ratio that the cost of the public improvement for which dedication was
accepted bears to the total cost of public improvements for the subdivision. In
no event shall a cash escrow be reduced below 25% of the principal amount.
Funds held in the escrow account shall not be released to the subdivider, in
whole or in part, except upon express written instructions of the Township
Attorney. At the end of the maintenance and warranty periods, all escrowed
funds, if any, shall be released to the subdivider. If the security provided by
the subdivider was a letter of credit, the Township Attorney shall execute
waivers of the municipality's right to draw funds under the credit upon actual
acceptance of the dedication of public improvements and then only to the ratio
that the cost of the public improvement for which dedication was accepted bears
to the total cost of public improvements for the subdivision. In no event shall
waivers be executed that would reduce the security below 25% of it original
amount.
(Ord. passed 3-18-1997)
§ 155.65 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Enforcement. Enforcement of this chapter shall be chiefly the
responsibility of the Township Building Official, who shall have the authority
to enforce this chapter in accordance with requirements and procedures set
forth herein.
   (B)   Authorized township official. The Township Supervisor, Building
Official and Planning Coordinator or their designees are hereby designated as
authorized township officials to investigate alleged violations of this chapter
and to take appropriate action. The action may include an order to correct the
violation, issuance of an appearance ticket pursuant to Michigan Public Act 147
of 1968, as amended, or other actions as provided for by state law and township
ordinances.
(Ord. passed 3-18-1997)
§ 155.66 OTHER REMEDIES.
   In addition to all other remedies, including the penalties provided in §
155.99, the township may commence and prosecute appropriate actions in the
Circuit Court for the County of Ingham or any other court having jurisdiction
to restrain or prevent any noncompliance with or violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter, or to correct, remedy or abate the noncompliance or
violation.
(Ord. passed 3-18-1997)
§ 155.67 PENDING PROSECUTIONS.
   Any prosecution arising from a violation of ordinances or regulations
repealed herein, which prosecution may be pending at the time this chapter
shall become effective, or any prosecution which may be commenced in the future
for any offenses committed before the effective date of this chapter, may be
instituted, tried and determined in accordance with the provisions of such
ordinances or regulations in effect at the time of the commission of the
offenses.
(Ord. passed 3-18-1997)
§ 155.68 REPEAL AND EFFECTIVE DATE.
   (A)   All other subdivision regulations heretofore adopted by the Planning
Commission and/or Township Board and all amendments thereto, are hereby
specifically repealed as of the effective date of this chapter. All other
ordinances conflicting or inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, to
the extent of the conflict or inconsistency only, are hereby repealed.
   (B)   This chapter shall become effective immediately upon its passage,
publication and recording by the Township Clerk.
(Ord. passed 3-18-1997)
§ 155.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Misdemeanor. Any violation of this chapter shall constitutes a
misdemeanor or municipal civil infraction, as determined within the township's
discretion. Any person who is convicted of a misdemeanor under this section
shall be subject to punishment by a fine not exceeding $500 or by imprisonment
not exceeding 90 days for each offense, or both, at the discretion of the
court. If instead a municipal civil infraction is imposed, the penalty shall be
a fine not to exceed $100. Upon notice of a violation, the appropriate township
employee shall investigate any violation and then make a determination as to
whether the penalty shall be imposed. The Township Supervisor or his/her
designated agent is hereby authorized to write and serve municipal civil
infraction tickets. This municipal civil infraction ticket shall serve shall
proceed as provided in the Township Municipal Civil Infractions Ordinance.
Furthermore, any property owners, surveyor, engineer, builder, contractor,
agent, or other person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains
any violation of the chapter may each be found guilty of a separate offense and
may be subject to the penalties provided herein. The cost of prosecution shall
also be assessed against the violator.
   (B)   Continuing violations. Each act of violation and every day upon which
such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense or infraction.
Abatements shall not be considered as payment or part of a violation's penalty.
(Ord. passed 3-18-1997; Ord. 54, passed 6-11-2014)
CHAPTER 156: ZONING
   Editor’s Note: The Williamstown Township Zoning Ordinance, passed July 9,
2013, is included herein as
Appendix A.
APPENDIX A: WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP ZONING ORDINANCE
Section
Article 1.00 
Rules of Construction and Definitions
   
1.01   Short title
   
1.02   Rules of construction
   
1.03   Definitions
Article 2.00
General Provisions
   
2.01   Administrative regulations
   
2.02   Allowable and prohibited uses
   
2.03   Accessory buildings and structures
   
2.04   Lawful use of a structure as a dwelling unit
   
2.05   Residential design standards
   
2.06   Home occupations and home-based businesses
   
2.07   Temporary structures and uses
   
2.08   Uses not otherwise included within a district
   
2.09   Yard and bulk regulations
   
2.10   Streets, roads, and other means of access
   
2.11   Grading regulations
   
2.12   Lighting
   
2.13   Sand, gravel, and mineral extraction
   
2.14   Junkyards and landfills
   
2.15   Safety provisions
   
2.16   Exceptions
   
2.17   Sidewalks
   
2.18   Performance guarantee
   
2.19   Trash removal and collection
   
2.20   Floodplains
   
2.21   Soil erosion and sedimentation control
   
2.22   Reception antenna facilities
   
2.23   Impact assessment
   
2.24   Wetland buffer regulations
   
2.25   Stormwater management
Article 3.00
Nonconformities
   
3.01   Intent
   
3.02   Definitions
   
3.03   General requirements
   
3.04   Nonconforming lots of record
   
3.05   Modification to nonconforming uses or structures
Article 4.00 
Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements
   
4.01   Off-street parking requirements
   
4.02   Loading space requirements
   
4.03   Penalties and enforcement
Article 5.00
Landscaping and Screening
   
5.01   Intent and scope of requirements
   
5.02   General landscaping requirements
   
5.03   Specific landscaping requirements for zoning districts
   
5.04   Standards for landscape materials
   
5.05   Installation and maintenance
   
5.06   Treatment of existing plant material
   
5.07   Modifications to landscape requirements
Article 6.00
Walls and Fences
   
6.01   Obscuring walls and fences
   
6.02   Fences and walls in residential and agricultural districts
   
6.03   General fence and wall standards
Article 7.00
Signs
   
7.01   Purpose
   
7.02   Scope of requirements
   
7.03   Definitions
   
7.04   Enforcement
   
7.05   General provisions
   
7.06   Sign design standards
   
7.07   Residential district signs
   
7.08   Nonresidential district signs
   
7.09   Penalties and enforcement
Article 8.00
Site Development Standards Applicable to Specific Uses
   
8.01   Intent and scope of application
   
8.02   Scope of requirements
   
8.03   Site development standards for residential uses
Article 9.00
Performance Standards
   
9.01   Intent and scope of application
   
9.02   Performance standards
   
9.03   Procedures for determining compliance
Article 10.00
Establishment of Zoning Districts
   
10.01   Creation of districts
   
10.02   Adoption of zoning map
   
10.03   Interpretation of district boundaries
   
10.04   Zoning of vacated areas
   
10.05   Zoning of filled land
   
10.06   District requirements
Article 11.00
R-1, One-Family Residential District
   
11.01   Statement of purpose
   
11.02   Permitted uses and structures
   
11.03   Development standards
   
11.04   Penalties and enforcement
Article 12.00
R-1-S, Suburban Residential District
   
12.01   Statement of purpose
   
12.02   Permitted uses and structures
   
12.03   Development standards
Article 13.00
RR, Rural Residential District
   
13.01   Statement of purpose
   
13.02   Permitted uses and structures
   
13.03   Development standards
Article 14.00
RE, Rural Estate District
   
14.01   Statement of purpose
   
14.02   Permitted uses and structures
   
14.03   Development standards
Article 15.00
AG-SF, Agricultural-Small Farms District
   
15.01   Statement of purpose
   
15.02   Permitted uses and structures
   
15.03   Development standards
Article 16.00
MHP, Mobile Home Park District
   
16.01   Statement of purpose
   
16.02   Permitted uses and structures
   
16.03   Development standards
Article 17.00
RM-1, Multiple-Family Residential District
   
17.01   Statement of purpose
   
17.02   Permitted uses and structures
   
17.03   Development standards
Article 18.00
AG-C, Commercial Agricultural District
   
18.01   Statement of purpose
   
18.02   Permitted uses and structures
   
18.03   Development standards
Article 19.00
OS-1, Office Service District
   
19.01   Statement of purpose
   
19.02   Permitted uses and structures
   
19.03   Development standards
Article 20.00
B-1, Limited Business District
   
20.01   Statement of purpose
   
20.02   Permitted uses and structures
   
20.03   Development standards
Article 21.00
B-2, Commercial Center District
   
21.01   Statement of purpose
   
21.02   Permitted uses and structures
   
21.03   Development standards
Article 22.00
I-1, Light Industrial District
   
22.01   Statement of purpose
   
22.02   Permitted uses and structures
   
22.03   Development standards
Article 23.00
Reserved
Article 24.00
GD, Green Zone Planned Development District
   
24.01   Statement of purpose
   
24.02   Boundaries in which the green zone may be used
   
24.03   Eligibility criteria
   
24.04   Permitted uses and structures
   
24.05   Prohibited uses and structures
   
24.06   Project design requirements
   
24.07   Area, height, bulk, and placement requirements
Article 25.00
PD, Planned Development
   
25.01   Intent
   
25.02   Eligibility criteria
   
25.03   Project design standards
   
25.04   Procedures and requirements
   
25.05   Review and approval standards
   
25.06   Phasing
Article 25.50
Planned Development Cluster Zoning Option
   25.51   Intent
   25.52   Eligibility criteria
   25.53   Project design standards
Article 26.00
M-43 Corridor Overlay Zone
   
26.01   Findings
   
26.02   Purpose
   
26.03   Definitions
   
26.04   Applicability
   
26.05   Additional site plan information
   
26.06   Access management standards
   
26.07   Nonmotorized pathways
   
26.08   Application to existing sites and modification of standards
Article 27.00
MU, Mixed Use Overlay District
   
27.01   Statement of purpose
   
27.02   Applicability of overlay zoning concept
   
27.03   Creation of mixed use overlay district boundaries
   
27.04   Permitted uses and structures
   
27.05   Development standards
   
27.06   Area, height, bulk, and placement requirements
   
27.07   Site plan review
Article 28.00
Schedule of Regulations
   
28.01   Intent and scope of requirements
   
28.02   Schedule of regulations for principal structures
Article 29.00
General Procedures and Related Standards
   
29.01   Purpose
   
29.02   Site plan review process
   
29.03   Special land uses
   
29.04   Planned development procedures and requirements
   
29.05   Variances and appeals
   
29.06   Amendments
   
29.07   Conditional rezoning
   
29.08   Permits and certificates
   
29.09   Filing fees
   
29.10   Violations and penalties
   
29.11   Records
   
29.12   Public notice
Article 30.00
Administrative Organization
   
30.01   Overview
   
30.02   Township Board of Trustees
   
30.03   Township Planning Commission
   
30.04   Zoning Board of Appeals
   
30.05   Building Inspector, Township Planner, and other enforcement officials
Article 31.00
Severability, Repeal, Effective Date, Adoption
   
31.01   Severability
   
31.02   Repeal
   
31.03   Effective Date
   
31.04   Adoption
ARTICLE 1.00
RULES OF CONSTRUCTION AND DEFINITIONS
§ 1.01 SHORT TITLE.
   This ordinance shall be known as the “Williamstown Township Zoning
Ordinance.” Within the following text, it may be referred to as the “Ordinance”
or the “Zoning Ordinance.”
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 1.02 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   The following rules of construction apply to the text of this Ordinance:
   A.   The particular shall control the general.
   B.   Words used in the present tense shall include the future, unless the
context clearly indicates the contrary.
   C.   Words used in the singular number shall include the plural; and words
used in the plural shall include the singular, unless the context clearly
indicates the contrary.
   D.   Terms referred to in the masculine gender include the feminine and
neuter.
   E.   The word “shall” is always mandatory and not discretionary; the word
“may” is permissive and discretionary.
   F.   The word “build” includes the words “erect” and “construct.”
   G.   The word “building ” includes the word “structure .” A building or
structure includes any part thereof.
   H.   The words “include” or “including” shall mean “including but not
limited to.”
   I.   The phrase “such as” shall mean “such as but not limited to.”
   J.   The phrase “used for” includes “arranged for,” “designed for,”
“intended for,” “occupied for,” and “maintained for.”
   K.   The word “person” includes an individual, firm, association,
organization, public or private corporation, partnership or co-partnership,
limited liability company, incorporated or unincorporated association, trust,
or any other entity recognizable as a person under the laws of the State of
Michigan.
   L.   Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation
involves two or more items, conditions, provisions, or events connected by the
conjunction and, or, or either/or, the conjunction shall be interpreted as
follows:
      (1)   “And” indicates that all the connected items, conditions,
provisions, or events shall apply.
      (2)   “Or” indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or
events may apply singularly or in any combination.
      (3)   “Either/or” indicates that the connected items, conditions,
provisions, or events shall apply singularly but not in combination.
   M.   All measurements shall be to the nearest integer, unless otherwise
specified herein.
   N.   Unless otherwise stated, the word “day” shall mean a calendar day;
“month” shall mean any consecutive period of 30 calendar days; and “year” shall
mean any consecutive period of 365 calendar days.
   O.   Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where an
illustration accompanies any item within this Ordinance, the written text shall
have precedence over said illustration.
   P.   The term “residential districts” includes the R-1, R-1-S, RR, RE, AG-
SF, RM-1, and MHP Districts, unless otherwise noted.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 1.03 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this Ordinance, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning. Words or terms not herein defined shall
have the meaning customarily assigned to them.
   ACCESSORY USE, ACCESSORY BUILDING, or ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A use, building ,
or structure which is clearly incidental to, customarily found in connection
with, subordinate to, and located on the same zoning lot (unless otherwise
specifically permitted) as the principal use to which it is related.  This
definition does not include PODs, semi-trailers, shipping containers, fabric
structures and any comparable unit which are of short-tem duration (see
TEMPORARY STORAGE STRUCTURES).
   ADULT FOSTER CARE FACILITY. See STATE-LICENSED RESIDENTIAL FACILITY .
   ADULT REGULATED USES. As used in this Ordinance, the following definitions
shall apply to ADULT REGULATED USES :
      A.   ADULT BOOK OR SUPPLY STORE. An establishment having 10% or more of
all usable interior, retail, wholesale, or warehouse space devoted to the
distribution, display, or storage of books, magazines, and other periodicals
and/or photographs, drawings, slides, films, video tapes, recording tapes, and/
or novelty items which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on
matters depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas, or an establishment with a segment or section
devoted to the sale or display of such material. Such establishment or the
segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such material in an
establishment is customarily not open to the general public, but only to one or
more classes of the public, excluding any minor by reason of age.
      B.   GROUP “A” CABARET. An establishment which features any of the
following: topless dancers and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers,
male and/or female impersonators or similar entertainers, or topless and/or
bottomless waitpersons or employees.
      C.   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER or ADULT LIVE STAGE PERFORMING THEATER.
An enclosed building with a capacity of 25 or more persons used for presenting
material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas for observation by patrons therein. Such an establishment is customarily
not open to the general public, but only to one or more classes of the public,
excluding any minor by reason of age.
      D.   ADULT MODEL STUDIO. Any place where models who display specified
anatomical areas are present to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted,
sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by persons who pay some form of
consideration or gratuity. This definition shall not apply to any bona fide art
school or similar educational setting.
      E.   ADULT MOTEL. A motel wherein visual displays, graphic materials, or
activities are presented which depict, describe, or relate to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
      F.   ADULT MOTION PICTURE ARCADE. Any place where motion picture
machines, projectors, or other image producing devices are maintained to show
images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the
images displayed depict, describe, or relate to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
      G.   MASSAGE PARLOR or MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT. A place where manipulated
massage or manipulated exercises are practiced for pay upon the human body by
anyone using mechanical therapeutic, or bathing devices or techniques, other
than the following: a duly licensed physician, osteopath, or chiropractor; a
registered or practical nurse operating under a physician’s directions; or,
registered physical or occupational therapists or speech pathologists who treat
patients referred by a licensed physician and operate only under such
physician’s direction. A MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT may include, but is not limited
to, establishments commonly known as “massage parlors,” “health spas,” “sauna
baths,” “Turkish bathhouses,” and “steam baths.” MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS , as
defined herein, shall not include properly-licensed hospitals , medical clinics
, or nursing homes , or beauty salons or barber shops in which massages are
administered only to the scalp, the face, the neck, or the shoulders.
      H.   ADULT OUTDOOR MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A drive-in theater used for
presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter
depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas for observation by patrons of the theater . Such establishment
is customarily not open to the general public, but only to one or more classes
of the public, excluding any minor by reason of age.
      I.   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Portions of the human body defined as
follows:
         (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, or female breast below the point immediately above the top of
the areola; and
         (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
      J.   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. The explicit display of one or more of
the following:
         (1)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
         (2)   Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy.
         (3)   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, or female breast. (revised 12/1/98)
   AGRICULTURAL TOURISM (also known as AGRITOURISM and AGTOURISM). The practice
of visiting an agribusiness, horticultural, or agricultural operation,
including, but not limited to, a farm , orchard, winery , greenhouse, hunting
preserve, a companion animal or livestock show, for the purpose of recreation,
education, or active involvement in the operation, other than as a contractor
or employee of the operation. (added 4/8/2015)
   AIRCRAFT. As defined in the Michigan Aeronautics Code, any contrivance now
known, or hereafter invented, used, or designed for navigation of or flight in
the air. (added 7/1/97)
   AIRPORT. As defined in the Michigan Aeronautics Code, any location, either
on land or water, which is used for the landing or take-off of aircraft , which
provides facilities for the shelter, supply, or care of aircraft , or for
receiving or discharging passengers or cargo, and all appurtenant areas used or
suitable for airport buildings or other airport facilities, and all appurtenant
rights-of-way , whether heretofore or hereafter established. (added 7/1/97)
      A.   AIRPORT, PUBLIC USE. An AIRPORT FOR PUBLIC USE is licensed as such
by the State of Michigan and is available for use by the general public.
      B.   AIRPORT, PRIVATE USE. An AIRPORT FOR PRIVATE USE is not licensed and
is available for the sole use of the person who owns or maintains the airport
and his or her invited guests.
   ALLEY. A dedicated public vehicular way usually between or behind buildings
, which affords a secondary means of access to abutting property but is not
intended for general traffic circulation.
   ALTERATIONS. Any change, addition or modification to a structure or type of
occupancy, or any change in the structural members of a building , such as
walls or partitions, columns, or beams or girders, or any change which may be
referred to herein as altered or reconstructed.
   ANIMAL HOSPITAL. See CLINIC, VETERINARY.
   ANIMAL UNIT EQUIVALENTS.   ANIMAL UNIT EQUIVALENTS for various animals are
based on the federal Clean Water Act regulations and are specified in the
GAAMPS as in the table below. All other animal classes, types, or sizes (e.g.,
nursery pigs) not in this table but defined in the Michigan Right to Farm Act
or described in Michigan Commission of Agriculture policy are to be calculated
as 1,000 pounds live weight equals one animal unit. (added 9/11/07)
Animal Unit Equivalents 50 250 300 500 750 1,000
Animal Type             Number of Animals
Animal Unit Equivalents   50    250    300    500    750    1,000
Animal Type               Number of Animals
Slaughter & Feeder Cattle 50    250    300    500    750    1,000
Mature Dairy Cattle       35    175    210    350    525    700
Swine (over 55 pounds)    125   625    750    1,250  1,875  2,500
Sheep & Lambs;            500   2,500  3,000  5,000  7,500  10,000
Swine 55 lbs or less
Horses                    25    125    150    250    375    500
Turkeys                   2,750 13,750 16,500 27,500 41,250 55,000
Laying Hens or Broilers   5,000 25,000 30,000 50,000 75,000 100,000
 
   ANTIQUES MALL. A retail building containing a co-operative or group of
antiques dealers with each individual dealer having a separate display/sales
area. (added 7/6/04)
   APARTMENT. See DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY.
   ARCADE. Any establishment which provides on its premises three or more
machines which may be operated or used as a game, contest, or for amusement of
any description, not including devices used solely for playing music.
   ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY. See DEPENDENT LIVING (FOR SENIORS).
   ATTACHED WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES.   Wireless communication
facilities that are affixed to existing structures , such as existing buildings
, towers, water tanks, utility poles, and the like. A wireless communication
support structure proposed to be newly established is not included in this
definition. (revised 6/3/97)
   AUCTION.
      AUCTION. An establishment operated for compensation and profit as a
public or private market where items are offered for sale through competitive
bidding. An AUCTION  can be operated on-line or on-site.
      AUCTION HOUSE.  A type of auction that is enclosed. The term AUCTION
HOUSE shall not include flea markets and yard sales.
      PERMANENT AUCTION. A live or on-line auction that is intended to reoccur
over an indefinite period of time. A PERMANENT AUCTION may be single purpose
(e.g., an agricultural auction, a vehicle auction) or it may exist for the sale
of a variety of goods.
         a.   PERMANENT AGRICULTURAL AUCTION. A type of permanent auction that
exists for the purpose of auctioning livestock and/or agricultural implements.
         b.   PERMANENT VEHICLE AUCTION. A type of permanent auction that is
designed and licensed to accommodate the auctioning of five or more vehicles on
a regular basis.
         c.   PERMANENT GENERAL PURPOSE AUCTION. A type of permanent auction
that exists for the sale of a variety of goods, which may include agricultural
implements and vehicles on an occasional basis.
      TEMPORARY AUCTION.  An auction that occurs once only, not to exceed three
contiguous days.
         a.   TEMPORARY REAL ESTATE AUCTION. An auction held for the sole
purpose of offering a particular parcel of property for sale.
         b.   TEMPORARY GENERAL AUCTION. An auction event that is held once
only to facilitate the sale of unwanted goods. An estate auction is an example
of a TEMPORARY GENERAL AUCTION.   
   AUTOMOBILE. Unless specifically indicated otherwise, AUTOMOBILE  shall mean
any vehicle including by way of example, cars, trucks, vans, motorcycles, and
the like.
   AUTOMOBILE DEALERSHIP OR VEHICLE DEALERSHIP. A building or premises used
primarily for the sale of new and used automobiles and other motor vehicles.
   AUTOMOBILE FILLING STATION. A place used for the retail sale and dispensing
of fuel or lubricants together with the fixed equipment from which the fuel is
dispensed directly into motor vehicles. AUTOMOBILE FILLING STATIONS may also
incorporate a convenience store operation as an accessory use , provided it is
clearly incidental to the filling station use, but no auto repairs shall be
permitted.
   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR. Major or minor repair of automobiles, defined as follows:
      A.    MINOR REPAIR. Engine tune-ups and servicing of brakes, air
conditioning exhaust systems; oil change or lubrication; wheel alignment or
balancing; or similar servicing or repairs that do not normally require any
significant disassembly or storing the automobiles on the premises overnight.
      B.   MAJOR REPAIR. Engine and transmission rebuilding and general
repairs, rebuilding or reconditioning; collision service such as body, frame,
or fender straightening or repair; steam cleaning, undercoating, and
rustproofing; and similar servicing, rebuilding, or repairs that normally do
require significant disassembly or storing the automobiles on the premises
overnight.
   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR GARAGE. An enclosed building where minor or major
automobile repair services may be carried out.
   AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION. A place where gasoline or other vehicle engine
fuel, kerosene, motor oil and lubricants, and grease are sold directly to the
public on the premises for the purposes of operation of motor vehicles;
including the sale of minor accessories (such as tires, batteries, brakes,
shock absorbers, window glass) and the servicing of and minor repair of motor
vehicles.
   AUTOMOBILE WASH or CAR WASH ESTABLISHMENT. A commercial establishment
contained within a building or premises or portion thereof where automobiles
are washed.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year. Also known as the 100-year flood.
   BASEMENT. That portion of a building which is partially or totally below
grade , but is so located that the vertical distance from the average grade to
the floor below is greater than the vertical distance from the average grade to
the ceiling. This definition shall not apply to earth-sheltered homes . A
BASEMENT  shall not be counted as a story .
   BED-AND-BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT. A dwelling in which overnight
accommodations are provided or offered for transient guests for compensation,
including provisions for a morning meal for overnight guests only.
   BEDROOM. A room designed or used in whole or part for sleeping purposes.
   BERM. See LANDSCAPING .
   BLOCK. The property bounded by a street or by a combination of streets and
public lands, rights-of-way , rivers or streams, boundary lines of the township
, or any other barrier to the continuity of development .
   BOARDING HOUSE. A building , other than a hotel , where for compensation or
by prearrangement for definite periods of time, lodging or lodging and meals
are provided for three or more persons. A rooming house shall be deemed a
BOARDING HOUSE for the purposes of this Ordinance.
   BREWPUB. An eating or drinking establishment that includes the brewing of
beer or ale as an accessory use for sale on the same premises of not more than
5,000 barrels per year. (A barrel is equivalent to 31 U. S. gallons.) (added 8/
13/2014)
   BUILDABLE AREA. The area of a lot which is defined by the minimum setback
requirements within which building construction is permitted by the terms of
this Ordinance.
   BUILDABLE AREA, NET. The NET BUILDABLE AREA is that portion of a site that
is not encumbered by regulated wetlands (except as specifically noted), steep
slopes , road  rights-of-way , easements , structures or lots , or other
existing or proposed features that would prevent construction of a building or
use of the site for a use permitted in the district in which the site is
located.
   BUILDING. Any structure , either temporary or permanent, having a roof or
other covering and used or built for the shelter or enclosure of persons,
animals, chattels, or property or materials of any kind. A building shall not
include such structures as signs , fences , or smokestacks, but shall include
structures such as storage tanks, grain elevators, coal bunkers, oil cracking
towers, or similar structures . (revised 1/12/2010)
   A.   BUILDING, PERMANENT. A building which is permanently affixed to the
ground with footings or a foundation and/or is permitted to exist for an
indefinite period of time exceeding six months. (added 1/12/2010)
   B.   BUILDING, TEMPORARY. A building which is not permanently affixed to the
ground and is permitted to exist for a specific reason for a specific period of
time, such as during a construction project. (revised 1/12/2010)
   BUILDING, ACCESSORY. See ACCESSORY USE, BUILDING, OR STRUCTURE.
   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. A permanent building or, where the context so
indicates, a group of permanent buildings (such as a school or office campus)
which are built, used, designed, or intended for the shelter or enclosure of
the principal use of the parcel .
   BUILDING ENVELOPE. See BUILDABLE AREA.
   BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the established grade
to:
      (1)   The highest point of the coping of a flat roof;
      (2)   The deck line of a mansard roof; or,
      (3)   The average height between the eaves and the ridge for a gable,
hip, studio (shed), or gambrel roof; or
      (4)   Seventy-five percent of the height of an A-frame.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/71d151aa824b5086a107ad3293684d8be35e4585/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1881.jpg]
   Building Height
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/71d151aa824b5086a107ad3293684d8be35e4585/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1883.jpg]
   Building Line
   BUILDING LINE. A line parallel to the front lot line at the minimum required
front setback line.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL. The officer or other authority designated by the Township
Board to administer and enforce the Building Code.
   BULK. The term used to indicate the size and setbacks of buildings and
structures and the location of same with respect to one another, including
standards for the height and area of buildings ; the location of exterior walls
in relation to lot lines , streets , and other buildings ; gross floor area of
buildings in relation to lot area; open space ; and, the amount of lot area
required for each dwelling unit .
   CARETAKER LIVING QUARTERS. An accessory dwelling on a nonresidential
premises, occupied by the person who oversees the nonresidential operation 24
hours per day, and his or her family .
   CEMETERY. Land used for the burial of the dead, including columbariums,
crematories, and mausoleums.
   CHILD CARE CENTER or DAY CARE CENTER. A facility, other than a private
residence, receiving more than 12 preschool or school age children for group
care for periods of less than 24 hours a day, and where the parents or
guardians are not immediately available to the child. It includes a facility
that provides care for not less than two consecutive weeks regardless of the
number of hours of care per day. The facility is generally described as a CHILD
CARE CENTER.    CHILD CARE CENTER  or DAY CARE CENTER does not include
instruction solely for religious purposes conducted by a religious institution
or a facility operated by a religious organization where children are cared for
during short periods of time while persons responsible for such children are
attending religious services.
   CHURCH. See RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION.
   CLINIC, MEDICAL. An establishment where human patients who are not lodged
overnight are admitted for examination and treatment by a group of physicians,
dentists, or similar professionals. A MEDICAL CLINIC may incorporate customary
laboratories and pharmacies incidental to or necessary for its operation or to
the service of its patients, but may not include facilities for overnight
patient care or major surgery.
   CLINIC, VETERINARY. An institution which is licensed by the Michigan
Department of Health to provide for the care, diagnosis, and treatment of sick
or injured animals, including those in need of medical or surgical attention. A
VETERINARY CLINIC may include customary pens or cages for the overnight
boarding of animals and such related facilities as laboratories, testing
services, and offices.
   CLUB OR FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION. An organization of persons for special
purposes or for the promulgation of sports, arts, science, agriculture,
literature, politics, or similar activities, but not operated for profit or to
espouse beliefs or further activity that is not in conformance with the
Constitution of the United States or any laws or ordinances. Also, the
facilities owned or used by such an organization.
   CLUSTER HOUSING. A housing development that concentrates buildings in
specific areas on a site to allow the remaining land to be used for recreation,
common open space , and/or preservation of environmentally sensitive areas.
   CLUSTERING. A development design technique in which uses are grouped or
clustered in specific areas on a site.
   COAL, COKE, OR FUEL YARD. A parcel , or a portion of a parcel , that is used
as a storage, loading, and dispatch center by a business engaged in the sale of
coke, coal, fuel, or similar products.
   COLLEGE or UNIVERSITY. A school of higher learning, consisting of a building
or buildings and other facilities for teaching and research, and that grants
bachelor’s and master’s degrees and doctorates.
   COLOCATION. The location by two or more wireless communication providers of
wireless communication facilities on a common structure , tower, or building ,
with the intent to reduce the total number of structures required to support
wireless communication antennas in the township . (revised 6/3/97)
   COMMERCIAL LIVESTOCK OPERATIONS. The use of land for the growing and/or
raising of livestock for income. COMMERCIAL LIVESTOCK OPERATIONS may include
the processing of livestock products for income.
   COMMERCIAL RADIO TOWER. A tower used to transmit or receive electromagnetic
waves, where such activity is undertaken for the purpose of generating income.
   COMMERCIAL USE. The use of property for retail sales or similar businesses
where goods or services are sold or provided directly to the consumer. As used
in this Ordinance, COMMERCIAL USE shall not include industrial, manufacturing,
or wholesale businesses.
   COMMERCIAL VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT. All power vehicles and equipment
constructed or used for transportation of goods, wares, materials, passengers,
merchandise, and/or all other power vehicles and equipment designed and used
for drawing other vehicles or used in construction or landscaping , including
dump truck, stake truck , tank truck, flatbed truck, step van, panel truck,
wrecker, car hauler, truck tractor , construction and landscaping vehicles and
equipment, sprayers, excavating equipment, logging vehicle, bulldozer, backhoe,
front loader, bus, hearse, ambulance, or limousine. The determination whether
other vehicles or equipment not specifically listed satisfy the definition of
COMMERCIAL VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT shall be made on a case by case basis by the
Township Board . (revised 2/3/04)
   COMPOSTING CENTER. A location where organic matter is collected and
delivered from off-site, thereby allowing for large-scale composting involving
various composting technologies.
   CONCRETE PLANT. An industrial facility where cement, water, and other
products are mixed to produce concrete for delivery to a job site.
   CONDOMINIUM. A condominium is a system of separate ownership of individual
units in multi-unit projects. In addition to the interest acquired in a
particular unit, each unit owner is also a tenant in common in the underlying
fee and in the spaces and building parts used in common by all the unit owners.
For the purposes of this Ordinance, CONDOMINIUM  terms shall be defined as
follows:
      A.   CONDOMINIUM ACT. Shall mean Public Act 59 of 1978, being M.C.L.A. §§
559.101 through 559.276, as amended.
      B.   CONDOMINIUM LOT.  That portion of a site condominium project
designed and intended to function similar to a platted subdivision lot for
purposes of determining minimum yard  setback requirements and other
requirements set forth in the Schedule of Regulations (Section 28.02).
      C.   CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISION PLAN.  Drawings and information which show
the size, location, area, and boundaries of each condominium unit, building
locations, the nature, location, and approximate size of common elements, and
other information required by Section 66 of Michigan Public Act 59 of 1976,
being M.C.L.A. § 559.166, as amended.
      D.   CONDOMINIUM UNIT.  That portion of the condominium project designed
and intended for separate ownership and use, as described in the master deed
for the condominium project. A condominium unit is not a lot or condominium lot
as those terms are used in this Ordinance.
      E.   COMMON ELEMENTS. Portions of the condominium project other than the
condominium units.
      F.   DETACHED CONDOMINIUM. A condominium project of detached units
designed to be similar in appearance to a conventional single-family
subdivision, except that limited common areas are not arranged in such a manner
as to create clearly defined condominium lots .
      G.   GENERAL COMMON ELEMENTS. Common elements other than the limited
common elements, intended for the common use of all co-owners.
      H.   LIMITED COMMON ELEMENTS. Portions of the common elements reserved in
the master deed for the exclusive use of less than all co-owners.
      I.   MASTER DEED. The condominium document recording the condominium
project to which are attached as exhibits and incorporated by reference the
bylaws for the project and the condominium subdivision plan.
      J.   SITE CONDOMINIUM PROJECT. A condominium project designed to function
in a similar manner, or as an alternative to a platted subdivision. A
residential site condominium project shall be considered as equivalent to a
platted subdivision for purposes of regulation in this Ordinance.
   CONFINED ANIMAL FEEDING OPERATION (CAFO). A lot or facility where 300 or
more farm  animal unit equivalents are stabled or confined and fed or
maintained for a total of 45 days or more in any 12-month period; and crops,
vegetation, forage growth, or post-harvest residues are not sustained in the
normal growing season over any portion of the lot or facility. CAFOs are
sometimes referred to as feedlots . (definition added 9/11/07)
   CONSERVATION EASEMENT. A legal agreement in which the landowner retains
ownership of private property, but conveys certain specifically identified
rights (e.g., the right to develop) to a land conservation organization or a
public body.
   CONTRACTOR’S YARD.  A site on which a building or construction contractor
stores equipment,tools, vehicles, building materials, and other appurtenances
used in or associated with building or construction. A contractor’s yard may
include outdoor or indoor storage, or a combination of both.
   CONVALESCENT HOME. See NURSING HOME.
   CONVENIENCE STORE. Any retail establishment offering for sale convenience
goods, such as pre-packaged food items, tobacco, periodicals, limited grocery
items, and other household goods.
   CO-OP (COOPERATIVE) HOUSING.  A multiple-unit dwelling owned by a
corporation which leases its units to stockholders on a proprietary lease
arrangement.
   CORPORATE RETREAT CENTERS. See  RETREAT CENTER.
   COURTYARD. In the case of a single-family detached home, a COURTYARD  is an
open space in front of the home that is surrounded by at least two sides of the
building . Typically, at least a portion of a COURTYARD  is paved to allow
movement of vehicles. (added 1/12/2010)
   CURB CUT. The entrance to or exit from a property provided for vehicular
traffic to or from a public or private road or highway .
   DECK. A raised platform, commonly constructed of wood, which is typically
attached to a house and used for outdoor leisure activities.
   DENSITY (RESIDENTIAL). The number of dwelling units per acre of land.
      A.   GROSS DENSITY. The number of units per acre of total land being
developed.
      B.   NET DENSITY.  The number of units per acre of land not encumbered by
regulated wetlands (except as specifically noted), steep slopes , road  rights-
of-way , easements , structures , lots , or other existing or proposed features
that would preventconstruction of a building or use of the site for a
residential dwelling . (revised 1/12/2010)
   DEPENDENT LIVING (FOR SENIORS). A multiple-family housing form with central
dining facilities provided as a basic service to each dwelling unit . Each
dwelling unit may or may not contain cooking facilities, but must contain
sanitary facilities. One type of dependent living facility is “assisted
living,” which is a special combination of dependent housing, with personalized
supportive services, and health care designed to meet the needs of those who
need help with activities of daily living. Services provided in “assisted
living” residences may include:
      •   Three meals per day served in a common dining area
      •   Housekeeping services
      •   Transportation
      •   Assistance with eating, bathing, dressing, toileting, and/or walking
      •   Emergency call systems for each unit
      •   Health promotion and exercise programs
      •   Medication management
      •   Personal laundry services
      •   Social and recreational activities. (added 1/12/2010)
   DETENTION BASIN. A structure or facility, natural or artificial, which
stores stormwater on a temporary basis and releases it at a controlled rate. A
DETENTION BASIN may drain completely after a storm event, or it may be a body
of water with a fixed minimum and maximum water elevation between runoff
events. See also  RETENTION BASIN. (revised 1/12/2010)
   DEVELOPMENT. The construction of a new building , reconstruction of an
existing building , or improvement of a structure on a parcel or lot , the
relocation of an existing building to another lot , or the improvement of open
land for a new use.
   DISTRIBUTION CENTER. A use which typically involves both warehouse and
office /administration functions, where short and/or long term storage takes
place in connection with the distribution operations of a wholesale or retail
supply business.
   DISTRICT, ZONING. A portion of the unincorporated area of the township
within which, on a uniform basis, certain uses of land and buildings are
permitted and within which certain yards , open spaces , lot areas, and other
requirements are established.
   DRIVE-IN. A business establishment so designed that its operation involves
providing service to patrons while they are in their car, rather than within a
building or structure .
   DRIVE-IN THEATER. An open-air theater constructed and operated at an
established location, without cover or roof, displaying motion pictures for the
general public who view the screen or stage while seated in a vehicle. The term
DRIVE-IN THEATER shall include the entire premises upon which such theater is
constructed and operated, including parking areas and all other facilities
accessory to such business.
   DRIVEWAY. A private lane, designed primarily for use by vehicles, which
connects a house, garage, or other buildings with the road .
   DWELLING. Any building , or part thereof, containing sleeping, kitchen, and
bathroom facilities designed for and occupied by a single family . In no case
shall a detached or attached garage, travel trailer , motor home, automobile ,
tent, or other structure or vehicle not defined as a recreational vehicle be
considered a DWELLING . In the case of a building  occupied in part as a
dwelling unit (“mixed occupancy”), the part so occupied shall be deemed a
dwelling unit for the purposes of this Ordinance.
   DWELLING, ACCESSORY APARTMENT.  A dwelling unit that is accessory to and
contained within a principal single-family dwelling , and which is occupied by
either persons related to the occupant of the principal residence by blood,
marriage, or legal adoption; domestic servants; or gratuitous guests. An
ACCESSORY APARTMENT commonly has its own kitchen, bath, living area, sleeping
area, and usually a separate entrance.
   DWELLING, MANUFACTURED. A building or portion of a building designed for
long-term residential use and characterized by all of the following:
      (1)   The structure is produced in a factory in accordance with the
National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act, as
amended; and
      (2)   The structure is designed to be transported to the site in a nearly
complete form, where it is placed on a foundation and connected to utilities;
and
      (3)   The structure is designed to be used as either an independent
building or as a module to be combined with other elements to form a complete
building on the site.
   DWELLING, MOBILE HOME. A type of manufactured housing that is transportable
in one or more sections, that is built upon a chassis and designed to be used
as a dwelling with or without permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities, and includes plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and
electrical systems contained in the structure . Recreational vehicles as
regulated herein shall not be considered MOBILE HOMES for the purposes of this
Ordinance.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A building designed for and occupied by three or
more families living independently, with separate housekeeping, cooking, and
bathroom facilities for each. Examples of MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS include:
      A.   APARTMENT. An attached dwelling unit with party walls contained in a
building with other apartment units which are typically accessed from a common
stair landing or walkway. Apartments are typically rented by the occupants.
Apartment buildings often may have a central heating system and other central
utility connections. Apartments typically do not have their own yard space.
Apartments may also be known as garden apartments or flats.
      B.   EFFICIENCY UNIT.  A type of apartment consisting of one principal
room , plus bathroom and kitchen facilities, hallways, closets, and/or a dining
alcove located directly off the principal room .
   DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY OR SINGLE-FAMILY. A detached residential dwelling
designed for and used or held ready for use by one family only.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY OR DUPLEX. A detached building designed exclusively for
and occupied by two families living independently of each other, with separate
housekeeping, cooking, and bathroom facilities for each.
   DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms , along with bathroom and kitchen
facilities, designed as a self-contained unit for occupancy by a single family
for living, cooking, and sleeping purposes.
   DWELLING UNIT, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED OR TOWNHOUSE. An attached dwelling
unit with party walls, designed as part of a series of three or more dwellings
, each with its own front door which opens to the outdoors at ground level; its
own basement ; and typically, its own utility connections and front and rear
yards . TOWNHOUSES  are sometimes known as “row houses.”
   EARTH-SHELTERED HOME. A complete building partially below grade that is
designed to conserve energy and is intended to be used as a single-family
dwelling .
   EASEMENT. A right-of-way granted, but not dedicated, for limited use of
private land for a public or quasi-public purpose and within which the owner of
the property shall not erect any permanent structures .
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL. The ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL is the person or persons
designated by the township as being responsible for enforcing and administering
requirements of this Zoning Ordinance. Throughout this Ordinance the
ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL may be referred to as the Building Official , Planning
Official, Public Safety Official , Engineering Official or their agents. Such
titles do not necessarily refer to a specific individual, but generally the
office or department most commonly associated with the administration of the
regulation being referenced.
   ENGINEER, TOWNSHIP. The TOWNSHIP ENGINEER is the person or firm designated
by the Township Board to advise the township administration, Township Board ,
and Planning Commission on drainage, grading, paving, storm water management
and control utilities, and other related site engineering and civil engineering
issues. The TOWNSHIP ENGINEER may be a consultant or an employee of the
township .
   ERECTED.  Any physical change on a site, including construction,
reconstruction, or alteration of buildings or structures thereon. Excavation ,
fill , drainage, and the like shall be considered part of ERECTION.
   ESSENTIAL SERVICES. The term ESSENTIAL SERVICES shall mean the erection,
construction, alteration, or maintenance by public or quasi-public utilities or
municipal departments of underground, surface, or overhead electrical, gas,
steam, fuel or water systems, for the purposes of transmission, distribution,
collection, communication, supply, or disposal; including towers, poles, wires,
mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm and police call
boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and similar equipment which are necessary for
the furnishing of adequate service to township residents by such utilities or
municipal departments for the general health, safety, and welfare of the
public; but not including storage yards , sales or business offices, commercial
buildings or activities, school bus yards , and wireless communication
facilities . (revised 6/3/97)
   EVENT. As used in the context of Event Barn regulations, an Event is a
scheduled private gathering (i.e., not open to the general public), at which
the proprietors of the Event Barn are paid for making the premises available
for the purposes of celebration or conducting business.
   EVENT BARN. A permanent building originally constructed for bona fide
agricultural purposes, or a new permanent building whose character emulates the
architectural features of an historic agricultural building that is now used
for business meetings, banquets, weddings and wedding receptions, reunions, and
similar gatherings. An event barn facility may include ancillary buildings that
are used for purposes that are complementary to the use of the main building .
   EXCAVATION. The removal or movement of soil, sand, stone, gravel, or fill
dirt, except for common household gardening, farming, and general ground care.
   EXCEPTION. An exclusion from the normal Zoning Ordinance rules and
regulations for the purposes of permitting particular uses or structures which
are considered essential or appropriate in certain locations or under certain
conditions. A variance is not required for uses or structures which are
permitted because of an exception.
   FAMILY. For the purposes of this Ordinance, a FAMILY  shall consist of an
individual or a group of two or more persons residing together as a single,
domestic, housekeeping unit whose relationship is of a continuous, non-
transient character. (revised 1/12/2010)
      (1)   Live-in domestic workers employed by a FAMILY  shall be considered
as part of that FAMILY .
      (2)   A FAMILY  shall not include any association, club , fraternity,
sorority, lodge, organization, society, or other group of persons whose common
living arrangement is transitory, seasonal, or for an anticipated limited
duration, such as a school term.
   FAMILY DAY CARE HOME. See STATE-LICENSED RESIDENTIAL FACILITY.
   FARM. The land, plants, animals, buildings , structures (including ponds
used for agricultural or aquacultural activities), machinery, equipment and
other appurtenances used in the production of farm products . For the purposes
of this Ordinance, FARMS  shall not include private stables, commercial dog
kennels or plant nurseries, unless such establishments are combined with other
bona fide farm operations listed above and located on the same continuous tract
of land. A FARM permitted by this Ordinance is not intended nor implied to
permit trucking, equipment and/or vehicle repair and/or sales, contractor’s
yards , stump removal and/or processing, snow removal and/or lawn maintenance
businesses, or any other activities other than those incidental to the FARM.
      A.   FARM, COMMERCIAL. The use of a farm for the growing and/or
production of farm products where the intent is to generate income. A farm
which is operated as a business for purposes of agricultural production is
distinguished from a collection of farm buildings and animals that is operated
for education, demonstration, or recreational purposes. Such quasi-farm
operations may be known as “petting zoos,” “model farms,” “demonstration
farms,” or “interpretive farms.” (revised 1/12/2010)
      B.   FARM, DEMONSTRATION OR INTERPRETIVE. A farm that exists for the
principal purpose of educating people about farming and farm life. Such a farm
typically has barns, silos, paddocks, pastures, fields, farm implements, and
other buildings and tools that are commonly found on a working farm, along with
displays, workshops, classrooms and other facilities necessary to carry out the
educational function of the DEMONSTRATION FARM. (revised 6/29/99)
   FARM ANIMALS. Animals used for human food and fiber or animals used for
service to humans, including cattle, swine, sheep, llamas, goats, bison,
equine, and poultry. FARM ANIMALS do not include companion animals, such as
dogs and cats, which are capable of being trained and adapting to living in a
human environment. (revised 3/6/01)
   FARM BUILDINGS. Any building or structure , other than a dwelling , which is
constructed, maintained, and used on a farm and which is essential and
customarily used for the agricultural operations on that type of farm .
   FARM PRODUCTS. Plants and animals useful to human beings and produced by
agriculture. FARM PRODUCTS include, but are not limited to, forages and sod
crops, grains and feed crops, field crops, dairy and dairy products, poultry
and poultry products, livestock (including breeding and grazing), fish and
other aquacultural products, bees and bee products, berries, herbs, fruits,
vegetables, flowers, seeds, grasses, nursery stock, trees and tree products,
mushrooms, and other similar products. (added 1/12/2010)
   FEEDLOT. See CONFINED ANIMAL FEEDING OPERATION . (revised 9/11/07)
   FENCE. An artificially constructed barrier of wood, masonry, stone, wire,
metal, or any other manufactured material or combination of materials, used to
prevent or control entrance, confine within, or mark a boundary.
   FILL, FILLING.  The deposit or dumping of any matter onto or into the
ground, except for common household gardening, farming, and general ground
care.
   FLAG LOT. See LOT, FLAG . (revised 2/3/98)
   FLOODPLAIN. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by floodwaters when
high amounts of precipitation are experienced or natural cyclic conditions
raise the water levels. (revised 1/12/2010)
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent lands
that must be reserved in order to discharge floodwaters without cumulatively
increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
   FLOOR AREA, GROSS. The total area of a building measured by taking the
outside dimensions of the building at each floor level intended for occupancy
or storage.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/71d151aa824b5086a107ad3293684d8be35e4585/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1885.jpg]
   FLOOR AREA, NET. See FLOOR AREA, USABLE RESIDENTIAL, AND FLOOR AREA, USABLE
NONRESIDENTIAL.
   FLOOR AREA, USABLE NONRESIDENTIAL. The sum of the horizontal areas of each
floor, measured from the interior faces of the exterior walls, including all
areas used for, intended to be used for, and accessible for the sale of
merchandise, provision of services, or service to patrons, clients, or
customers. Floor area which is used for or intended to be used for the storage
or processing of merchandise, or for utilities shall be excluded from the
computations of USABLE NONRESIDENTIAL FLOOR AREA  (see illustration).
   FLOOR AREA, USABLE RESIDENTIAL. The gross floor area minus areas in
basements , unfinished attics, attached garages, and enclosed or unenclosed
porches.
   FOSTER FAMILY HOME or FOSTER FAMILY GROUP HOME. See STATE-LICENSED
RESIDENTIAL FACILITY .
   FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION. See CLUB .
   GARAGE, PRIVATE. An accessory building for parking or storage of motor
vehicles owned and used by the occupants of the building to which it is
accessory. Private garages shall not have public repair facilities. A private
garage may be either attached to or detached from the principal structure .
   GARAGE, PUBLIC. See AUTOMOBILE REPAIR GARAGE .
   GAS STATION. See AUTOMOBILE FILLING STATION AND AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION .
   GENERALLY ACCEPTED AGRICULTURAL AND MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (GAAMPS).
Agricultural practices defined by the Michigan Commission of Agriculture,
pursuant to the Michigan Right to Farm Act, Public Act 93 of 1981, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 286.471 through 286.474, as amended. (revised 9/11/07)
   GOLF COURSE or COUNTRY CLUB. The premises upon which the game of golf is
played, including clubhouses, parking lots, swimming pools , tennis courts, or
other facilities or uses customarily incidental to a golf course or country
club .
   GRADE. The term GRADE shall mean the ground elevation established for the
purpose of regulating the number of stories or height of a building . The
building grade shall be the level of the ground adjacent to the walls of the
building if the finished grade is level. If the ground is not entirely level,
the GRADE  shall be determined by averaging the elevation of the ground for
each face of the building .
   GREENBELT. See LANDSCAPING .
   GROUP DAY CARE HOME. See STATE-LICENSED RESIDENTIAL FACILITY.
   GYM  or GYMNASIUM. A room or building equipped for gymnastics, exercise, or
sport.
   HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE. Pursuant to Michigan Public Act 451 of 1994, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 324.101 through 324.90106, as amended, HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE shall
include one or more of the following, but not including fruit, vegetable, or
field crop residuals or processing by-products, or aquatic plants, that are
applied to the land for an agricultural use or for use as an animal feed, if
the use is consistent with Generally Accepted Agricultural and Management
Practices developed pursuant to the Michigan Right to Farm Act, Act No. 93 of
the Public Acts of 1981, being M.C.L.A. §§ 286.471 through 286.474 as amended:
      (1)   Any substance that is demonstrated, on a case by case basis, to
pose an unacceptable risk to the public health, safety, or welfare, or the
environment, considering the fate of the material, dose-response, toxicity, or
adverse impact on natural resources .
      (2)   HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE as defined in the Comprehensive Environmental
Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980, Public Law 96-510, 94 Stat.
2767.
      (3)    HAZARDOUS WASTE as defined in Chapter 3, Part 111, of the Natural
Resources and Environmental Protection Act, Act No. 451 of the Public Acts of
1994, being M.C.L.A. §§ 324.11101 to 324.11152.
      (4)   PETROLEUM as defined in Chapter 8, Parts 211 and 213, of the
Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, Act No. 451 of the Public
Acts of 1994, being M.C.L.A. §§ 324.21101 to 324.2121331. (revised 2/3/98)
   HAZARDOUS USES. Any activity which is or may become injurious to public
health, safety, or welfare or the environment. HAZARDOUS USES include but are
not limited to all uses which involve the storage, sale, manufacture, or
processing of materials which are dangerous or combustible and are likely to
burn immediately, and from which either poisonous fumes or explosions are to be
anticipated in the event of fire. These uses include all high hazard uses
listed the State Building Code, as amended.
   HEIGHT OF BUILDING. See BUILDING HEIGHT .
   HIGHWAY. See ROAD, PRINCIPAL ARTERIAL .
   HOME-BASED BUSINESS. A commercial use of greater intensity than a home
occupation and that is undertaken by the resident occupants of the dwelling
unit , plus not more than one full-time equivalent non-resident employee or
independent contractor. A HOME-BASED BUSINESS must be clearly secondary to the
use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes. (added 1/12/2010)
   HOME FOR THE AGED. A facility, other than an adult foster care facility ,
hotel , hospital , nursing home , or other state-licensed residential facility
that provides room , board, and supervised personal care to 21 or more
unrelated, non-transient individuals 60 years of age or older. (added 1/12/
2010)
   HOME OCCUPATION. An occupation or profession undertaken entirely within a
dwelling unit by one or more resident occupants of that dwelling unit . A  HOME
OCCUPATION must be clearly secondary to the use of the dwelling unit for
residential purposes. (revised 1/12/2010)
   HOSPITAL. An institution which is licensed by the Michigan Department of
Health to provide in-patient and out-patient medical and surgical services for
the sick and injured, and which may include such related facilities as
laboratories, medical testing services, central service facilities, and staff
offices.
   HOSPITAL, VETERINARY. See CLINIC, VETERINARY .
   HOTEL. A building  occupied as a more or less temporary abiding place for
individuals who are lodged, with or without meals, in rooms consisting of a
minimum of one bedroom and a bath, occupied for hire, and which typically
provides hotel services such as maid service, the furnishing and laundering of
linens, telephone and secretarial or desk service, the use of furniture, a
dining room and general kitchen, and meeting rooms .
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. A surface that has been compacted or covered with a
layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
   INDEPENDENT LIVING (FOR SENIORS). An independent living setting for senior
adults who lead an independent lifestyle that requires minimal or no extra
assistance. Although minimal or no extra assistance may be required, some
independent facilities may provide hospitality or supportive services,
including meals served in a common dining area, transportation, and social and
recreational activities. (added 1/12/2010)
   INDOOR RECREATION CENTER. An establishment which provides indoor exercise
facilities and indoor court sports facilities, and which may include spectator
seating in conjunction with the sports facilities. For the purposes of this
Ordinance, a bowling establishment shall be considered a type of  INDOOR
RECREATION CENTER .
   INDUSTRY, HEAVY. A use engaged in the basic processing and manufacturing of
materials or products predominantly from extracted or raw materials, or a use
engaged in storage of, or manufacturing processes using flammable or explosive
materials, or storage or manufacturing processes that potentially involve
hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions.
   INDUSTRY, LIGHT. A use engaged in the manufacture, predominantly from
previously prepared material of finished products or parts, including
processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging, incidental storage,
sales and distribution of such products, but excluding basic industrial
processing.
   INGRESS AND EGRESS. As used in this Ordinance,  INGRESS AND EGRESS generally
is used in reference to a driveway which allows vehicles to enter or leave a
parcel of property, or to a sidewalk which allows pedestrians to enter or leave
a parcel of property, a building , or another location.
   JUNK. Any motor vehicles, machinery, appliances, products or merchandise
with parts missing, or other scrap materials that are damaged, deteriorated, or
are in a condition which prevents their use for the purpose for which the
product was manufactured. (revised 1/12/2010)
   JUNK YARD or SALVAGE YARD. An area where waste and used or secondhand
materials are bought and sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled,
or handled, including, but not limited to: junk , scrap iron, metals, paper,
rags, tires, bottles and automobiles. A JUNKYARD  includes automobile wrecking
yards and includes any open area of more than 200 square feet for the storage,
keeping, or abandonment of junk .
   KENNEL, BOARDING. Any lot or premises where three or more dogs or cats over
six months of age are boarded and/or trained for compensation. (added 1/12/
2010)
   KENNEL, BREEDING. Any lot or premises where three or more dogs or cats are
owned, kept, or harbored for the purpose of breeding for commercial gain.
(added 1/12/2010)
   KENNEL, NON-COMMERCIAL. Any lot or premises, except where accessory to a
farm , where more than three dogs or cats are owned or kept for the personal
enjoyment of the owner or occupants of the property, and for which commercial
gain is not the primary objective. (added 1/12/2010)
   LAKE. Any body of water, natural or artificial, that has definite banks, a
bed, and visible evidence of a continued occurrence of water.
   LANDFILL. A tract of land that is used to collect and dispose of solid waste
as defined and regulated in Michigan Public Act 451 of 1994, being M.C.L.A. §§
324.21101 to 324.2121331, as amended.
   LANDING AREA. An area of an airport used or intended for use in landing,
taking off or taxiing of aircraft , excluding area and facilities for shelter,
servicing or repair of aircraft or for receiving or discharging passengers or
cargo. (added 7/1/97)
   LANDING FIELD. Any location, either on land or water, which shall be used
for the landing or take-off of aircraft with safety, but which is not equipped
with facilities for shelter, supply and repair of aircraft . (added 7/1/97)
   LANDSCAPING. The treatment of the ground surface with live plant materials
such as, but not limited to, grass, ground cover, trees, shrubs, vines, and
other live plant material. In addition, a landscape design may include
decorative non-living materials, such as wood chips, crushed stone, boulders,
or mulch. Structural features such as fountains, pools, statues, and benches
shall also be considered a part of LANDSCAPING , but only if provided in
combination with live plant material. Artificial plant materials shall not be
counted toward meeting the requirements for LANDSCAPING . Various landscaping-
related terms are defined as follows:
      A.   BERM. A continuous, raised earthen mound, with flattened top and
sloped sides, capable of supporting live plant materials.
      B.   GRASS.  Any of a family of plants with narrow leaves normally grown
as permanent lawns in Ingham County, Michigan.
      C.   GREENBELT. A strip of land of definite width and location reserved
for the planting of a combination of shrubs, trees, and ground cover to serve
as an obscuring screen or buffer for noise or visual enhancement, in accordance
with the requirements of this Ordinance.
      D.   GROUND COVER. Low-growing plants that form a dense, extensive growth
after one complete growing season and which tend to prevent weeds and soil
erosion.
      E.   HEDGE. A row of closely planted shrubs or low-growing trees which
commonly form a continuous visual screen, boundary, or fence .
      F.   HYDRO-SEEDING. A method of planting grass where a mixture of seed,
water, and mulch is mechanically sprayed over the surface of the ground.
      G.   INTERIOR PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING. A landscaped area located in the
interior of a parking lot and with the objectives of improving pedestrian and
vehicular traffic safety, guiding traffic movement, and enhancing the
appearance of the parking lot.
      H.   MULCH. A layer of wood chips, dry leaves, straw, hay, plastic, or
other materials placed on the surface of the soil around plants to retain
moisture, prevent weeds from growing, hold the soil in place, and/or aid plant
growth.
      I.   NURSE GRASS. Any of a variety of rapidly-growing annual or perennial
rye grasses used to quickly establish ground cover to prevent dust or soil
erosion.
      J.   SCREEN  or  SCREENING. A wall, wood fencing, or combination of
plantings of sufficient height, length, and opacity to form a visual barrier.
If the SCREEN  is composed of non-living material, such material shall be
compatible with materials used in construction of the main building .
      K.   SHRUB. A self-supporting, deciduous or evergreen, woody plant
normally branched near the base, bushy, and less than 15 feet in height.
      L.   SOD. An area of grass-covered surface soil held together by matted
roots.
      M.   TREE. A self-supporting, deciduous or evergreen woody plant with a
well-defined central trunk or stem which normally grows to a mature height of
15 feet or more in Ingham County, Michigan.
         (1)   DECIDUOUS TREE. A variety of tree that has foliage that is shed
at the end of the growing season.
         (2)   EVERGREEN TREE. A variety of tree that has foliage that persists
and remains green throughout the year.
         (3)   ORNAMENTAL TREE. A deciduous tree which is typically grown
because of its shape, flowering characteristics, or other attractive features,
and which grows to a mature height of 25 feet or less.
         (4)   SHADE TREE. For the purposes of this Ordinance, a  SHADE TREE is
a deciduous tree which has a mature crown spread of 15 feet or greater in
Ingham County, Michigan, and has a trunk with at least five feet of clear stem
at maturity.
      N.   VINE . A plant with a flexible stem supported by climbing, twining,
or creeping along a surface, and which may require physical support to reach
maturity.
   LANDSCAPING CONTRACTOR’S OPERATION. A business engaged in the practice of
improving building sites or other grounds by contouring the land; planting
flowers, shrubs, and trees; and lawn mowing. A LANDSCAPING CONTRACTOR’S
OPERATION typically consists of equipment, tools, vehicles, and materials used
in or associated with such a business. (revised 12/1/98)
   LIVESTOCK. Horses, cattle, sheep, goats, poultry, swine, and other domestic
animals normally kept or raised on a farm . (revised 1/12/2010)
   LOADING SPACE, OFF-STREET. An off-street space which is safely and
conveniently located on the same lot as the building or buildings being served,
for the temporary parking of delivery vehicles while loading and unloading
merchandise and materials.
   LOT. A tract of land occupied , or intended to be occupied , by a main
building or a group of such buildings and accessory buildings , or utilized for
the principal use and uses accessory thereto, together with such yards and open
spaces as are required under the provisions of this Ordinance. A LOT  may or
may not be specifically designated as such on public records.
   LOT AREA, GROSS. The net lot area plus one-half of the area of any public
right-of-way area or private road  easement immediately adjacent to or abutting
the lot .
   LOT AREA, NET. The total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot ,
exclusive of any abutting public road  rights-of-way or private road  easements
, or the area of any lake . The NET LOT AREA shall be used in determining
compliance with minimum lot area standards.
   LOT, CONTIGUOUS.   Lots adjoining each other.
   LOT, CORNER.  A lot abutting on and at the intersection of two or more
streets , provided that the streets intersect at an angle of not more than 135
degrees.
      (1)   Where a lot is on a curve, if the tangents through the extreme
point of the street lines of such lot make an interior angle of not more than
135 degrees, it shall be considered a corner lot . In the case of a corner lot
with a curved street line, the corner is that point on the street lot line
nearest to the point of intersection of the tangents described above (see
illustration). A tangent is a straight line extended from the outer edges of a
curve which intersect to form a corner.
      (2)   For the purposes of this definition, the “street lot line ” shall
be the line separating the lot from the street or road  right-of-way .
   LOT COVERAGE. The part or percent of a lot that is occupied by buildings and
structures .
   LOT DEPTH.  The horizontal distance between the front lot line and rear lot
line , measured along the median between the side lot lines .
   LOT, "DOUBLE FRONTAGE (OR THROUGH LOT).  A lot , other than a corner lot ,
having frontage on two streets . In the case of a row of double frontage lots ,
one street shall be designated as the front street for all lots in the plat and
in the request for a zoning compliance permit. If there are existing buildings
in the same block fronting on one or both of the streets , the required minimum
front yard  setback shall be observed on those streets where buildings
presently front.
   LOT, FLAG. A lot located behind other parcels or lots fronting on a public
road , but which has a narrow extension providing access to the public road .
For the purposes of this Ordinance, the extension, which provides access to the
buildable portion of the lot , shall comply with the lot width standards for
the district in which the lot is located.
   LOT, INTERIOR. Any lot , other than a corner lot , with only one lot line
fronting on a street .
   LOT LINES. The lines bounding a lot as follows:
      A.   FRONT LOT LINE. The line separating said lot from the public or
private road  right-of-way . In the case of a corner lot or double frontage lot
, the FRONT LOT LINE shall be that line that separates said lot from the right-
of-way for the road which is designated as the front on the plat, or which is
designated as the front on the site plan review application or request for a
building permit, subject to approval by the Planning Commission or Building
Official . On a flag lot , the FRONT LOT LINE shall be the interior lot line
most parallel to and nearest the street from which access is obtained.
      B.   REAR LOT LINE. Ordinarily, that lot line which is opposite and most
distant from the front lot line. In the case of irregular, triangular, wedge-
shaped, or lots that are pointed at the rear, the REAR LOT LINE shall be an
imaginary line parallel to the front lot line, not less than ten feet in
length, lying farthest from the front lot line and wholly within the lot .
      C.   SIDE LOT LINE.  Any lot line other than the front or rear lot lines.
A SIDE LOT LINE separating a lot from a road  right-of-way is a side street lot
line . A side lot line separating a lot from another lot or lots is an interior
side lot line.
   LOT OF RECORD.  A parcel of land, the dimensions and configuration of which
are shown on a subdivision plat recorded in the offices of the Ingham County
Register of Deeds and Township Treasurer, or a lot or parcel described by metes
and bounds, and accuracy of which is attested to by a land surveyor registered
and licensed in the State of Michigan and is recorded with the Ingham County
Register of Deeds and Township Treasurer.
   LOT SPLIT or LOT CONSOLIDATION. The dividing or uniting of lots by virtue of
changes in the deeds in the office of the Ingham County Register of Deeds and
the Township Treasurer.
   LOT WIDTH. The straight line distance between the side lot lines , measured
at the two points where the minimum front yard  setback line intersects the
side lot lines (see illustration).
   MAIN ACCESS DRIVE.  Any private street designed to provide access from a
public street or road to a mobile home park , apartment or condominium complex,
or other private property development .
   MARGINAL ACCESS ROAD.  See SERVICE DRIVE.
   MASSAGE THERAPIST. A person trained in manipulation of the soft tissues of
the body by rubbing, stroking, kneading, etc., for therapeutic or healing
purposes. (added 1/12/2010)
   MASTER PLAN. A document prepared under the guidance of and adopted by the
Planning Commission , consisting of graphic and written materials which
indicate the general location for streets , parks, schools, public buildings ,
and all physical development of the township .
   MEDICAL MARIJUANA COMPASSION CLUB. A facility that is typically operated
with the intent of dispensing advice about the use of marijuana for medical
purposes. Compassion Clubs vary in size, organizational structure, and the
services they provide. Services may include, but are not necessarily limited
to: provision of information about baked goods and other edibles containing
marijuana, tinctures, oils, concentrates, capsules, smoking, and sprays. (added
7/9/2014)
   MEDICAL MARIJUANA COOPERATIVE. An organization owned and/or operated by a
group of individuals for its mutual benefit (such as the distribution,
exchange, processing, delivery, or cultivation of marijuana). (added 7/9/2014)
   MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY. Any site, facility, location, use,
cooperative, or business where more than one registered primary caregiver
intends to or does distribute, exchange, process, deliver or give away
marijuana for medical purposes to qualifying patients. (added 7/9/2014)
   MEDICAL MARIJUANA GROW FACILITY. Any site, facility, or location where more
than one primary caregiver grows marijuana for medical purposes. (added 7/9/
2014)
   MEDICAL USE OF MARIJUANA. The acquisition, possession, cultivation,
manufacture, use, internal possession, delivery, transfer, or transportation of
marijuana or paraphernalia relating to the administration of marijuana to treat
or alleviate a registered qualifying patient's debilitating medical condition
or symptoms associated with debilitating medical condition. (added 7/9/2014)
   MEZZANINE. An intermediate level or levels between the floor and ceiling of
any story with an aggregate floor area of not more than one-third of the floor
area of the story in which the level or levels are located.
   MICROBREWERY. A brewery that produces less than 30,000 barrels of beer or
ale per-year, as allowed by state law. (A barrel is equivalent to 31 U. S.
gallons.) (added 8/13/2014)
   MINI-WAREHOUSE. A building or group of buildings , each of which contains
several individual storage units, each with a separate door and lock and which
can be leased on an individual basis. MINI-WAREHOUSES are typically contained
within a fenced, controlled-access compound.
   MOBILE HOME. See DWELLING, MOBILE HOME .
   MOBILE HOME LOT. An area within a mobile home park which is designated for
the exclusive use of a specific mobile home .
   MOBILE HOME PARK . A parcel or tract of land under the control of a person
upon which three or more mobile homes are located on a continual non-
recreational basis and which is offered to the public for that purpose
regardless of whether a charge is made therefor, together with any building ,
structure , enclosure, street , equipment, or facility used or intended for use
incident to the occupancy of a mobile home , subject to conditions set forth in
the Mobile Home Commission Rules and Michigan Public Act 96 of 1987, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 125.2301 through 125.2349, as amended.
   MORTUARY or FUNERAL HOME. An establishment where the dead are prepared for
burial or cremation and where wakes or funerals may be held.
   MOTEL. A building or group of buildings  occupied as a more or less
temporary abiding place for individuals who are lodged with or without meals in
rooms consisting of a minimum of a bedroom and bath, occupied for hire, in
which provision is not usually made for cooking within the rooms , and which
provides customary motel services such as maid service, linen service,
telephone and/or desk service, and the use of furniture. MOTELS  typically
provide exterior entrances and on-site parking for each unit. A MOTEL  may also
include conference room or banquet facilities, an attached dining room , and/or
an unattached standard restaurant .
   MUNICIPALITY. Williamstown Township, Ingham County, Michigan.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/71d151aa824b5086a107ad3293684d8be35e4585/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1887.jpg]
   NATURAL AREA. A land area or water body which is generally not occupied by
structures , roads , or other artificial elements and which contains floral,
faunal, geologic, or other similar features having scenic, educational, or
scientific value to residents. An area may be considered NATURAL  even though
excavation , filling , or other similar activity may have previously occurred.
(revised 1/9/96)
   NATURAL RESOURCES.  Natural resources shall include land, soils, wetlands ,
floodplains , surface and ground water, topography, trees and other types of
vegetative cover, subsurface strata, geologic formations, animal life, and
naturally occurring substances and living organisms that can be useful to
people. NATURAL RESOURCES are of two types: renewable (e.g., plants and trees)
and nonrenewable (e.g., mineral resources). NATURAL RESOURCES may also be
referred to as “natural features” in this Ordinance. (revised 1/9/96)
   NATURE CENTER.  A facility that exists for the principal purpose of
educating people about and exposing them to natural resources . Such a facility
typically has indoor and outdoor facilities and uses, including buildings which
may contain classrooms, displays, workshops, offices, and similar uses;
interpretive trails, outdoor displays, and other outdoor educational displays
or facilities; and, accessory uses or facilities, such as parking, restrooms,
etc. (revised 6/29/99)
   NONCONFORMITY.  Any structure , lot , or use of any lot , land or structure
, which does not conform at the time of adoption of this Ordinance or any
amendment thereto, to the regulations for the district in which it is located
(see also definitions in §
3.02).
   NUISANCE. Any offensive, annoying, or disturbing practice or object, which
prevents the free use of one’s property, or which renders its ordinary use or
physical occupation uncomfortable. NUISANCE  commonly involves continuous or
recurrent acts which give offense to the senses, violate the laws of decency,
obstruct reasonable and comfortable use of property, or endangers life and
health.
   NURSERY, DAY NURSERY , or NURSERY SCHOOL. See CHILD CARE CENTER .
   NURSERY, PLANT MATERIAL. A space, building , and/or structure , or
combination thereof, where live trees, shrubs, and other plants used for
gardening and landscaping are propagated, stored, and/or offered for sale on
the premises, but not including any space, building , or structure used
principally for the sale of fruits, vegetables, or Christmas trees.
   NURSING HOME.  A facility that provides organized nursing care and medical
treatment to two or more unrelated individuals suffering or recovering from
illness, injury, or infirmity. NURSING HOME does not include a hospital , a
veterans’ facility, a correctional facility, a hospice, or a hospice residence.
   OCCUPANCY, CHANGE OF. A discontinuance of an existing use and the
substitution of a use of a different kind or class, or, the expansion of a use.
   OCCUPIED.  Used in any way at the time in question.
   OFFICE. A building or portion of a building wherein services are performed
involving predominantly administrative, professional, or clerical operations.
   OIL OR GAS PROCESSING PLANT. A facility designed for separating, metering,
holding, and marketing of oil and gas production, including sweetening plants
designed for the removal of sulfur compounds from natural gas, but not
including oil refineries.
   OPEN AIR BUSINESS. Any commercial use that is conducted primarily out-of-
doors. Unless otherwise specified herein, OPEN AIR BUSINESS shall include:
      (1)   Retail sales of garden supplies and equipment, including but not
limited to: trees, shrubbery, plants, flowers, seed, topsoil trellises, and
lawn furniture.
      (2)   Roadside stands for the sale of agricultural products.
      (3)   Various outdoor recreation uses, including but not limited to:
tennis courts, archery courts, shuffleboard, horseshoe courts, miniature golf,
golf driving ranges, and amusement parks.
      (4)   Outdoor display and sale of garages, swimming pools , playground
equipment, and uses.
   OPEN PORCH. An exterior appendage to a building that serves as an approach
or vestibule to a doorway. An OPEN PORCH is one that does not have a roof.
(added 1/12/2010)
   OPEN SPACE. Any parcel or area of land or water that is generally free of
structures and that is set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public
or private use or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and
occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such OPEN SPACE . OPEN SPACE may be
required for recreation, resource protection, aesthetics, or other purposes.
      A.   OPEN SPACE, USABLE. Open space that is accessible to a majority of
residents in a development for recreation or leisure activities. Examples of
USABLE OPEN SPACE include, but are not limited to, open fields and woodlands.
Swamps or marshes are not generally considered usable open space, except as
specifically exempted elsewhere in this Ordinance. (revised 1/12/2010)
   ORDINARY HIGH WATER. The line between upland and bottomland which persists
through successive changes in water levels below which the presence and action
of the water is so common or recurrent that the character of the land is marked
distinctly from the upland and is apparent in the soil itself, the
configuration of the surface soil and the vegetation.
   OUTDOOR STORAGE. The keeping, in an unroofed area, of any goods, junk ,
material merchandise or vehicles in the same place for more than 24 hours.
   OUTDOOR WOOD-FIRED BOILER. A wood-fired boiler, stove, or furnace that is
not located within a building intended for habitation by humans or domestic
animals. (added 1/12/2010)
   OUTLOT. A parcel of land which is designated as an OUTLOT  on the recorded
plat, and which is usually not intended to be used for the same purposes as
other lots in the plat.
   PARCEL. A continuous area, tract, or acreage of land that has not been
subdivided according to the provisions of the Subdivision Control Act and that
has frontage on a public street .
   PARKING LOT, OFF-STREET. An area on private property which provides
vehicular parking spaces along with adequate drives and aisles for maneuvering,
so as to provide safe and convenient access for entrance and exit and for
parking of more than three vehicles.
   PARKING SPACE. An area of definite length and width as designated in this
Ordinance for parking an automobile or other vehicle, and which is fully
accessible for such purposes.
   PAVED TERRACE.  An open, flat paved surface, typically located adjacent to a
house, that serves as an outdoor living area. (added 1/12/2010)
   PERC TEST or PERCOLATION TEST. A test designed to determine the ability of
ground to absorb water, and used to determine the suitability of a soil for
drainage or for the use of a septic system.
   PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE. A financial guarantee to ensure that all
improvements, facilities, or work required by this Ordinance will be completed
in compliance with the Ordinance, regulations, and approved plans and
specifications of the development .
   PERSONAL FITNESS CENTER. A facility which provides indoor exercise
facilities, such as exercise machines and weight-lifting equipment, usually in
a structured physical activity program supervised by professional physical
fitness instructors. As defined herein, PERSONAL FITNESS CENTER shall not
include court sports facilities or spectator seating for sports events. A
PERSONAL FITNESS CENTER may or may not be enclosed within a gym .
   PERVIOUS SURFACE. A surface that permits full or partial absorption of storm
water.
   PET. A domesticated dog, cat, bird, gerbil, hamster, guinea pig, turtle,
fish, rabbit, or other similar animal that is commonly available and
customarily kept for pleasure or companionship.
   PLANNED DEVELOPMENT. A planning or construction project involving the use of
special zoning requirements and review procedures which are intended to provide
design and regulatory flexibility, so as to encourage innovation in land use
planning and design and thereby achieve a higher quality of development than
might otherwise be possible.
   PLANNER, TOWNSHIP.  The TOWNSHIP PLANNER  is the person or firm designated
by the Township Board and Planning Commission to advise the township
administration, Township Board , and Planning Commission on planning, zoning,
land use, housing, and other related planning and development issues. The
TOWNSHIP PLANNER may be a consultant or an employee of the township .
   PLANNING COMMISSION.  The Planning Commission of Williamstown Township, as
authorized by Michigan Public Act 33 of 2008, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3801
through 125.3885, as amended.
   PLAT, SUBDIVISION. The division of a tract of land for the purpose of sale,
lease or building  development , in accordance with Subdivision Control Act,
Michigan Public Act 288 of 1967, being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101 through 560.293, as
amended, or any successor thereto, and subdivision control regulations as may
be adopted by the township . (revised 1/9/96)
   PLOT PLAN. A plan, prepared to scale, showing accurately and with complete
dimensioning, the boundaries of a site and all salient features required to
adequately evaluate whether the approvals sought by an applicant are in
compliance with this Ordinance.
   PRIMARY CAREGIVER. A person who is at least 21 years old, has agreed to
assist with a patient's medical use of marijuana , has never been convicted of
a felony involving illegal drugs, and is licensed under the Michigan Medical
Marijuana Act. (added 7/9/2014)
   PRINCIPAL USE. See USE, PRINCIPAL.
   PRIVATE STREET or PRIVATE ROAD. See ROAD.
   PROPERTY LINE. The line separating a piece of property from the street
 right-of-way and the lines separating a parcel of property from adjacent
parcels . See also  LOT LINE.
   PUBLIC SAFETY OFFICIAL.   THE PUBLIC SAFETY OFFICIAL refers generally to the
departments or persons who perform police, fire fighting, and other public
safety functions for the township .
   PUBLIC UTILITY. Any persons, firm, corporation, municipal department, or
board, duly authorized to furnish under federal, state, or local regulations a
service which is of public consequence and need. The principal distinctive
characteristics of a PUBLIC UTILITY are that: (1) because of the nature of its
business, it has characteristics of a natural monopoly, and (2) it provides a
service to an indefinite public (or portion of the public) which has a legal
right to demand and receive its services. (revised 6/3/97)
   QUALIFYING PATIENT. A person who has been diagnosed by a physician as having
a debilitating medical condition for the purposes of receiving medical
marijuana , pursuant to the Michigan Medical Marijuana Act. (added 7/9/2014)
   REAL PROPERTY. Includes the surface, whatever is attached to the surface
(such as buildings or trees), whatever is beneath the surface (such as
minerals), and the area above the surface, i.e., the sky.
   RECEPTION ANTENNA. An apparatus installed out-of-doors which is capable of
receiving communications for radio and/or television purposes, including
satellite reception antennas, but excluding such facilities that have been
preempted from township regulation by applicable state or federal laws or
regulations.
   RECOGNIZABLE AND SUBSTANTIAL BENEFIT. A clear benefit, both to the ultimate
users of the property in question and to the community, which would reasonably
be expected to accrue, taking into consideration the reasonably foreseeable
detriments of the proposed development and uses. Such benefits may include:
long-term protection or preservation of natural resources and natural features,
historical features, or architectural features; or, elimination of or reduction
in the degree of nonconformity in a nonconforming use or structure .
   RECREATION LAND.  Any public or privately owned lot or land that is utilized
for recreation activities such as, but not limited to, camping, swimming,
picnicking, hiking, nature trails, boating, and fishing.
   RECREATIONAL FACILITIES. Playgrounds, parks, picnic areas, golf courses ,
ball fields, camps, swimming pools , nature preserves, or any other type of
community space or equipment that is designed to provide the user with the
opportunity to relax, engage in athletic activity, or engage in other leisure
pursuits.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A class of vehicle which shall include the following:
      A.   TRAVEL TRAILER. A portable vehicle on a chassis, which is designed
to be used as a temporary dwelling during travel, recreational, and vacation
uses, and which may be identified as a TRAVEL TRAILER by the manufacturer.
TRAVEL TRAILERS generally contain sanitary, water, and electrical facilities.
      B.   PICKUP CAMPER.  A structure designed to be mounted on a pickup or
truck chassis with sufficient equipment to render it suitable for use as a
temporary dwelling during the process of travel, recreational, and vacation
uses.
      C.   MOTOR HOME. A recreational vehicle intended for temporary human
habitation, sleeping, and/or eating, mounted upon a chassis with wheels and
capable of being moved from place to place under its own power. MOTOR HOMES
generally contain sanitary, water, and electrical facilities.
      D.   FOLDING TENT TRAILER. A folding structure , mounted on wheels and
designed for travel and vacation use.
      E.   BOATS, BOAT TRAILERS. Boats, floats, rafts, canoes, etc., plus the
normal equipment used to transport them on the highway .
      F.   OTHER RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT. Snowmobiles, all terrain or special
terrain vehicles, utility trailers , etc., plus the normal equipment to
transport them on the highway .
   RECYCLING CENTER. A facility at which used material is separated and
processed prior to shipment to others who will use the materials to manufacture
new products.
   RECYCLING COLLECTION STATION. A facility for the collection and temporary
storage of recoverable resources, prior to shipment to a recycling center for
processing.
   RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION. Any structure primarily and regularly used for
religious assembly and/or activity. (added 1/12/2010)
   RESTAURANT. Any establishment whose principal business is the sale of food
and beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state, and whose method of
operation is characteristic of a carry-out, drive-in , drive-through, fast
food, standard restaurant, or bar/lounge, or combination thereof, as defined
below:
      A.   RESTAURANT, CARRY-OUT. A restaurant whose method of operation
involves sale of food, beverages, and/or frozen desserts in disposable or
edible containers or wrappers in a ready-to-consume state for consumption
primarily off the premises.
      B.   RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN. A restaurant whose method of operation
involves delivery of prepared food so as to allow its consumption in a motor
vehicle or elsewhere on the premises, but outside of an enclosed building .
      C.   RESTAURANT, DRIVE-THROUGH. A restaurant whose method of operation
involves the delivery of the prepared food to the customer in a motor vehicle,
typically through a drive-through window, for consumption off of the premises.
      D.   RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD. A restaurant whose method of operation
involves minimum waiting for delivery of ready-to-consume food to the customer
at a counter or cafeteria line for consumption at the counter where it is
served, or at tables, booths, or stands inside the structure or out, or for
consumption off the premises, but not in a motor vehicle at the site.
      E.   RESTAURANT, STANDARD. A restaurant whose method of operation
involves either:
         (1)   The delivery of prepared food by waiters and waitresses to
customers seated at tables within a completely enclosed building , or
         (2)   The prepared food is acquired by customers at a cafeteria line
and is subsequently consumed by the customers at tables within a completely
enclosed building .
      F.   BAR/LOUNGE. A type of restaurant operated primarily for the
dispensing of alcoholic beverages, although the sale of prepared food or snacks
may also be permitted. If a BAR  or  LOUNGE is part of a larger dining
facility, it shall be defined as that part of the structure so designated or
operated.
   RETENTION BASIN. A wet or dry stormwater holding area, either natural or
artificial, which has no outlet other than an emergency spillway. (revised 1/
12/2010)
   RETREAT CENTER. A use that is typically in a building located in a quiet,
secluded area and which contains rooms for meetings, discussion, and
contemplation.
   RIDING ARENA. An area enclosed within a building or fence and which is
intended to be used as a place to ride horses.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY.  The strip of land over which an easement exists to allow
facilities such as streets , roads , highways , and power lines to be built.
   ROAD. Any public or private thoroughfare or right-of-way , other than a
public or private alley , dedicated to or designed for travel and access to any
land, lot or parcel whether designated as a thoroughfare, road, avenue, highway
, boulevard, drive, lane, place, court, or any similar designation. Various
types of roads are defined as follows:
      A.   PRIVATE ROAD.  Any road which is to be privately maintained and has
not been accepted for maintenance by the Ingham County Road Commission, the
State of Michigan or the federal government, but which is subject to approval
by the township . The inclusion of this definition is not intended to indicate
that private roads are permitted in Williamstown Township.
      B.   PUBLIC ROAD.  Any road or portion of a road which has been dedicated
to and accepted for maintenance by the Ingham County Road Commission, State of
Michigan or the federal government.
      C.   COLLECTOR ROAD. A road whose principal function is to carry traffic
between local roads and arterial roads, but which may also provide direct
access to abutting properties.
      D.   CUL-DE-SAC. A road that terminates in a vehicular turnaround.
      E.   LOCAL OR MINOR ROAD. A road whose sole function is to provide access
to abutting properties.
      F.   MINOR ARTERIAL ROAD. A road which carries moderate volumes of
traffic and serves as an avenue for circulation of traffic into, out of, or
around the township .
      G.   PRINCIPAL ARTERIAL ROAD. An arterial road which is intended to
service a large volume of traffic for both the immediate area and the region
beyond.
   ROADSIDE STAND. A temporary structure or use operated for the purpose of
seasonally selling agricultural products, a portion of which are raised or
produced on the same premises by the proprietor of the stand. A roadside stand
shall not include small operations consisting of a portable table that are
operated intermittently.
   ROOM. For the purpose of determining lot area requirements and density in a
multiple-family district, a ROOM  is a living room, dining room, or bedroom ,
equal to at least 80 square feet in area. A ROOM  shall not include the area in
kitchen, sanitary facilities, utility provisions, corridors, hallways and
storage. Plans presented showing one-, two-, or three-bedroom units and
including a den, library, or other extra ROOM  shall count such extra ROOM  as
a bedroom for the purpose of computing density .
   ROOMING HOUSE.  See BOARDING HOUSE.
   RURAL CLUSTER ZONING. A technique that is intended to preserve the “Rural
Open Space Environment ” by grouping dwellings on some portions of the
development site in order to preserve the remainder of the site as permanent
open space in a natural state or for continued agricultural use. In areas not
served by public sewers, units are typically clustered on the portions of the
site where the soils are most capable of supporting septic systems. RURAL
CLUSTER ZONING is also known as “Open Space Zoning.”
   RURAL OPEN SPACE ENVIRONMENT. A type of development that preserves
characteristics of the rural/town environment, such as agricultural use of
farmlands, open fields, road front trees, woodlots, fence rows, wildlife
habitats, historic farm buildings and sites, and wetlands . A development that
preserves the RURAL OPEN SPACE ENVIRONMENT typically minimizes large lot sprawl
which results in the fragmentation of rural lands.
   SEMI-TRAILER. A trailer , which may or may not be enclosed, having wheels
generally only at the rear and supported in front by a truck tractor or towing
vehicle.
   SENIOR HOUSING. Any multiple-unit housing development intended for adults
aged 55 or older. SENIOR HOUSING does not include an adult foster care facility
, home for the aged , hospital , hotel , nursing home , or other state-licensed
residential facility . (added 1/12/2010)
      A.   SENIOR APARTMENTS . A senior housing development with self-contained
living units intended for adults who are able to care for themselves.
      B.   SENIOR CONGREGATE HOUSING. A senior housing development that may
provide supportive services such as meals, housekeeping, social activities,
and/or transportation, but not adult foster care or continuous medical or
nursing care.
   SERVICE DRIVE. A road that is generally parallel to and adjacent to an
arterial road and that is designed to provide access to abutting properties so
that these properties are separated from the through traffic on the arterial
road and so that the flow of traffic on the arterial road is not impeded by
direct driveway access from a large number of abutting properties.
   SERVICE TRUCK. A pick-up truck or van that is used in conjunction with a
repair or maintenance business, such as a plumbing, electrical, or carpentry
business.
   SETBACK. The distance between the front, side, or rear lot line and the
nearest part of a structure on a lot . The “minimum required setback” is the
minimum distance between a front, side, or rear lot line and the nearest part
of a structure in order to conform to the required yard setback provisions of
this Ordinance (see YARD ). SETBACK shall also mean the distance between the
high water mark of any lake , pond, or other body of water, or wetland and the
nearest part of any structure . The “minimum required setback” is the minimum
distance from the high water mark of any lake , pond, or other body of water or
wetland and the nearest part of a structure in order to conform to the required
setback provisions of this Ordinance. (revised 2/3/98, 2/3/04)
   SHOPPING CENTER. A grouping of retail businesses and service uses on a
single site with common parking facilities.
   SIGN. Any device, structure , fixture, or placard which uses words, numbers,
figures, graphic designs, logos, or trademarks for the purpose of informing or
attracting the attention of persons. Unless otherwise indicated, the definition
of SIGN  includes interior and exterior SIGNS  which are visible from any
public street , sidewalk alley , park, or public property, but not SIGNS  which
are primarily directed at persons within the premises upon which the SIGN  is
located. Various types of SIGNS  and sign-related terms are defined in
Article 7.00 of this Ordinance.
   SLOPE, STEEP. A slope with a moderate or high erosion hazard (often 7% or
greater) as defined in the Michigan Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control
Guidebook. Percent slope shall be computed by dividing the change in elevation
by the horizontal distance, times 100. (revised 1/9/96)
   SPECIAL EVENT. An occurrence or noteworthy happening of seasonal, civic, or
church importance, which is organized and sponsored by a non-profit
Williamstown Township community group, organization, club or society, and which
offers a distinctive service to the community, such as public entertainment,
community education, civic celebration, or cultural or community enrichment.
SPECIAL EVENTS  typically run for a short period of time (less than two weeks)
and are unlike the customary or usual activities generally associated with the
property where the special event is to be located.
   SPECIAL LAND USE/SPECIAL USE. Special land uses are uses, either public or
private, which possess unique characteristics and therefore cannot be properly
classified as a permitted use in a particular zoning district or districts.
After due consideration of the impact of each such proposed use upon the
neighboring land and of the public need for the particular use at the proposed
location, such special land uses may be permitted following review and approval
subject to the terms of this Ordinance. (revised 1/9/96)
   SPECIAL USE PERMIT. See SPECIAL LAND USE/SPECIAL USE. (revised 1/9/96)
   STABLE, PRIVATE. An enclosed building intended for the keeping of horses or
other large domestic animals, for the noncommercial use of the residents of the
principal residential use on the site.
   STABLE, PUBLIC. An enclosed building intended for the keeping of horses or
other domestic animals, in which any such animals are kept for remuneration,
hire, or sale.
   STAKE TRUCK. A truck having a platform with stakes inserted along the
outside edges to retain the load. (revised 2/3/04)
   STATE-LICENSED RESIDENTIAL FACILITY. Any structure constructed for
residential purposes and licensed by the State of Michigan pursuant to Michigan
Public Act 116 of 1973, being M.C.L.A. §§ 722.111 through 722.128 (the Child
Care Licensing Act) or Michigan Public Act 218 of 1979, being M.C.L.A. §§
400.701 through 400.737 (the Adult Foster Care Facility Licensing Act),
including adult foster care facilities, foster family homes, foster family
group homes, family day care homes, and group day care homes. (added 1/12/2010)
      A.   ADULT FOSTER CARE. The provision of supervision, personal care, and
protection, in addition to room and board, for 24 hours a day, five or more
days a week, and for two or more consecutive weeks for compensation.
         (1)   ADULT FOSTER CARE FACILITY. A residential structure that is
licensed to provide adult foster care, but not continuous nursing care, for
unrelated adults over the age of 17. An ADULT FOSTER CARE FACILITY does not
include any of the following: a licensed child caring institution, children’s
camp, foster family home, or foster family group home; an alcohol or substance
abuse rehabilitation center; a residential facility for persons released from
or assigned to adult correctional institutions; a maternity home; a hotel or
rooming house that does not provide or offer to provide foster care; or a
veterans’ facility.
         (2)   ADULT FOSTER CARE FAMILY HOME. A private home with the approved
capacity to receive not more than six adults to be provided with adult foster
care.
         (3)   ADULT FOSTER CARE SMALL GROUP HOME. An “adult foster care
facility” with the approved capacity to receive not more than 12 adults.
         (4)   ADULT FOSTER CARE LARGE GROUP HOME. An “adult foster care
facility” with the approved capacity to receive at least 13 but not more than
20 adults.
         (5)   ADULT FOSTER CARE CONGREGATE FACILITY. An “adult foster care
facility” with the approved capacity to receive more than 20 adults.
      B.   CHILD DAY CARE. The care and supervision for periods of less than 24
hours a day of minor children, unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except
children related to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage, or
adoption.
      (1)   FAMILY DAY CARE HOME. A private home in which one but fewer than
seven minor children are received for care and supervision for compensation for
periods of less than 24 hours a day, unattended by a parent or legal guardian,
except children related to an adult member of the household by blood, marriage,
or adoption. Pursuant to Public Act 116 of 1973, as amended, the Department of
Licensing and Regulatory Affairs or its successor agency may find that a family
day care home is eligible for increased capacity of one additional child added
to the total number of minor children received for care and supervision,
subject to the criteria in said Act 116.
         (2)   GROUP DAY CARE HOME.  A private home in which more than six but
not more than 12 minor children are given care and supervision for periods of
less than 24 hours a day unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except
children related to an adult member of the household by blood, marriage, or
adoption. Pursuant to Public Act 116 of 1973, as amended, the Department of
Licensing and Regulatory Affairs or its successor agency may find that a group
child care home is eligible for increased capacity of two additional children
added to the total number of minor children received for care and supervision,
subject to the criteria in said Act 116.
      C.   CHILD FOSTER CARE. The care and supervision for 24 hours a day, for
four or more days a week, and for two or more consecutive weeks, of minor
children who are not related to an adult member of the household by blood or
marriage, are not placed in the household under the Michigan adoption code, and
are unattended by a parent or legal guardian.
         (1)   FOSTER FAMILY HOME. A private home in which one but not more
than four children are provided with child foster care.
         (2)   FOSTER FAMILY GROUP HOME. A private home in which more than four
but not more than six children are provided with child foster care.
      D.   PRIVATE HOME. For the limited purpose of defining a state-licensed
residential facility , a PRIVATE HOME means a private residence in which the
facility licensee or registrant permanently resides as a member of the
household.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/71d151aa824b5086a107ad3293684d8be35e4585/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1889.jpg]
   STORY. That portion of a building , other than a basement or mezzanine as
defined herein, included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper
surface of the floor or roof next above it.
      A.   A mezzanine shall be deemed a full STORY  when it covers more than
one-third of the area of the story underneath, or, if the vertical distance
from the floor next below the mezzanine to the floor above it is 24 feet or
more.
      B.   A basement shall be deemed a full STORY  when the vertical distance
from the average grade to the floor below is less than the vertical distance
from the average grade to the ceiling.
   STORY, HALF. The uppermost story lying under a pitched roof, the usable
floor area of which does not exceed two-thirds of the floor area of the
uppermost full story . The usable floor area of a HALF STORY shall be at least
160 square feet with a minimum clear height of seven feet, six inches.
   STREET. See ROAD .
   STREET LOT LINE. A dividing line between the street and a lot , also known
as the right-of-way line.
   STRUCTURAL ADDITION. Any alteration that changes the location of the
exterior walls or area of a building .
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected , the use of which requires
location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the
ground. STRUCTURES  include, but are not limited to, principal and accessory
buildings , towers, decks , fences , privacy screens, walls, antennae, swimming
pools , signs , and public roads . (revised 1/12/2010)
   SUBDIVISION PLAT. See PLAT, SUBDIVISION.  (revised 1/9/96)
   SWIMMING POOL. Any permanent, non-portable structure or container located
either above or below grade designed to hold water to a depth of greater than
24 inches, intended for swimming or bathing. A swimming pool shall be
considered an accessory structure for purposes of computing lot coverage .
   TEMPORARY STORAGE STRUCTURES. Structures  used for temporary storage and/or
shipping of household items or vehicles. This definition includes PODs, Pack
Rats, U-Packs, semi-trailers, shipping containers, fabric structures  and any
comparable unit which is of short-term duration. This definition does not
include FARM BUILDINGS as defined in this Ordinance.
   TEMPORARY USE OR BUILDING. A use or building permitted to exist for a
limited period of time under conditions and procedures as provided for in this
Ordinance.
   THEATER. An enclosed building used for presenting performances or motion
pictures which are observed by paying patrons from seats situated within the
building .
   THOROUGHFARE. See ROAD .
   TOWNSHIP. Williamstown Township, Ingham County, Michigan.
   TOWNSHIP BOARD. The Supervisor, Clerk, Treasurer, and Trustees of
Williamstown Township, Ingham County, Michigan.
   TOXIC OR HAZARDOUS WASTE. Waste or a combination of waste and other
deposited, stored, or disposed material (including but not limited to solid,
liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material) which because of its
quantity, concentration, or physical chemical or infectious characteristics may
(if improperly treated, deposited, stored, transported, disposed, or otherwise
managed) cause or significantly contribute to the following conditions:
      (1)   An increase in mortality; or
      (2)   An increase in serious irreversible illness; or
      (3)   Serious incapacitating, but reversible illness; or
      (4)   Substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the
environment.
   TRAILER. A vehicle without motive power that is designed to be drawn by a
motor vehicle and used for carrying property or persons. (revised 1/12/2010)
   TRANSITION ZONE. A TRANSITION ZONE  generally refers to a zoning district ,
an arrangement of lots or land uses, a landscaped area, or similar means of
providing a buffer between land uses or districts.
   TRUCK TERMINAL. A structure to which goods, except raw or unprocessed
agricultural products, natural mineral or other resources, are delivered for
immediate distribution or to be amalgamated or divided for delivery in larger
or smaller units to other points, or for distribution, amalgamation, or
division involving transfer to other modes of transportation.
   TRUCK TRACTOR. A motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing
another vehicle. (revised 2/3/04)
   UNDERLYING ZONING. The zoning classification and regulations applicable to
the property immediately preceding the approval of an application to designate
a parcel  planned development .
   USE. The purpose for which land, lots , or buildings thereon is designed,
arranged .or intended, or for which it is occupied , maintained, let, or
leased.
      A.   USE, ACCESSORY. See ACCESSORY USE, BUILDING, OR STRUCTURE.
      B.   USE, PERMITTED. A use which may be lawfully established in a
particular district or districts provided it conforms with all requirements,
regulations, and standards of such district.
      C.   USE, PRINCIPAL. The main use of land and buildings and the main
purpose for which land and buildings exist.
      D.   USE, SPECIAL LAND. See SPECIAL LAND USE.
   UTILITY TRAILER. A small trailer that is designed to be pulled by an
automobile , van, or pick-up truck.
   VARIANCE. A modification of the literal provisions of the Zoning Ordinance
granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals when strict enforcement of the Zoning
Ordinance would cause practical difficulties owing to circumstances unique to
the individual property on which the variance is granted.
   VETERINARY HOSPITAL. See CLINIC, VETERINARY.
   WALL, OBSCURING. A structure of definite height and location to serve as an
opaque screen in carrying out the requirements of this Ordinance.
   WAREHOUSE. A building used primarily for storage of goods and materials. See
also DISTRIBUTION CENTER.
   WETLAND. Land characterized by the presence of water at a frequency and
duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances does
support, WETLAND  vegetation or aquatic life, and which is commonly referred to
as a bog, swamp, or marsh. A WETLAND  is further characterized by the presence
of hydric soils and prevalence of hydrophytic vegetation typically adapted for
life in saturated soil conditions. A WETLAND  that exhibits these
characteristics may be dry on the surface during part or all of the year.
(revised 1/12/2010)
   WETLAND BUFFER. A strip of land surrounding a wetland that provides
protection for the wetland from inadvertent and secondary impacts. A WETLAND
BUFFER may also protect wildlife habitat, prevent erosion, provide nutrient
filtration and serve other functions associated with a wetland . The WETLAND
BUFFER shall encompass all land within 40 feet of the edge of the wetland .
(added 1/12/2010)
   WHOLESALE SALES. The sales of goods generally in large quantities and
primarily to customers engaged in the business of reselling the goods.
   WIND ENERGY SYSTEM. A system for the conversion of wind energy into
electricity through the use of a wind turbine generator. A WIND ENERGY SYSTEM
includes the turbine, blades, tower, as well as related electrical equipment.
(added 10/7/2008)
      A.   ANEMOMETER TOWER. A tower containing instrumentation designed to
provide present moment wind data in support of an existing or future wind
energy system.
      B.   ON-SITE WIND ENERGY SYSTEM. A wind energy system designed and built
to provide electrical power to the owner at that site.
      C.   UTILITY GRID WIND ENERGY SYSTEM. A wind energy system designed and
built to provide electricity to the electric utility grid.
   WINERY. An establishment for making wine, consisting of a producing
vineyard, orchard, or similar growing area, and/or manufacturing and bottling
of wines in an amount not to exceed 25,000 gallons per year. A WINERY  may
include ancillary facilities, such as a tasting room . (added 2/6/07)
   WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY. All structures and accessory facilities
relating to the use of the radio frequency spectrum for the purpose of
transmitting or receiving radio signals. This may include, but shall not be
limited to, radio towers, television towers, telephone devices and exchanges,
microwave relay towers, telephone transmission equipment, building and
commercial mobile radio service facilities. Not included within this definition
are: citizen band radio facilities; short wave facilities; ham, amateur radio
facilities; satellite dishes; and, governmental facilities which are subject to
state or federal law or regulations which preempt municipal regulatory
authority. (revised 6/3/97)
   WIRELESS COMMUNICATION SUPPORT STRUCTURES.   Structures  erected or modified
tosupport wireless communication antennas, including but not limited to,
monopoles, lattice towers, light poles, wood poles and guyed towers, or other
structures which appear to be something other than a mere support structure .
(revised 6/3/97)
   YARD. An open space on the same lot with a building , unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise permitted in this
Ordinance. The “minimum required setback ” is theminimum depth of a front, rear
or side YARD  necessary to conform to the required YARD setback provisions of
this Ordinance (see illustrations).
      A.   YARD, FRONT.  An open space extending the full width of the lot ,
the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot
line and the nearest line of the principal building . Unless otherwise
specified, on corner lots and through lots there shall be maintained a FRONT
YARD  along each street frontage.
      B.   YARD, REAR. An open space extending the full width of the lot , the
depth of which shall be the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot
line and the nearest line of the principal building . On corner lots , the REAR
YARD may be opposite either street frontage, but there shall only be one REAR
YARD .
      C.   YARD, SIDE. An open space between a principal building and the side
lot line , extending from the front yard to the rear yard , the width of which
shall be the horizontal distance from the nearest point of the side lot line to
the nearest point on the principal building .
      D.   YARD, INTERIOR SIDE. A side yard that abuts an adjacent lot (in
contrast to a “street side yard ,” which abuts a street or road  right-of-way
). (added 1/12/2010)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/71d151aa824b5086a107ad3293684d8be35e4585/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1891.jpg]
   ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The ZONING ADMINISTRATOR is the person or persons
designated by the Township Board to administer the Zoning Ordinance on a day-
to-day basis, including but not limited to processing applications, maintaining
the minutes of the Planning Commission , sending notices of public hearings,
and similar work. The duties of the ZONING ADMINISTRATOR may be filled by
people holding other positions, such as the Building Official , Planning
Commission Secretary, or Supervisor.
   ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS. The Zoning Board of Appeals for Williamstown
Township, as authorized by Michigan Public Act 110 of 2006, being M.C.L.A. §§
125.3101—125.3702 as amended. (added 1/12/2010)
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013; Ord. 55, passed 7-9- 2014; Ord. 56, passed 8-13-2014;
Ord. 57, passed 4-8-2015; Ord. passed 1-8-2020; Ord. passed 12-14-2022; Ord.
passed 2-8-2023)
ARTICLE 2.00
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 2.01 ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS.
   A.   Scope of regulations. No structure or tract of land shall hereafter be
used or occupied , and no structure , or part thereof, shall be erected ,
altered, or moved, except in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance.
However, where a building permit for a building or structure has been issued in
accordance with law prior to the effective date of this Ordinance and
construction is begun within six months of the effective date, said building or
structure may be completed in accordance with the approved plans. Furthermore,
upon completion the building may be occupied under a certificate of occupancy
for the use for which the building was originally designated, subject
thereafter to the provisions of
Article 3.00 concerning nonconformities . Any subsequent text or map amendments
shall not affect previously issued valid permits.
   B.   Minimum requirements. The provisions of this Ordinance shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of public health, safety,
convenience, comfort, morals, prosperity, and general welfare.
   C.   Relationship to other ordinances or agreements. This Ordinance is not
intended to abrogate or annul any ordinance, rule, regulation, permit, easement
, covenant, or other private agreement previously adopted, issued, or entered
into and not in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance. However, where
the regulations of this Ordinance are more restrictive or impose higher
standards or requirements than other such ordinances, rules, regulations,
permits, easements , covenants, or other private agreements, the requirements
of this Ordinance shall govern.
   D.   Vested right. Nothing in this Ordinance should be interpreted or
construed to give rise to any permanent vested rights in the continuation of
any particular use, district, zoning classification, or permissible activities
therein. Furthermore, such rights as may exist through enforcement of this
Ordinance are hereby declared to be subject to subsequent amendment, change or
modification as may be necessary for the preservation or protection of public
health, safety, and welfare, to the extent that such rights are not protected
by the nonconforming use provisions in
Article 3.00.
   E.   Continued conformity with yard and bulk regulations. The maintenance of
yards and other open space and minimum lot area legally required for a building
shall be a continuing obligation of the owner of such building or of the
property on which it is located, for as long as the building is in existence.
No portion of a lot used in complying with the provisions of this Ordinance in
connection with an existing or planned building , shall again be used to
qualify or justify any other building or structure existing or intended to
exist at the same time.
   F.   Division and consolidation of land.  (revised 10/1/2002) The division
and consolidation of land shall be in accordance with the Subdivision Control
Act (Michigan Public Act 288 of 1967, being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101 through
560.293, as amended), the Township Subdivision Control Ordinance, and the
Township Ordinance to Regulate the Division of Land. No lot or parcel shall
hereafter be divided into two or more lots and no portion of any lot shall be
sold, unless all zoning lots resulting from each such division or sale conform
to all regulations of the zoning district in which the property is located.
   G.   Unlawful buildings , structures , site designs, and uses. A building ,
structure , or use which did not lawfully exist at the time of adoption of this
Ordinance shall not be made lawful solely by adoption of this Ordinance. In
case any building , or part thereof, is used, erected , occupied , or altered
contrary to the provisions of this Ordinance, such building or use shall be
deemed an unlawful nuisance and may be required to be vacated, torn down, or
abated by any legal means, and shall not be used or occupied until it has been
made to conform to the provisions of this Ordinance. Public expenditures toward
abating any such nuisance shall become a lien upon the land.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 2.02 ALLOWABLE AND PROHIBITED USES.
   A.   Allowable uses. Only the following uses of land, buildings , or
structures shall be allowed in the township :
      1.   Uses lawfully established on the effective date of this Ordinance.
      2.   Uses for which a building permit had been issued in accordance with
§
29.08.
      3.   Permitted principal and accessory uses in the applicable zoning
districts , subject to the requirements specified.
      4.   Conditional and special uses in the applicable zoning districts ,
subject conditions and requirements specified.
      5.   Temporary uses subject to the requirements specified in §
2.07.
      6.   Uses and structures that are not expressly permitted in this
Ordinance are prohibited.
   B.   Prohibited uses. The following uses, as defined in §
1.03, shall not be allowed anywhere in the Township:
      1.   Medical marijuana dispensaries .
      2.   Medical marijuana cooperatives .
      3.   Medical marijuana grow facilities .
      4.   Medical marijuana compassion club .
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013; Ord. 55, passed 7-9- 2014)
§ 2.03 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.
   A.   General requirements.
      1.   Timing of construction. No accessory building , structure , or use
shall be constructed or established on a parcel unless there is a legally-
established principal building , structure , or use being constructed or
already established on the same parcel of land.
      2.   Site plan approval. If submission of a site plan for review and
approval is required, then the site plan shall indicate the location of
proposed accessory buildings , structures , or uses .
      3.   Nuisances . (revised 1/12/2010) Accessory uses such as household
animal enclosures, dog runs, central air conditioning units, heat pumps,
outdoor wood-fired boilers, and other mechanical equipment that could produce
noise, odors, or other nuisances shall not be located adjacent to an adjoining
property owner’s living or sleeping area where windows and/or doors would be
exposed to the nuisance . These restrictions shall not be construed to limit or
prevent activities permitted by the Michigan Right to Farm Act.
      4.   Impact on adjacent buildings or uses. The location and
characteristics of an accessory building shall not have an adverse impact on
existing adjacent buildings or uses. In evaluating impact on adjacent buildings
or uses, factors that the Planning Commission and Township Board shall consider
include, but are not limited to:
         a.   The potential for generation of nuisances , as might be caused by
increased traffic or noise. (revised 3/6/2001)
         b.   The orientation of doors and access routes.
         c.   Site drainage patterns.
         d.   Impact on views.
      5.   Conformance with lot coverage standards.  Accessory buildings and
structures shall be included in computations to determine compliance with
maximum lot coverage standards, where required.
      6.   Location in proximity to easements or rights-of-way . Accessory
buildings , structures , or uses shall not be located within a dedicated
easement or right-of-way .
      7.   Use of accessory buildings and structures .    (revised 1/9/1996, 1/
12/2010)
         Attached and detached accessory buildings or structures in residential
districts shall not be used as dwelling units or for any business, profession,
trade, or occupation, or as storage space that is offered for rent, except that
an accessory building may be used to house a permitted home occupation or home-
based business , subject to the provisions of §
2.06. An accessory garage on a residential parcel shall be used only for the
storage of vehicles or equipment or materials used by the occupants of the
residence to which it is accessory.
      8.   Applicability of other codes and ordinances.  Accessory buildings
and structures shall be subject to all other applicable codes and ordinances
regarding construction, installation, and operation.
      9.   Accessory farm buildings . (revised 2/3/1998) The requirements in
this section shall not apply to accessory buildings (such as barns and silos)
used in the agricultural operations on a farm , as defined in §
1.03, except that farm buildings shall comply with the setback requirements for
the districts in which they are located.
   B.   Attached accessory buildings . Unless otherwise specified in this
section, accessory buildings or structures which are attached to the principal
building (such as an attached garage, breezeway, or workshop) shall be
considered a part of the principal building for the purposes of determining
conformance with area, setback , height, and bulk requirements. A breezeway or
other attachment between the principal building and the accessory building or
structure must have a complete foundation and must provide interior access to
both buildings for the accessory building to be considered “attached.”
   C.   Detached accessory buildings.
      1.   Location. Detached accessory buildings shall not be located in a
front yard or a required side yard , except as follows:
         a.   Commercial and industrial districts. The following accessory uses
may be permitted in the front or side yards of commercial or industrial
districts, subject to the approval of the Planning Commission : buildings for
parking attendants, guard shelters, gate houses, and transformer pads.
         b.   Large lot residential districts. In the RR, RE, and AG-SF
districts, detached accessory buildings may be permitted in the front yard ,
subject to the following requirement: (revised 1/9/1996, 7/6/2004, 1/12/2010)
            (i).   The maximum floor area of an accessory building located in
the front yard shall be as listed below:
Parcel Area Accessory Building Area
Parcel Area       Accessory Building Area
Less than 2 acres Not Permitted
2 - 4.99 acres:   1,000 sq. ft.
5 - 5.99 acres:   1,400 sq. ft.
6 - 6.99 acres:   1,600 sq. ft.
7 - 7.99 acres:   1,800 sq. ft.
8 - 8.99 acres:   2,000 sq. ft.
9 - 9.99 acres:   2,200 sq. ft.
10 or more acres: 2,400 sq. ft.
 
            (ii).   Any accessory building shall have a minimum front setback
of 200 feet.
         c.   Agricultural-Commercial District. (revised 1/12/2010) In the AG-
C district, detached accessory buildings may be permitted in the front yard
provided that they comply with all setback requirements for accessory buildings
.
      2.   Setbacks .   (revised 1/12/2010) Detached accessory buildings ,
including any and all roof overhangs, shall comply with the setback
requirements for accessory buildings , as provided in §
28.02, except as follows:
         a.   Front yard  setback . Unless otherwise specified, when an
accessory structure is permitted in the front yard it shall comply with the
front yard  setback for the district in which it is located.
         b.   Side yard  setback in large lot residential districts.     
(revised 1/12/2010) The required side yard  setback for detached accessory
buildings in the RR and RE districts may be reduced to ten feet, provided that:
            (i).   The accessory building coverage is less than 1,500 square
feet; and
            (ii).   The accessory building is set back a minimum of 60 feet
from any principal residence on an adjoining parcel . This requirement shall in
no way constrain the owner of an adjacent principal residence from performing
home improvements that would decrease the 60-foot setback .
            (iii).   A stake survey may be required by the Building Official to
determine exact distances from the lot line . The location of the proposed
building shall be approved by the Building Official prior to construction.
         c.   Rear yard  setback . Accessory buildings shall be located no
closer than ten feet to the rear lot line .
         d.   Setback increase based on height. (revised 1/12/2010) In the R-
1 and R-1-S Districts (and for single-family detached housing in the RM-
1 district), the side and rear yard  setbacks for detached accessory buildings
shall be increased by one foot for every foot in height that an accessory
building exceeds 14 feet. (revised 2/3/1998)
         e.   Distance from other buildings . Detached accessory buildings
shall be located at least ten feet from any building on the site.
      3.   Size. (revised 2/3/1998, 1/12/2010) Unless otherwise specifically
permitted elsewhere in this Ordinance, the size of all detached accessory
buildings related to a principal residential use shall not exceed the following
standards:
         a.   The total ground floor area coverage (i.e., footprint of building
, roof overhang, etc.) of any detached accessory building shall not exceed 25%
of the area between the rear lot line and the required rear yard  setback line.
In addition, a detached accessory building may not cover more than 40% of the
area between the rearmost portion of the principal residence and the required
rear yard  setback line. Twelve inches of roof overhang may be excepted from
the calculation of ground floor area coverage for a detached accessory building
.
         b.   In residential districts, the total floor area of all detached
accessory buildings shall not exceed the limits specified in the following
table.
 
Parcel Size          Maximum Floor Area
Up to 2.5 acres      1,500 sq. ft.
2.5 - 5 acres        2,400 sq. ft.
Greater than 5 acres No maximum floor area, but site plan review is required if
                     over 4,000 sq. ft.
 
         c.   The area covered by a lean-to or similar unenclosed roof
structure shall be counted as part of the total floor area. All such accessory
buildings shall comply with the following requirements:
            (i).   Where the total of all accessory buildings is less than
4,000 square feet, administrative approval shall be required. Where the total
of all accessory buildings is 4,000 square feet or greater, site plan review
and approval shall be required (see §
29.02). (revised 10/1/2002)
      4.   Height.    (revised 1/12/2010) Detached accessory buildings shall
comply with the maximum height standards for accessory buildings listed in §
28.02.
      5.   Screening. Individual detached accessory buildings over 2,400 square
feet in area shall be screened in compliance with §
5.02 E, if within 200 feet of a principal residence on an adjacent property.
Existing vegetation may be used for screening provided that a visual barrier in
compliance with §
5.02 E is provided. (added 7/3/2001)
         (i).   If the principal residence on an adjacent property undergoes
renovation or addition such that the 200-foot setback from an adjacent detached
accessory building over 2,400 square feet is reduced, the owner of the
accessory building shall not be required to install a landscaped screen. (added
1/12/2010)
   D.   Accessory structures .
      1.   General requirements. Accessory structures (for example, tennis
courts, wind generators, antennas) shall be located in the rear yard and shall
comply with height, setback , and lot coverage requirements for accessory
buildings , unless otherwise permitted in this Ordinance. (revised 1/9/1996)
      2.   Exceptions to accessory structure standards. Antennas and wind
generators shall comply with the height standards specified in §§
2.16 and
2.22.
      3.   Solar panels.   (revised 1/12/2010) Freestanding solar panels shall
be considered accessory structures and may be located in the front, side, or
rear yard , subject to the setback requirements for accessory buildings .
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 2.04 LAWFUL USE OF A STRUCTURE AS A DWELLING UNIT.
   A.   Incompletely constructed structures . Any incompletely constructed
structure which does not meet the requirements of the Building Code or this
Ordinance shall not be issued a certificate of occupancy and shall not be used
as a dwelling . For the purposes of this section, a basement which does not
have a residential structure constructed above it shall be considered an
incompletely constructed structure . The restrictions shall not prevent
temporary use of structure as a residence in accordance with §
2.07.
   B.   Caretaker residence. No dwelling shall be erected in a commercial or
industrial district, unless specifically permitted otherwise this Ordinance,
except for the living quarters of a watchman or caretaker. Any such living
quarters shall consist of a structure which is permanently affixed to the
ground, constructed in accordance with the adopted building code, and provided
with plumbing, heating, bathroom, and kitchen facilities. In no case shall such
living quarters be used as a permanent single-family residence by anyone other
than a watchman or caretaker and his or her immediate family . (revised 1/12/
2010)
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 2.05 RESIDENTIAL DESIGN STANDARDS.
   Any residential structure , including manufactured dwellings and mobile
homes not located in mobile home parks , shall be erected or constructed only
if in compliance with the following residential design standards.
   A.   General requirements. 
      1.   Area and bulk regulations. Any residential structure , including any
mobile home dwelling unit, shall comply with the minimum floor area
requirements specified for the zoning district where such structure is located.
Mobile homes shall comply with all regulations normally required for site-built
housing in the zoning district in which it is located, unless specifically
indicated otherwise herein.
      2.   Foundation. Any residential structure , including a mobile home ,
shall be placed on a permanent foundation to form a complete enclosure under
the exterior walls. The foundation shall be constructed in accordance with the
adopted building code of the township . A mobile home shall be securely
anchored to its foundation in order to prevent displacement during windstorms.
The wheels, tongue and hitch assembly, and other towing appurtenances, shall be
removed before attaching a mobile home to its permanent foundation.
      3.   Other regulations. Residential structures shall be constructed in
compliance with applicable state, federal, or local laws or ordinances,
including the Michigan State Construction Code. Mobile homes shall comply with
the most recent regulations specified by the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development, Manufactured Home Construction and Safety
Standards (24 CFR 3280), as amended.
      4.   Floodplain. No dwelling unit , including mobile homes , shall be
located within a 100-year floodplain .
      5.   Use. Mobile homes and other structures shall be used only for the
purposes permitted in the zoning district in which they are located.
      6.   Attachments. Any exterior attachments or extensions onto a dwelling
unit , such as entry steps and storage buildings , shall comply with the
adopted building code of the township .
   B.   Requirements applicable to mobile homes . Mobile homes or manufactured
dwelling units erected outside of mobile home parks after the effective date of
this Ordinance shall comply with the general requirements set forth previously
in §
2.05A. and with the following regulations.
      1.   Design features. The design and position of windows and other
features of mobile homes and manufactured dwellings , including exterior wall
colors and color combinations, shall be similar to site-built homes within
1,200 feet of the mobile home property boundaries. If no more than one site-
built dwelling is presently located within 1,200 feet of the proposed location,
then the mobile home or manufactured dwelling shall be compared to the nearest
50 site-built homes.
      2.   Roof pitch. The pitch of the main roof shall have a minimum vertical
rise of one foot for each four feet of horizontal run, and the minimum distance
from the eaves to the ridge shall be ten feet, except where the specific
housing design dictates otherwise (i.e., French provincial, Italianate, etc.).
The roof shall be finished with a type of shingle or other material that is
commonly used in standard on-site residential construction in the vicinity.
      3.   Exterior materials. The exterior siding of a mobile home or
manufactured dwelling shall consist of materials that are generally acceptable
for site-built housing in the vicinity, provided that the reflection from such
exterior surface shall be no greater than from white semi-gloss exterior
enamel, and provided further that any such exterior is comparable in
composition, appearance, and durability to the exterior siding commonly used in
standard residential construction.
      4.   Dimensions. The dimensions and placement of mobile homes or
manufactured dwellings shall be comparable to typical dimensions and placement
of site-built housing in the vicinity. Therefore, a mobile home or manufactured
dwelling shall be located on the lot so that the minimum width of the front
elevation is no less than 34 feet and the minimum dimension along any side or
rear elevation is no less than 24 feet. If there are any extensions or
additions off of the front of the mobile home or manufactured dwelling , the
minimum width of any such secondary front elevation shall be 24 feet. Such
dimensions shall be measured from the outer extremities and shall include
additions to the main body of the mobile home or manufactured dwelling , such
as living or recreation rooms , garages, carports, utility rooms , and the
like, the front portions of which are within 10 feet of the front of the main
body of the mobile home or manufactured dwelling .
      5.   Roof overhang. Mobile homes and manufactured dwellings shall be
designed with either a roof overhang of not less than six inches on all sides
or with window sills and roof drainage systems to concentrate roof drainage at
collection points along the sides of the dwelling .
      6.   Exterior doors. Mobile homes and manufactured dwellings shall have
not less than two exterior doors which shall not be located on the same side of
the building . Where required because of a difference in elevation, all
exterior doors shall be provided with steps that are permanently attached to
the building .
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 2.06 HOME OCCUPATIONS AND HOME-BASED BUSINESSES.
   A.   General requirements. All home occupations and home-based businesses
shall be subject to the applicable requirements of the zoning district in which
they are located, in addition to the following general requirements, unless
otherwise specified elsewhere in this Ordinance.
      1.   Any business activity must be clearly incidental to the use of the
dwelling as a residence.
      2.   The exterior appearance of any structure shall not be altered due to
the business activity.
      3.   No business activity shall be conducted in such a manner so as to
cause the premises to differ from a residential character, whether by the use
of colors, materials, construction, lighting, signs (except as permitted in
this section), or the emission of sounds or vibrations.
      4.   The delivery and pickup of goods and materials used and/or produced
in the operation of a home occupation or home-based business shall be limited
to the customary activity of the United States Postal Service and/or
alternative private package services common to residential property in the
area.
      5.   A home occupation or home-based business may increase vehicular
traffic flow and parking demand by no more than two additional vehicles at a
time. No more than ten customers or clients shall visit the dwelling unit for
services or products during any one day.
         a.   Parking. Any demand for parking generated by a home occupation or
home-based business , including one space for each non-resident employee of a
home-based business , shall be met off the street and behind the required front
setback line.
   B.   Activities not considered a home occupation or home-based business .
      1.   Bed-and-breakfast inns, roadside stands , garage or yard sales, auto
service or repair garages, restaurants and bars, and any other business
activity specifically regulated by provisions elsewhere in this Ordinance shall
not be considered a home occupation or a home-based business .
   C.   Standards for home occupations . All home occupations shall be subject
to the following standards, in addition to the general requirements listed in
subsection A., above.
      1.   No outdoor display and/or storage of materials, goods, supplies, or
equipment used in the home occupation shall be allowed on the premises in any
zoning district .
      2.   Any person who is not a resident occupant of the dwelling unit shall
not be employed in a home occupation located there. If the resident occupant is
not the owner of the dwelling unit , the owner shall submit a notarized
affidavit granting permission for the activity to take place within the
dwelling unit .
      3.   Sign . One non-illuminated nameplate, not more than two square feet
in area, shall be allowed per residence to identify a home occupation . The
permitted sign shall not be located in any road  right-of-way and shall not
obstruct the clear vision of drivers. No other sign shall be used on the
premises to advertise a home occupation .
      4.   The total area within the principal dwelling devoted to home
occupations shall not exceed one-quarter of the usable residential floor area
of the dwelling unit .
      5.   One detached accessory building may be occupied by a home occupation
, provided that there is no external evidence of the business activity and that
the total area of accessory building devoted to a home occupation does not
exceed 4,000 square feet. Any accessory building used for a home occupation
shall be in full compliance with the standards for accessory buildings , as
provided in §
2.03 of this Ordinance.
      6.   Pursuant to Section 204 of Michigan Public Act 110 of 2006 (M.C.L.A.
§ 125.3204), individual instruction in a craft or fine art within a residence
is a permitted home occupation .
   D.   Standards for home-based businesses . All home-based businesses shall
be subject to the following standards, in addition to the general requirements
listed in subsection A., above.
      1.   No more than one home-based business shall be permitted per
residence.
      2.   No outdoor display and/or storage of materials, goods, supplies, or
equipment used in the home-based business shall be permitted on the premises,
except that outdoor storage or display may be permitted in the AG-C District,
subject to prior Planning Commission and Township Board approval and
consideration of the impacts on the character of the neighborhood.
      3.   A home-based business shall be conducted solely by the resident
occupants of the dwelling unit , plus not more than one full-time-equivalent
non-resident employee or independent contractor per residence. If the resident
occupant is not the owner of the dwelling unit , the owner shall submit a
notarized affidavit granting permission for the activity to take place within
the dwelling unit .
      4.   Signs . One, non-illuminated, freestanding, or wall signs may be
permitted for a home-based business , provided that the total sign area for all
signs shall not exceed four square feet per residence. Signs shall not be
located in any road  right-of-way and shall not obstruct the clear vision of
drivers. Freestanding signs associated with a home-based business shall not be
greater than five feet in height.
      5.   The total area within the principal dwelling devoted to home-based
businesses shall not exceed one-half of the usable residential floor area of
the dwelling unit .
      6.   Accessory buildings may be occupied by a home-based business ,
provided that there is no external evidence of the business activity and that
the total area of accessory buildings devoted to a home-based business does not
exceed 4,000 square feet per residence. Any accessory building used for a home-
based business shall be in full compliance with the standards for accessory
buildings , as provided in §
2.03 of this Ordinance.
      7.   The township may limit hours of operation for a home-based business
if deemed necessary to maintain the residential character of the neighborhood.
   E.   Permits and administration.
      1.   Home occupations . No permit shall be required for the operation of
a home occupation in accordance with the standards of this Ordinance. If a home
occupation is found to be operating outside the standards of this Ordinance,
the township may require the business owner to file an application for home-
based business or cease operation of the home occupation .
      2.   Home-based business . 
         a.   The initial application for a home-based business permit shall be
made on a form to be provided by the township . The applicant shall submit a
sketch plan, drawn to scale, showing property lines ; building footprints;
sidewalks, driveways , and parking areas; the location of the well and septic
system; and other salient features. Upon receipt of a completed application and
sketch plan, the township shall notify neighboring properties within 500 feet
of the proposed location of a home-based business . The application and plan
shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission for compliance with the Zoning
Ordinance and compatibility with the residential neighborhood, after which
review a recommendation shall be made to the Township Board to approve, approve
with conditions, or deny the home-based business permit.
         b.   A home-based business permit shall be restricted to the resident
occupants of the dwelling unit at the time of initial application and may not
be transferred or sold except upon re-review by the township . If the resident
occupant is not the owner of the dwelling unit , the owner shall submit a
notarized affidavit granting permission for the activity to take place within
the dwelling unit .
         c.   Township approval of a home-based business shall only remain
valid while the business activity complies with the standards of this
Ordinance.
   F.   Penalties and enforcement. Any violation of this Ordinance, or any part
thereof, shall be deemed a municipal civil infraction. Upon notice of a
violation, the appropriate township employee shall investigate any violation
and then make a determination as to whether the penalty shall be imposed. The
imposition of a penalty for a violation shall not excuse the violation or be
considered a permit to allow the violation to continue. Each day that a
violation exists or continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. If
a municipal civil infraction is imposed, the penalty shall be a fine not to
exceed $100. The Township Supervisor or his/her designated agent is hereby
authorized to write and serve municipal civil infraction tickets. This
municipal civil infraction ticket shall serve as notice of the alleged
violation. Proceedings for the municipal civil infraction shall proceed as
provided in the Township Municipal Civil Infractions Ordinance.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013; Ord. 54, passed 6-11-2014)
§ 2.07 TEMPORARY STRUCTURES AND USES.
   A.   General requirements. Temporary buildings and structures shall comply
with the following requirements:
      1.   Temporary structures used for residential purposes.
      A building or structure may be approved for temporary residential use
only while damage to the principal dwelling due to fire, flood, ice, wind, or
other natural disaster is being repaired. Any such temporary building shall not
be used as a residence without prior review and approval by the Police, Fire,
and Building Officials .
      Also, a mobile home or other approved living quarters may be occupied as
a residence on a temporary basis on sites for which a building permit has been
issued for construction of a new dwelling unit or for major repair or
remodeling of an existing dwelling unit , subject to the following:
         a.   Such permits may be issued by the Building Official for up to six
months in duration and may be renewed for a period of up to six months,
provided that work is proceeding in an expeditious manner.
         b.   The total duration of a temporary permit shall not exceed 12
months.
         c.   Temporary structures shall comply with the setback standards for
the zoning district in which they are located.
         d.   The Building Official shall approve electrical and utility
connections to any temporary structure .
         e.   An approved temporary structure may be moved onto a site 14 days
prior to commencement of construction and shall be removed within 14 days
following issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the permanent dwelling .
         f.   The applicant shall furnish the township with a performance
guarantee in the amount of no less than $500, as determined by the Building
Official , to ensure removal of the temporary structure .
      2.   Temporary structures used for nonresidential purposes. (revised 1/
12/2010) Temporary buildings for nonresidential use, including semi-trucks/
trailers and concrete batch plants, shall be permitted only when the intended
use is by a contractor or builder in conjunction with a construction project,
and only after review and approval by the Building Official . Such temporary
structures shall be removed immediately upon completion of the construction
project and prior to a request for a certificate of occupancy for the project.
This provision is not intended to address farm -related storage, as provided
for in §
18.02, subsection A.2.
      3.   Permits. Permits for the utilization of temporary structures shall
be issued by the Building Official . The permit shall specify a date for the
removal of the temporary structure , and the Building Official may require
posting of a bond to insure removal. A certificate of occupancy shall be
required for such structures .
      4.   Use as an accessory structure . A temporary building or structure
shall not be used as an accessory building or structure , except as permitted
herein.
      5.   Special events and other temporary uses .  The Building Official may
grant temporary use of land and structures for special events and other
temporary uses , as defined in
Article 1.00 of this Ordinance, subject to the following general conditions:
         a.   Adequate off-street parking shall be provided.
         b.   The applicant shall specify the exact duration of the temporary
use .
         c.   Electrical and utility connections shall be approved by the
Building Official .
         d.   The Building Official may require a performance bond to assure
proper clean-up.
   The following conditions apply to specific temporary uses :
         e.   Carnival or circus.
            (i).   Maximum duration: ten days.
            (ii).   Operator or sponsor: Non-profit entity.
            (iii).   Location: Shall not be located in or adjacent to any
developed residential area except on church , school or park property.
         f.   Sidewalk display and sale of bedding plants.
            (i).   Maximum duration: 90 days.
            (ii).   Location: In commercial districts only.
            (iii).   Sidewalk coverage: Shall not cover more than 50% of the
width of the sidewalk.
         g.   Christmas tree sales.
            (i).   Maximum duration: 45 days.
            (ii).   Location: Shall not be located in or adjacent to any
developed residential area.
            (iii).   Clean-up: Stumps, branches, and other debris shall be
completely removed from site.
         h.   Roadside stands .
            (i).   See §
8.02(Z).
         i.   Garage sales.
            (i).   Maximum number of sales per year: Two.
            (ii).   Location: Residential districts.
            (iii).   Purpose: For sale of items belonging to members of the
household living on the premises where the sale is being conducted.
            (iv).   Permit: A permit shall not be required for garage sales.
   B.   Penalties and enforcement. Any violation of this Ordinance, or any part
thereof, shall be deemed a municipal civil infraction. Upon notice of a
violation, the appropriate township employee shall investigate any violation
and then make a determination as to whether the penally shall be imposed. The
imposition of a penalty for a violation shall not excuse the violation or be
considered a permit to allow the violation to continue. Each day that a
violation exists or continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. If
a municipal civil infraction is imposed, the penalty shall be a fine not to
exceed $100. The Township Supervisor or his/her designated agent is hereby
authorized to write and serve municipal civil infraction tickets. This
municipal civil infraction ticket shall serve as notice of the alleged
violation. Proceedings for the municipal civil infraction shall proceed as
provided in the Township Municipal Civil Infractions Ordinance.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013; Ord. 54, passed 6-11- 2014; Ord. passed 1-8-2020)
§ 2.08 USES NOT OTHERWISE INCLUDED WITHIN A DISTRICT.
   (A)   General requirements. A land use which is not cited by name as a
permitted use in a zoning district may be permitted upon determination by the
Township Board that such use is clearly similar in nature and compatible with
the listed or existing uses in that district. In making such a determination,
the Township Board shall seek the advice and recommendation of the Planning
Commission , and shall consider the following:
      1.   Determination of compatibility. In making the determination of
compatibility, the Township Board shall consider specific characteristics of
the use in question and compare such characteristics with those of the uses
which are expressly permitted in the district. Such characteristics shall
include, but are not limited to, traffic generation, types of service offered,
types of goods produced, methods of operation, and building characteristics.
      2.   Conditions by which use may be permitted. If the Township Board
determines that the proposed use is compatible with permitted and existing uses
in the district, the Board shall then decide whether the proposed use shall be
permitted by right, as a special land use , or as a permitted accessory use .
The proposed use shall be subject to the review and approval requirements for
the district in which it is located. The Township Board shall have the
authority to establish additional standards and conditions under which a use
may be permitted in a district. No use shall be permitted in a district under
the terms of this section if the use is specifically listed as a use permitted
by right or as a special or conditional use in any other district.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 2.09 YARD AND BULK REGULATIONS.
   A.   General regulations. All lots , buildings , and structures shall comply
with the following general yard and bulk regulations unless specifically stated
otherwise in this Ordinance:
      1.   Minimum lot size. Every building hereafter erected on a lot or
parcel of land created subsequent to the effective date of this Ordinance shall
comply with the lot size, lot coverage , and setback requirements for the
district in which it is located. No yards in existence on the effective date of
this Ordinance, shall subsequently be reduced below, or further reduced if
already less than, the minimum yard requirements of this Ordinance.
      2.   Number of principal uses per lot . Only one principal building shall
be placed on a lot of record or parcel in single-family residential districts.
In a single-family site condominium project, only one principal building shall
be placed on each condominium  lot , as defined in
Article 1.00.
      3.   Projections into required yards . Fire escapes, fire towers,
chimneys, platforms, balconies, boiler flues, and other projections shall be
considered part of the building , subject to the setback requirements for the
district in which the building is located. The table below identifies permitted
projections in required yards .
      4.   Unobstructed sight distance. (revised 1/12/2010) No new fence ,
wall, or structure shall be erected or established on any lot that will
obstruct the view of drivers in vehicles approaching an intersection of two
roads or the intersection of a road and a driveway . Fences , walls, and
structures located in the triangular areas described below shall not be
permitted to obstruct cross-visibility between a height of 30 inches and six
feet above the lowest point of the intersecting road (s).
         a.   Unobstructed sight area. The unobstructed triangular area is
described as follows:
            (i).   The area formed at the corner intersection of two public
right-of-way lines, the two sides of the triangular area being 40 feet in
length measured along abutting public rights-of-way lines, and third side being
a line connecting these two sides, or
            (ii).   The area formed at the corner intersection of a public
right-of-way and a driveway , the two sides of the triangular area being ten
feet in length measured along the right-of-way line and edge of the driveway ,
and the third side being a line connecting these two sides.
      5.   Lots adjoining alleys. In calculating the area of a lot that adjoins
an alley for the purposes of applying lot area and setback requirements, one-
half of the width of said alley shall be considered a part of the lot .
      6.   Relocation of existing buildings into the township . No existing
building or structure shall be relocated upon any parcel or lot in Williamstown
Township unless the building or structure conforms to all requirements for the
district in which the building or structure is to be located.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
Table 2.1 Permitted Projections into Required Yards [see §
2.09(A)(3)]
Projection Front Yard Rear Yard Interior Side Street Side Courtyard Additional
                                Yard          Yard                  Regulations
                                Front Rear Interior Street           Additional
Projection                      Yard  Yard Side     Side   Courtyard Regulations
                                           Yard     Yard
   Exterior air conditioning X     P    P        P      P
equipment
   Access drives             P     P    P        P      P         See Note 3
   Arbors; trellises         P     P    P        P      P
                                                                     May project
                                                                     into yard
   Awnings; canopies         P     P    P        P      P         by up to
                                                                     10% of yard
                                                                     depth
   Bay windows               P     P    P        P      P         See Note 1
   Decks (open or enclosed)  P     P    P        P      P
   Eaves (overhanging)       P     P    P        P      P         See Note 1
Fences ; walls                  P     P    P        P      P         Article
                                                                     6.00
Flagpoles                       P     P    P        P      P
Live landscape materials,       P     P    P        P      P
including gardens and hedges
Gutters                         P     P    P        P      P
Laundry drying equipment        X     P    P        X      X
Light standards (ornamental)    P     P    P        P      P
Paved terraces and open porches P     P    P        P      P         See Note 2
Signs (approved)                P     P    P        P      P         Article
                                                                     7.00
Stairways (open, unroofed);     P     P    P        P      P
Steps; Barrier-Free Ramps
Television/radio towers or      X     P    P        P      X         §
antennas                                                             2.22
Windmills; wind energy systems  X     P    X        X      X         §
                                                                     2.16
Window air conditioning units   P     P    P        P      P
X = Not PermittedP = Permitted
Notes on Table:
            1.   Bay windows, window sills, belt courses, cornices, eaves,
overhanging eaves, and other architectural features may project into a required
side yard not more than two inches for each one foot of width of such side yard
, and may extend into any front or rear yard not more than three feet.
            2.   Open paved terraces and open porches may project into a
required rear yard up to ten feet, provided no terrace or porch shall be
located within 25 feet of the rear lot line . Open paved terraces and open,
uncovered porches may project into a front yard up to ten feet.
            3.   Access drives may be placed in the required front or side
yards so as to provide access to rear yards or accessory or attached structures
. Further, any walk, terrace or other pavement serving a like function, shall
be permitted in any required yard , providing the pavement is no higher than
nine inches above grade .
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/71d151aa824b5086a107ad3293684d8be35e4585/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1893.jpg]
   Figure 2.1: Unobstructed Sight Area at Road Corners [see §
2.09(A)(4)]
§ 2.10 STREETS, ROADS, AND OTHER MEANS OF ACCESS.
   A.   Intent. Unimpeded, safe access to parcels of land throughout the
township is necessary to provide adequate police and fire protection, ambulance
services, and other public services, and to otherwise promote and protect the
health, safety, and welfare of the public. The standards and specifications set
forth herein are determined to be the minimum standards and specifications
necessary to meet the above stated intentions.
   B.   Public access required/minimum frontage. The front lot line of all lots
shall abut onto a publicly dedicated road  right-of-way . The required frontage
on an approved road  right-of-way shall be equal to or greater than the minimum
lot width for the district in which the lot is located, as specified in
Article 28.00; except that the minimum frontage of lots that abut the
turnaround at the end of a cul-de-sac shall be equal to or greater than 50% of
the minimum lot width . On lots located on a curve, frontage shall be measured
along a straight line between the two points where the side lot lines intersect
the curved right-of-way line (see drawing). Frontage on a “T” turnaround shall
not be counted toward the minimum road frontage requirements.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/71d151aa824b5086a107ad3293684d8be35e4585/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1895.jpg]
   Figure 2.2: Measurement of Lot Frontage [see §
2.10(B)]
   C.   Access on residential through lots . 
      On through lots in residential districts, the driveway providing the
primary means of vehicular access shall intersect the road on which lot
frontage is greatest.
      However, if the property line abutting the other road has been designated
as the “front lot line ” on an approved lot split application or subdivision
plat , then the driveway providing the primary means of vehicular access shall
intersect the road that abuts said front lot line .
   The Planning Commission may approve a primary means of access that varies
from these requirements upon finding that such access would facilitate traffic
safety (for example, by limiting access on an arterial street ) or achieve
consistency with existing adjacent and nearby residences.
   D.   Road and driveway standards. (revised 2/3/1998) Public roads shall
comply with the requirements of the Ingham County Road Commission or Michigan
Department of Transportation, as applicable. Driveways shall comply with the
following minimum requirements in addition to engineering standards that are
enforced by the township .
      1.   Minimum driveway  setbacks . (added 2/3/98; revised 3/6/01, 1/12/
2010) Driveways shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from any side or rear
property line , unless otherwise specified, except that in R-1 and R-1-
S Districts, Planned Developments , and in Rural Open Space developments ,
driveways shall be set back a minimum of four feet.
      2.   Paving waiver.
         Upon request from an applicant, the Planning Commission may waive
paving requirements for driveways , parking areas, and other vehicle
maneuvering areas upon making a determination that another surfacing material
would be adequate and not in conflict with township planning and zoning
objectives. In making a determination whether an alternative surface material
can be approved, the Planning Commission shall consider the following
considerations: the level, type, and frequency of traffic expected; the types
of vehicles expected to use the facility (recognizing that certain types of
heavy equipment may damage paved surfaces); alternatives to handle stormwater
runoff; and, visibility and appearance of such areas from public roads and
adjacent private property.
         Prior to making an evaluation whether unpaved surfacing should be
permitted, the Planning Commission may require the applicant to provide
engineered plans and specifications. In all cases main vehicle maneuvering
lanes and roads through any development shall be paved. The Planning Commission
may require a performance guarantee and/or recordable document to provide for
re-evaluation and possible completion of paving in the event that the intensity
or nature of the use changes. (added 2/3/1998)
      3.   Residential uses.
Type of Road or Driveway Minimum Width Pavement Required Curb and Gutter
                                                         Required?
Type of     Minimum Pavement
Road or     Width   Required     Curb and Gutter Required?
Driveway
Driveways
to
individual
detached    9 feet  Paved        --
units in a
plat or
site
condominium
Driveways
to
individual
detached    9 feet  Gravel or    --
lots not in         Paved
a plat or
site
condominium
Roads
throughout
a single-
family
attached    Must comply with Ingham County Department of Transportation and
development Roads standards
, including
entrance
roads (see
note 1)
Driveways
to
individual
single-     9 feet  Paved        --
family
attached
units
Roads
throughout
a multiple- 24 feet Paved        Curb and gutter
family
development
Multiple-
family
development 27 feet Paved        Curb and gutter
entrance
roads (see
note 1)
Roads /
driveways           See
within a            Article 4.00
parking
area
Roads in a          See
mobile home         Article
park                16.00
            1.   An entrance road extends from the edge of the public road to
            the edge of any parking lot, intersection, tee, or similar terminus
            within a development .
Notes on    2.   Shared driveways for adjoining single-family parcels may be
Table:      permitted, provided that an access easement is recorded that
            provides for joint use and maintenance of the driveway . Both
            parcels shall comply with minimum road frontage and lot width
            requirements as described in §
            2.10(B). (revised 2/3/1998, 12/1/1998)
 
      4.   Commercial/office /industrial uses.
Type of Road or Driveway Minimum Width Pavement Required Curb and Gutter
                                                         Required?
Type of Road Minimum Pavement Curb and Gutter Required?
or Driveway  Width   Required
Driveways
serving two
or more
parcels      31 feet Paved    Curb and gutter
(e.g.,
office or
industrial
park)
Main access
driveways    31 feet Paved    Curb and gutter
(commercial/
office uses)
Main access
driveways
and internal
circulation
routes for   27 feet Paved    Curb and gutter
three or                      No on-street parking
fewer
buildable
industrial
parcels
Main access
driveways
and internal
circulation
routes for   31 feet Paved    Curb and gutter
four or more
buildable
industrial
parcels
Internal circulation truck    31 feetPavedCurb and gutter
routes
Internal circulation routes   24 feetPavedCurb and gutter
(no trucks)
Entrance roads (see note 1)   31 feetPavedCurb and gutter
Roads /driveways within a     See
parking area                  Article 4.00
             1.   An entrance road extends from the edge of the public road
Notes on     to the edge of any parking lot, intersection, tee, or similar
Table:       terminus within a development .
             2.   Curb and gutter requirements are not applicable for
             access routes through parking lots.
 
      5.   Miscellaneous.
 
Type of Road             Minimum Width Pavement Curb and Gutter Required?
                                       Required
Boulevard entrances with 18 feet each  Paved    Curb and gutter
median (not public)      direction
Service drives (minimum
30-foot setback from     24 feet       Paved    --
parallel public road )
“T” turnaround       Must comply with Ingham County Department of
                         Transportation and Roads standards
Cul-de-sac               Minimum cul-de-sac right-of-way or easement
                         radius is 60 feet.
         1.   Unless otherwise required by the Ingham County Department
         of Transportation and Roads, “T” turnarounds shall only be used
Notes on at the end of stub streets that have no dwelling units fronting
Table:   on them, and a cul-de-sac shall be constructed at the end of all
         dead-end public roads , regardless of whether the roads are
         expected to be extended in the future. (revised 12/1/1998)
 
      6.   Vertical clearance.   (revised 1/12/2010) Driveways and roads needed
for emergency and fire department access in commercial and industrial districts
shall maintain a minimum vertical clearance of 13.5 feet.
   E.   Access across residential district land. No land which is located in a
residential district shall be used for a driveway , walkway, or other access to
any land which is located in a nonresidential district, unless such access is
by way of a public road . This provision is not intended to prevent access
across residential district land to gain access to adjacent agricultural lands.
   F.   Service drives /secondary access roads . If the Planning Commission
determines that proposed or anticipated development will result in an excessive
number of entrance or exit drives onto a public road , thereby creating
potentially hazardous traffic conditions and diminishing the carrying capacity
of the road , the Commission may permit or require construction of service
drives across abutting parcels and generally parallel to the public road to
allow traffic to circulate from one parcel to another without re-entering the
public road . The service drive shall comply with the following requirements:
      1.   An easement shall be recorded with the Ingham County Register of
Deeds allowing free vehicular access across the service drive between adjoining
parcels . The easement shall be in a form acceptable to the Township Board ,
and it shall be recorded prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for
the principal building .
      2.   The service drive shall comply with the design requirements set
forth previously in subsection D. The service drive shall comply with the
engineering and construction standards established by the Township Board .
      3.   In anticipation of a future need for a service drive , the Planning
Commission may require, as a condition of site plan approval, granting of an
easement to allow future vehicular access between adjoining parcels .
      4.   In lieu of a designated service drive , the Planning Commission may
require the development of parking to permit vehicular circulation between
parking lots on contiguous lots or parcels .
      5.   Each property owner shall be responsible for continued maintenance
of the service drive and easement so that it continues to provide a safe means
of access from one parcel to another.
      6.   Backing from parking spaces onto the service drive shall not be
permitted except on a temporary basis.
      7.   The site plan shall indicate the proposed elevation of the service
drive at the property line and the Building Official shall maintain a record of
all service drive elevations so that their grades can be coordinated. Service
drive elevations shall conform to elevations established by the Building
Official .
   G.   Performance guarantee . To assure completion of a service drive in
conformance with the requirements set forth herein, the Building Official may
require the applicant or owner to provide a performance guarantee , in
accordance with §
2.18. (revised 2/3/1998)
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 2.11 GRADING REGULATIONS.
   A.   Intent and scope of requirements. Compliance with the grading
regulations set forth herein shall be required as follows:
      1.   Intent. Grading regulations are established to control the
excavation and filling of land, to assure adequate drainage away from
structures and to a natural or established drainage course, and to assure
protection of trees on sites where grading is to take place. The regulations
set forth herein also establish procedures and requirements for grading
permits, inspection of finished grading operations, and penalties for violation
of the grading regulations.
      2.   Scope of application. (revised 10/1/2002, 1/12/2010) A grading
permit shall be required in all instances where grading, excavating, filling ,
stockpiling, or other alterations to the land exceeding 50 cubic yards on any
one lot are proposed. Grading permits shall be subject to requirements in the
adopted building code of the township , dealing with when permits are required,
exempted work, hazards, grading permit requirements, bonds, cuts and fills,
setbacks , drainage and terracing, erosion control, grading inspection, and
completion of work. The grading permit fee shall be established by resolution
of the Township Board .
   B.   Grading plan.
      1.   Grading plan.    (revised 1/12/2010) In the event that a grading
permit is required, the applicant shall first submit a grading plan for review
and approval. Grading plans submitted in conjunction with site plan review
shall be prepared by a registered professional land surveyor or civil engineer.
Grading plans shall be subject to review and approval by the Township Engineer
or Building Official .
      2.   Grading plan standards. At a minimum, grading plans shall show grade
elevations adjacent to existing and proposed structures and at the nearest side
of structures on adjacent properties, and sufficient existing and proposed
elevations on the site to be altered and on as much of the adjacent property as
is necessary to establish the proposed surface water drainage pattern. If
excavation or filling is proposed, the amount of material to be excavated or
filled shall be indicated on the grading plan. All elevations shall be based on
United States Geological Survey (U.S.G.S.) datum. Elevations and location of
bench marks used for determining elevations shall be shown on the plan.
      3.   Subdivision grading plans. For any proposed subdivision, a grading
plan prepared by a registered land surveyor or civil engineer shall be
submitted with the preliminary subdivision plan. The grading plan shall show
the topography of the area to be platted, the existing drainage pattern, and
the proposed surface water drainage pattern. Drainage easements shall be
provided across private property where necessary for handling surface drainage
from adjacent properties.
   C.   Grading standards. 
      1.   Slope away from buildings . All buildings and structures shall be
constructed at an elevation which provides a sloping grade away from the
building or structure , thereby causing surface water to drain away from the
walls of the building to a natural or established drainage course. Unless
insufficient space exists on a site, a minimum 5% slope away from all sides of
a building or structure shall be provided for a minimum distance of ten feet.
      2.   Runoff onto adjacent properties. New grades shall not be established
that would permit an increase in the runoff of surface water onto adjacent
properties, except through established drainage courses.
      3.   Stockpiling. Stockpiling of soil, sand, clay, gravel, and similar
material shall be prohibited, except where permitted as part of an approved
excavation operation, approved construction project, or approved use in an
industrial district. Aside from these exceptions, all material brought onto a
site in Williamstown Township shall be graded to match the natural grade on
adjoining parcels . These restrictions shall not be construed to prohibit MDNR-
monitored clean-up of contaminated soil.
      4.   Clean fill . Fill material brought into the township shall be free
of contamination from hazardous substances , debris, junk , or waste. The
Building Official may require verification from a qualified soil testing
laboratory that the fill is free of all contamination.
      5.   Removal of soil, sand, clay, gravel, and similar material by a
commercial operation. Businesses engaged in the removal of soil, sand, clay,
gravel, and similar materials, rather than the moving, grading, or leveling of
soil, sand, clay, gravel, or similar materials on a site for the purposes of
preparing the site for building construction or another permitted use shall
comply with the regulations set forth for such uses in §
2.13.
      6.   Excavations of holes. The excavation or continued existence of
unprotected holes, pits, or wells that constitute or are reasonably likely to
constitute a danger or menace to the public health, safety, and welfare is
prohibited. However, this restriction shall not apply to excavations for which
a permit has been acquired from the township , provided such excavations are
properly protected with fencing, guard rails, and warning signs . This section
also shall not apply to lakes , streams, ditches, reservoirs, or other bodies
of water under the jurisdiction of the State of Michigan, County of Ingham,
Township of Williamstown, or other governmental agency.
   D.   Review, inspection, and approval procedures. 
      Grading plans shall be reviewed by the Township Engineer and/or Building
Official . In the event that the grading plan is submitted in conjunction with
a site plan, the Planning Commission shall review the grading plan as a part of
normal site plan review. The Planning Commission shall review all plans for
commercial profit-oriented excavation operations as specified in subsection
C.5. The Building Official shall issue a grading permit after the determination
has been made that the requirements set forth herein and in other applicable
ordinances have been complied with.
      Compliance with a grading plan and permit shall be verified by the
Building Official after visual on-site inspection. Before final inspection and
issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the rough grading must be completed;
final grading shall be completed within six months after a certificate of
occupancy has been issued.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 2.12 LIGHTING.
   A.   Intent. The regulations in this section are intended to require
sufficient lighting for parking areas, walkways, driveways , building
entrances, loading areas, and common areas to ensure the security of property
and safety of persons. These regulations are also intended to prevent the
adverse effects of inappropriate lighting, including glare, light trespass onto
adjoining properties, light pollution and sky glow, and energy waste. These
regulations are also intended to permit and encourage the use of lighting that
complements and enhances the rural environment and natural features of the
township and that promotes energy efficiency and conservation in the township .
(revised 1/12/2010)
   B.   Definitions. Words and phrases used in this section shall have meaning
set forth below. Words and phrases not defined herein but defined in
Article 1.00 shall be given the meanings set forth in
Article 1.00. All other words and phrases shall be given their common, ordinary
meaning, unless context clearly requires otherwise.
      BULB (OR LAMP). The source of electric light (to be distinguished from
the whole assembly, which is called the luminaire). LAMP  is often used to
denote the BULB  and its housing.
      CANDELA (CD). A unit of luminous intensity. One CANDELA  is one lumen per
steradian. Also known as one candlepower.
      DISABILITY GLARE. An intense and blinding light that results in reduced
visual performance and visibility, and is often accompanied by discomfort.
      FILTERED FIXTURE. Light fixtures having glass, acrylic, or translucent
enclosures to filter the light.
      FIXTURE. The assembly that holds the lamp in a lighting system. The
FIXTURE  includes the elements designed to give light output control, such as a
reflector (mirror), refractor (lens), the ballast, housing, and the attachment
parts.
      FLOODLIGHT. A fixture or lamp designed to “flood” an area with light.
      FOOTCANDLE. Illuminance produced on a surface one foot from a uniform
point source of one candela or when one lumen is distributed into an area of
one square foot.
      FULLY SHIELDED FIXTURE. An outdoor lighting fixture that is shielded or
constructed so that all light emitted is projected onto the site and away from
adjoining properties. Light from a fully shielded fixture is not visible from
adjoining properties, and does not cause glare or interfere with the vision of
motorists.
      HIGH PRESSURE SODIUM (HPS) LAMP. High-intensity discharge lamp where
radiation is produced from sodium vapor at relatively high partial pressures
(100 torr).
      INCANDESCENT LAMP. A lamp that produces light by a filament heated to a
high temperature by electric current.
      LASER SOURCE LIGHT. An intense beam of light, in which all photons share
the same wavelength.
      LED LIGHT. A light fixture that uses a light-emitting diode, which is a
semi-conductor diode that emits light when conducting electrical current.
(added 1/12/2010)
      LIGHT TRESPASS. Light falling where it is not wanted or needed (also
called spill light).
      LOW PRESSURE SODIUM (LPS) LAMP. A discharge lamp where the light is
produced by radiation from sodium vapor at a relatively low partial pressure
(about 0.001 torr). A LPS lamp produces monochromatic light.
      LUMEN. Unit of luminous flux; the flux emitted within a unit solid angle
by a point source with a uniform luminous intensity of one candela. One
footcandle is one lumen per square foot. One lux is one lumen per square meter.
      LUMINAIRE. The complete lighting unit, including the lamp, fixture, and
other parts.
      MERCURY VAPOR LAMP. A high-intensity discharge lamp where the light is
produced by radiation from mercury vapor.
      METAL HALIDE LAMP. A high-intensity discharge mercury lamp where the
light is produced by radiation from metal-halide vapors.
      NON-ESSENTIAL LIGHTING. Outdoor lighting which is not required for safety
or security purposes.
      RECESSED CANOPY FIXTURE. An outdoor lighting fixture recessed into a
canopy ceiling so that the bottom of the fixture is flush with the ceiling.
   C.   General requirements.
      1.   Sufficient lighting, as defined by the most recent edition of the
“Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA) Standards,” shall be
required for parking areas, walkways, driveways , building entrances, loading
areas, and public common areas to ensure the security of property and safety of
persons.
      2.   All outdoor lighting shall be shielded as required in §
2.12.D.
      3.   Non-essential lighting shall be turned off after business hours,
leaving only that lighting that is necessary for site security.
      4.   Light trespass from a property shall not exceed 0.5 footcandles at
the property line , measured five feet above the ground.
      5.   To prevent sky glow, lighting shall be shielded or designed to
prevent light to project above a 90 degree horizontal plane (see illustration).
      6.   Uplighting of buildings for aesthetic purposes shall be confined to
the target surface as much as possible.
      7.   Gas station canopies and similar structures shall have fully
recessed lighting fixtures and the total initial lamp output under the canopies
shall be limited to 40 lumens per square foot of canopy.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/71d151aa824b5086a107ad3293684d8be35e4585/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1897.jpg]
   Figure 2.3: Lighting Fixture Orientation and Shielding [see §
2.12(C)(5)]
   D.   Permitted lighting sources and shielding requirements.
Lamp Type Permitted Use Shielding Requirement
Lamp Type                    Permitted Use                Shielding Requirement
                             Street lighting; parking and
High Pressure Sodium;        security area; sports parks,
Low Pressure Sodium          tennis courts; residential   Fully
                             or agricultural security
                             lighting
Metal Halide                 Signage, display and sports
(filtered and in enclosed    lighting, where color        Fully
luminaries only)             rendering is critical
Fluorescent                  Residential lighting,
(warm white or natural lamps internal sign lighting       Fully
preferred)                   (see §
                             7.06, subsection B)
Incandescent, more than 100  Sensor activated residential Fully
watts                        lighting
Incandescent, 100 watts or   Porch lighting and other     None
less                         residential uses
Any light source of 50 watts Any                          None
or less
Glass tubes filled with      Display/advertising          None
neon, argon, or krypton
 
   E.   Height.
      Lighting fixtures shall not exceed a height of 22 feet measured from the
ground level to the centerline of the light source. Fixtures should provide an
overlapping pattern of light at a height of approximately seven feet above
ground level.
      The Planning Commission may modify these height standards in commercial
and industrial districts, based on consideration of the following: the position
and height of buildings , other structures , and trees on the site; the
potential off-site impact of the lighting; the character of the proposed use;
and, the character of surrounding land use. In no case shall the lighting
exceed the maximum permitted building height in the district in which it is
located.
   F.   Sign lighting. Illuminated signs shall comply with the regulations set
forth in
Article 7.00.
   G.   Prohibited lighting.
      1.   Recreational facility lighting. No outdoor recreational facility,
public or private, shall be illuminated after 11:00 p.m. except to conclude a
permitted recreational or sporting event or other activity in progress prior to
11:00 p.m.
      2.   Outdoor building and landscaping lighting. Unshielded illumination
of the exterior of a building or landscaping is prohibited except with
incandescent fixtures having lamps of 100 watts or less.
      3.   Mercury vapor and wall pack lighting.  The installation of mercury
vapor fixtures is prohibited. Wall pack fixtures are also prohibited, except
where the lens is fully shielded.
      4.   Laser source light. The use of laser source light or any similar
high intensity light for outdoor advertising or entertainment, when projected
above the horizontal, is prohibited.
      5.   Searchlights. The operation of searchlights for advertising purposes
is prohibited between 10:00 p.m. and sunrise the following morning.
   H.   Exceptions.
      1.   Fossil fuel light.   (revised 1/12/2010) Fossil fuel light produced
directly or indirectly from the combustion of natural gas or other utility-type
fossil fuels (e.g., gas lamps) is exempt from the provisions of this section.
      2.   Temporary carnival and civic uses. Lighting for permitted temporary
circus, fair, carnival, or civic uses is exempt from the provisions of this
section.
      3.   Construction and emergency lighting. Lighting necessary for
construction or emergencies is exempt from the provisions of this article
provided that said lighting is temporary and is discontinued immediately upon
completion of the construction work or abatement of the emergency.
      4.   Special conditions. Additional exceptions may be permitted, subject
to site plan review, and upon finding that unique or special conditions on the
site warrant the exception .
   I.   Application for a permit.
      1.   Any person applying for site plan approval or for a building ,
electrical, or sign permit to install outdoor lighting fixtures shall submit
evidence that the proposed work will comply with this section.
      2.   The site plan or building , electrical, or sign permit application
shall identify the location, type, height, method of mounting, and intensity of
proposed lighting. If available, the manufacturer’s catalog specifications and
documents, drawings, and certified test reports shall be submitted. The
information submitted shall be sufficiently complete to demonstrate compliance
with Ordinance requirements. (revised 3/6/2001)
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 2.13 SAND, GRAVEL, AND MINERAL EXTRACTION.
   Sand, gravel, coal , topsoil, and mineral deposits are non-renewable natural
resources which are necessary and beneficial to the economy of the township and
the region. The standards in this section are intended to assure removal of
such resources occurs in a manner that is compatible with existing and planned
development of the township and to ensure the proper restoration of the land.
   A.   Review and approval process.
      1.   Permit required. Permits shall be required for all extractive
operations. Permits may be approved for a one year period by the Township Board
after recommendation by the Planning Commission .
         a.   Permit renewal. Unless the owner or operator of the extractive
operation ignores or violates any conditions of approval, the permit may be
renewed for one year periods, subject to the master plan and timetable
requirements in §
2.13(B)(4). If the extractive operations vary from the approved timetable, a
public hearing shall be required prior to permit renewal pursuant to §
29.03(C) to determine if the extractive operation with the new timetable
continues to comply with the standards for special land use approval.
         b.   Exception to permit requirement. A permit shall not be required
for normal land balancing related to building site development , or for
excavation of a basement or building foundation.
      2.   Special land use approval. Proposals for extractive operations shall
be reviewed in accordance with the procedures for special land use review in §
29.03.
      3.   Performance guarantee . Submittal of a performance guarantee , in
accordance with §
2.18, may be required as a condition of approval of any sand, gravel, or other
extractive operation.
      4.   Inspections. To ensure compliance with Ordinance requirements, the
Building Official shall conduct periodic inspections and shall file a written
notice to the permit holder if a violation is found. Thirty days prior to the
renewal date of permit, the Building Official shall file a written report with
the Township Board on the status and compliance of the operation.
      5.   Violations. In the event of deviation from an approved plan, the
Building Official shall notify the permit holder of a violation. Failure to
correct the violation within 30 days shall automatically void any permits
issued, and shall prevent the issuance of new permits until such time as the
violation has been corrected. Appeals from a decision of the Building Official
regarding an alleged violation shall be directed to the Township Board .
      6.   Agreement. Before the issuance of a permit, the applicant and
township shall enter into an agreement stipulating the amount and disposition
of a fee for regulation, inspection, and administration of the special land use
permit. Said fee may be based on the acreage mined or amount of mineral or
other material extracted. The final settlement of the fee shall be specified in
the written agreement.
   B.   Application data requirements. Applications for a permit for sand,
gravel, or other extractive operations shall include the following information,
in addition to all information required as a part of site plan review and
special land use review:
      1.   Aerial photograph. A vertical aerial photograph, enlarged to a scale
equal to one inch equals 200 feet, from an original photograph at a negative
scale no smaller than one inch equals 1,000 feet. The area covered by the
vertical aerial photograph shall include: all land included in the petition;
all contiguous land which is proposed to be used or has been used by the owner
or leasehold applicant for any extraction, treatment or storage; and, all
public roads which can provide first point of access. Each such area or feature
shall be delineated on the aerial.
      2.   Survey. Five copies of a land survey, prepared by an engineer or
surveyor certified by the State of Michigan to prepare such survey, drawn to a
scale of one inch equals 200 feet. This survey shall include the boundary of
the entire tract by courses and distances, boundary of the area where the
extraction is proposed, and the means of vehicular access to the proposed
operation. An estimate of the quantity of excavation shall also be provided.
      3.   Watershed report. A report by a qualified soil scientist, soils
engineer, or geologist regarding the effect the proposed operation will have
upon the watershed. Particular attention shall be focused on the impact on the
water table and groundwater recharge. The report shall indicate if water bodies
are to be created and the anticipated permanence of such.
      4.   Master plan and timetable. A master plan for the extraction of the
natural resource deposits. The plan shall include a timetable for various
stages of the operation and detailed restoration plan indicating how the parcel
will be reused for a use permitted in the zoning district in which the
operation is located. A timetable for extraction and restoration shall be
included for each yearly permit requested; subsequent requests shall include an
evaluation of work completed in the preceding year. The restoration plan shall
specify the proposed use of the parcel , the proposed topography drawn at
contour intervals of two feet, indication of water bodies and other major
physical features, and the delineation of areas intended to be partitioned or
subdivided, including a preliminary subdivision layout.
      5.   Access routes. An explanation of the access routes which will be
used, together with an estimate of the size, weight, and frequency of trips.
The proposed routing shall be submitted to the Ingham County Department of
Transportation and Roads (ICDTR) for review. The township shall report any
circulation or routing problems to the applicant and (ICDTR). After
consultation with the (ICDTR), the township may require use of alternate access
routes or limited use of existing problem routes.
      6.   Information required by outside agencies. All information required
for submittal by state or federal agencies having jurisdiction over the
operation.
      7.   Site plan. A site plan, drawn to scale and sealed by a registered
professional engineer, and including all information required for site plan
review (§
29.02) and special land use review (§
29.03), in addition to the following information:
         a.   Boundaries of the site and adjacent parcels .
         b.   Locations and names of all streams, drains, roads , railroads,
utility lines, and pipelines on or adjacent to the site.
         c.   Location of all structures within 1,000 feet of the boundaries of
the site, present owners and occupants of such structures , and current use of
each structure .
         d.   Location, extent, and depth of proposed extractive operations.
         e.   Location of proposed mines, wastedumps, tailing ponds, sediment
basins, stockpiles, structures , roads , railroads, utilities, and other
permanent or temporary facilities to be used in the extractive operation.
         f.   Estimated depth to groundwater.
      8.   Description of proposed extractive operations. Plans and written
documentation prepared by a registered professional engineer describing the
proposed extractive operation, including the following:
         a.   A description of the material(s) to be extracted.
         b.   A description of the extraction and processing equipment to be
used.
         c.   A description of measures to be taken to control noise and
vibrations from the operation.
         d.   A statement of the hours of operation.
         e.   A description of measures to be taken to buffer or screen the
operation from view.
         f.   Proposed primary travel routes to be used to transport the
extracted material to processing plants or away from the property.
         g.   A description of the plans for topsoil storage.
         h.   A description of probable hydrologic consequences, including
plans to dewater any portion of the mined area, the amount of groundwater
affected and method of disposal, such as, pumping into county drains or other
water bodies.
         i.   A timetable for commencement, duration, and cessation of
extractive operations.
      9.   Reclamation plan. (revised 1/12/2010)
         All extraction areas shall be reclaimed progressively as they are
worked out. Reclaimed sites shall be reasonably natural and inconspicuous,
lacking in any hazards and left in a condition that they can be reused for a
use permitted in the district in which the site is located. All slopes and
banks shall be graded to angles which do not exceed those found in the natural
topography of surrounding areas, and they shall be treated to prevent erosion.
         All applications for extraction operations shall attach a reclamation
plan, which shall include all information required by any state or federal
agency having jurisdiction, as well as the following:
         a.   Description and location of each phase, number of acres included
in each phase, estimated starting and termination dates of each phase and the
amount of time that will be required to complete the entire reclamation
operation.
         b.   Provisions for grading, drainage, (especially agricultural field
tiles) revegetation, and stabilization that will minimize soil erosion,
sedimentation, and public safety problems.
         c.   Description of proposed future land uses.
         d.   Description of plans for disposition of all structures , roads ,
drains or related facilities after cessation of the extractive operation.
         e.   A plan for disposal or treatment of all harmful or toxic
materials found in any formations penetrated by the extractive operation or
produced during the processing of minerals on the site and of chemicals or
materials used during the extractive, processing, or reclamation operations.
         f.   All information required as part of a reclamation plan that is
required by state or federal law, such as the Surface Mining Control and
Reclamation Act, Public Law 95-87.
      10.   Additional information. Any additional information deemed necessary
by the Planning Commission or Township Board to determine the nature of the
operation and its effect on surrounding area to determine compliance with the
requirements set forth herein.
      11.   Compliance with subsection C. A detailed explanation of how the
applicant intends to comply with the operating requirements contained in
subsection C, following.
   C.   Operating requirements. A sand and gravel extraction permit shall not
be issued unless the applicant demonstrates that the operation will comply with
all of the following requirements:
      1.   General requirements. The removal of materials by excavation ,
stripping, mining or another method, and the on-site operations appurtenant to
the extraction, including washing, grading, sorting, crushing, and grinding
operations, shall be carried on within the limits of an area approved for such
activities. All extraction from new pits begun subsequent to the effective date
of this Ordinance shall be washed, graded, and further processed and stored
within the limits of the area approved. No natural resource extracted outside
the limits of this area shall be brought in for washing, grading, or further
processing, except in instances where the Township Board , following Planning
Commission recommendation, finds that such activities will not conflict with
the reasonable use and development of neighboring properties. Resource-related
industries including, but not limited to, concrete batch plants and asphalt
mixing plans, shall not be permitted as a part of the operation unless
specifically approved and regulated as an accessory operation to the principal
permitted use .
      2.   Setbacks. No topsoil, earth, gravel, or sand shall be removed, and
no excavation , washing and stockpiling of extracted material shall be
conducted closer than 300 feet to the outer boundary of the area approved for
extractive operation, or closer than 500 feet to any residentially zoned or
used district. This setback may be reduced upon making the determination that
the operations can still be carried out in a manner that is compatible with
surrounding land use. Extractive operations shall not encroach upon required
setback areas.
      3.   Control of off-site impacts. 
         In order to reduce the effects of airborne dust, dirt, and noise, all
equipment for sorting, crushing, grinding, loading, weighing, and other
operational structures shall not be built closer than 300 feet from any public
street  right-of-way line or adjacent property lines . This setback may be
reduced upon making the determination that the operations can still be carried
out in a manner that is compatible with surrounding use.
         Driveways , parking lots, and loading and unloading areas shall be
paved, oiled, watered, or chemically treated to limit the nuisance caused by
wind blown dust. Trucks hauling extractive materials to or from the site shall
be loaded and covered in accordance with all applicable state and county and
local regulations.
         Private access roads serving the operation shall be paved or treated
to create dust-free surfaces for a distance of 300 feet from any public access
road . Arrangements shall also be made to minimize dust on public access routes
traveled in the township .
      4.   Frontage and access.
         Extractive operations shall be located on parcels having minimum
frontage of 250 feet on an arterial or collector road .
         The Township Board shall approve routes for truck movement in and out
of the facility in order to minimize the wear on public streets , to prevent
hazard and damage to properties and to avoid densely populated residential
areas.
         Entrance ways shall be no closer than 500 feet to the intersection of
the right-of-way of any two public streets .
      5.   Fencing. The entire site shall be fenced with a six-foot high fence
with suitable gates. “KEEP OUT - DANGER” signs shall be posted at 200 foot
intervals along the perimeter. The gate shall be locked at all times when the
site is not in use or when an attendant is not present.
      6.   Slopes. Finished slopes shall be no steeper than three feet
horizontal to one foot vertical (3:1). Where ponded water is created as a
result of extraction, the 3:1 slope shall be extended into the water to a depth
of five feet. The slope requirements shall be met as the work in any one
section of the excavation proceeds. Stockpile slopes shall be no steeper than
45 degrees.
      7.   Fill material. No garbage or refuse of any nature shall be used for
fill . Only the following materials may be used for fill : sand, gravel, clay,
topsoil and other clean earth materials which provide a suitable base for
future building sites.
      8.   Liability. The owner or operator shall maintain liability insurance
with the township named as an insured party, and the township shall be
indemnified and held harmless in respect to any liability and claims which may
arise in conjunction with the extractive and reclamation operations. Proof of
such insurance in the form of a certificate issued by an insurance company
licensed to do business in Michigan shall be submitted to the township . The
policy shall remain in full force and effect during the term of the permit and
renewal, including all reclamation operations.
      9.   Gravel roads . Gravel roads which are within 300 feet of occupied
residences shall not be used for ingress and egress to the excavation site.
However, the owner or operator of the extractive operation may arrange at his
or her expense to have such roads paved, subject to Ingham County Department of
Transportation and Roads approval.
      10.   Removal of structures and equipment. All buildings , structures and
equipment shall be removed within six months after completion of the excavation
, unless otherwise permitted by the Planning Commission .
      11.   Hours of operation. Mining, processing, and reclamation activities
shall occur only on Monday through Saturday during the following times:
         a.   Processing and stockpiling of aggregates shall occur only between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
         b.   Mining or extracting operations shall occur only between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
         c.   Equipment maintenance and repair shall occur only between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
      12.   Top soil replacement. All top soil shall be stockpiled on the site
so that the entire area may be recovered with a minimum of three inches of top
soil when excavating operations are completed. No topsoil shall be removed from
the extraction site or sold. The top soil replacement shall occur immediately
following the termination of extraction operations. All replaced top soil shall
immediately be planted with grass or other plant material acceptable to the
township so as to prevent erosion. Lands under water or in approved beach areas
are excluded from top soil replacement and planting requirements.
      13.   Explosives.     (revised 1/12/2010) Explosives shall be used in
accordance with applicable state and federal regulations.
      14.   Soil erosion and sedimentation control. All extractive operations
shall comply with the soil erosion and sedimentation control requirements of
Ingham County and the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality.
      15.   Lighting. Adequate security lighting shall be provided on the site.
Lighting shall comply with the requirements of §
2.12.
      16.   Pollution control. The proposed extractive operation shall comply
with applicable local, state, or federal environmental and pollution control
laws and standards, including air, water and natural resources protection
standards of the Michigan Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act,
Public Act 451 of 1994, as amended, and applicable standards in
Article 9.00 of this Ordinance. Operations shall not cause pollution of surface
or subsurface water bodies.
      17.   Buffer zone. Where deemed necessary by the Planning Commission , a
berm and/or greenbelt in accordance with
Article 5.00 shall be provided to screen the extractive operation from
residential uses located within 1,000 feet of the operation.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 2.14 JUNKYARDS AND LANDFILLS.
   A.   Junk yards or salvage yards . The following regulations shall apply to
junk yards and salvage yards :
      1.   Setbacks .     (revised 1/12/2010) A minimum setback of 250 feet
shall be maintained between the front property line and the portion of the lot
on which junk materials are placed or stored. All buildings , fencing, and junk
materials shall be set back at least 250 feet from any road or highway  right-
of-way line, and at least 300 feet from any property line which abuts a
residentially-zoned (R-1, R-1-S, RR, RE, AG-SF, RM-1, or MHP) district or
property in residential use.
      2.   Screening. The entire junk yard or salvage yard site shall be
screened with an eight-foot obscuring masonry wall or solid wood fence
constructed in accordance with the
Article 6.00. The wall or fence shall be uniformly painted and maintained in
neat appearance, and shall not have any signs or symbols painted on it.
      3.   Surfacing. All roads , driveways , parking lots, and loading and
unloading areas shall be paved or treated in a manner approved by the Building
Official so as to confine any wind-borne dust within the boundaries of the
site.
      4.   Regulated activities. Open burning shall be prohibited. All fluids
shall be drained from vehicles and disposed of in a proper manner prior to the
vehicles being stored on the site.
      5.   Permits. All required township , county, and state permits shall be
obtained prior to establishing a junkyard.
      6.   Stacking. Junk , automobiles, or other debris shall not be stacked
in a manner such that the material could be visible outside the site. Junkyards
shall not be located in areas where it would be impossible to screen them from
view from adjacent properties or public roads .
   B.   Landfills , dumping and sewage disposal facilities.
      1.   General requirements.
         a.   Design and operation standards. Any such use shall conform to
current standards established by the U. S. Environmental Protection Agency, the
U. S. Department of Agriculture, the Michigan Department of Environmental
Quality and other regulatory agencies.
         b.   Environmental impact assessment. An environmental impact
assessment shall be prepared in accordance with §
2.23 and submitted to the Township Board for review and approval.
      2.   Landfills and dumping.
         a.   Intent. These regulations are established to control the storage,
piling, placing, or dumping of garbage, sewage, refuse, trash, debris, rubbish,
or other waste in the township , including landfills .
         b.   Scope of application. No person shall pile, place, store, dump,
bury, dispose of, or keep in open containers on any land within the township
any garbage, sewage, refuse, trash, debris, rubbish, or other solid waste,
including cans, bottles, waste paper, cartons, boxes, crates, or other
offensive or obnoxious matter, except in strict conformity with the provisions
of this Ordinance. In no instance shall any landfill , dump, parcel of land, or
other facility be used for the disposal of gasoline, tanks containing gasoline,
or hazardous substances , unless the landfill is specifically licensed to
accept such material.
         c.   Exceptions. These provisions shall not prevent the reasonable use
of fertilizers, manure, and similar materials for improvement of land being
lawfully utilized for farming purposes, provided that such use is carried out
in a healthy and sanitary manner without creating a nuisance for the
surrounding area.
      3.   Permit requirements for landfills and dumping.
         a.   Issuance. A permit shall be required in all instances where
landfill or dumping activity is proposed in the township .
         b.   Review procedures. Applications for landfill or dumping permits
shall be reviewed in accordance with the procedures for review of special land
uses in §
29.03. Permits for such uses shall be issued by the Township Board for a one-
year period. Permits may be renewed for one-year periods unless the owner or
operator violates any conditions of approval.
         c.   Performance guarantee . 
            To assure conformance with the requirements specified herein, the
township may require the applicant or owner to provide a performance guarantee
, in accordance with §
2.18. The performance guarantee shall be held in escrow, and may be released to
the applicant in proportion to the work completed on the various restoration
activities, provided an inspection report has been submitted to the Township
Engineer and approved by the Township Board . No more than 90% of the
performance guarantee shall be returned until all work has been completed and
inspected.
            The amount of the performance guarantee shall be reevaluated on an
annual basis when the permit is renewed to ensure that it is adequate to
complete the project as proposed, based on current construction costs.
            The Township Board may approve a performance guarantee that covers
less than the total site, provided that no excavation or dumping may take place
in an area until a performance guarantee has submitted to assure proper
completion of the activities proposed for the area.
         d.   Application requirements. The following information shall be
provided on an application for a landfill or dumping permit:
            (i).   Aerial photography. Vertical aerial photographs of the site,
enlarged to a scale of one inch equals 200 feet. The aerial photograph shall
include all land included in the application, all contiguous land which is
proposed to be used or has been used by the owner or operator, and all
surrounding public roads .
            (ii).   Survey. A metes and bounds survey of the subject site,
prepared by a registered land surveyor and drawn to a scale of one inch equals
200 feet. The survey shall include the boundary of the entire site and
topography of the site at two-foot contour intervals.
            (iii).   Engineering report. An engineering report by a qualified
soil scientist, soils engineer, or geologist regarding the effect of the
proposed operation on the watershed of the area. Particular attention should be
focused on the potential pollution or contamination of groundwater.
            (iv).   Master plan . A detailed plan for the landfill , including
a timetable for various stages of the operation. A specific timetable for
dumping and restoration shall be included with each annual permit request.
            (v).   Restoration plan. A detailed restoration plan indicating how
the area will be re-used in a manner compatible with the Township Master Plan .
The restoration plan shall include the proposed use of the restored area and
the proposed topography drawn at two-foot contour intervals.
            (vi).   Operating specifications. A detailed description of
operating procedures, so as to demonstrate conformance with the standards in
subsection 4, following.
      4.   Standards. All landfill and dumping activity shall be subject to the
following standards:
         a.   Limits of approval. All landfill and dumping activities shall be
carried on within the boundary limits approved for such activities.
         b.   Setbacks. Landfilling, dumping, and stockpiling shall not be
conducted closer than 100 feet to the approved outer boundary for the
operation, and not closer than 500 feet to any property line that abuts a
residentially zoned or used district. The required setback area may be used
only for access roads and greenbelt plantings and landscaping . All equipment
for sorting, processing, storing, weighing, and other operations shall be
located at least 300 feet from any public street  right-of-way line or adjacent
property line .
         c.   Noise, dust, debris. All processing equipment and activities and
all storage areas shall be treated, covered, muffled, or otherwise controlled
to prevent excessive noise, dust, debris, or other impacts beyond the property
line . Any trucks hauling material to or from the site shall be enclosed or
covered to prevent materials from blowing or falling out of the trucks.
         d.   Road treatment. All private access roads shall be paved or
treated to create a dust-free surface. The operator shall work with the
township to minimize dust on public access roads serving the site.
         e.   Frontage and access. The subject site shall have a minimum
frontage of 250 feet on an arterial or collector road .
         f.   Fencing. Landfill and dumping operations shall comply with the
following fencing requirements:
            (i).   Where slopes steeper than 30 degrees exist for a period of
one month or more, the proposed operation shall be enclosed with a six-foot
high cyclone fence or similarly effective barrier located at least 50 feet
outside the edge of the excavation area.
            (ii).   Where collection of water greater than one foot in depth
occurs for a period of one month or more in an area occupying 200 square feet
or more, fencing shall be required as previously noted.
         g.   Slopes. Finished slopes shall not exceed a four to one grade
(four feet horizontal per one foot vertical). These requirements shall be
complied with as each phase of the excavation or dumping proceeds. The finished
slopes shall be achieved within 12 months after work has begun on any section.
         h.   Topsoil and seeding. Sufficient topsoil shall be stockpiled so
that a minimum of two feet of topsoil will be placed on the top of the finished
operation. The topsoil shall be planted immediately with grass or other
groundcover, subject to approval by the Township Board .
         i.   Berms. A ten foot high berm with side slopes of no greater than
four on one grade shall be required around any active cell which is adjacent to
a road or exterior property line . This requirement may be waived when the
existing topography or other screening exits that would accomplish the purpose
of the berm .
      5.   Violations. To ensure compliance with these regulations, the
Building Official shall conduct periodic inspections. In the event that a
violation is found, the Building Official shall send a written notice to the
permit holder. Failure to correct the violation within 30 days shall
automatically void the permit. No new permits shall be issued until the
violation has been corrected.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 2.15 SAFETY PROVISIONS.
   A.   Public service access. All structures shall be provided with adequate
access for fire, police, sanitation, and public works vehicles.
   B.   Fire protection. All structures shall be provided with adequate fire
protection, which may include adequate water supply for fire fighting purposes,
adequate internal fire suppression system, use of fire walls and fire-proof
materials, and other fire protection measures deemed necessary by the Township
Fire Chief or Building Official .
      1.   Fire protection systems. The Fire Chief or Building Inspector shall
have the authority to require fire protection systems installed in any zoning
district .
      2.   Site development standards. To facilitate fire protection during
site preparation and construction of buildings , consideration shall be given
to the following:
         a.   If public water is available, water mains and fire hydrants shall
be installed prior to construction above the foundation. Hydrants shall be
spaced to provide adequate fire fighting protection for all buildings and uses,
subject to applicable codes and review by the township officials.
         b.   Prior to construction of buildings and other large structures , a
hard surfaced roadbed shall be provided to accommodate access of heavy fire
fighting equipment to the immediate job site at the start of construction. The
roadbed shall be maintained until all construction is completed or until
another means of access is constructed.
         c.   Free access from the street to fire hydrants and to outside
connections for standpipes, sprinklers, or other fire extinguishing equipment,
whether permanent or temporary, shall be provided and maintained at all times.
         d.   The building permit holder shall provide scheduled daily cleanup
of scrap lumber, paper products, corrugated cardboard and other debris.
Construction debris shall be disposed of in accordance with methods approved by
the Building Official .
   C.   Excavations and holes. Excavations and holes created in conjunction
with a construction project shall be adequately barricaded and illuminated if
not filled in at the end of the working day. Where such excavations or holes
are located in a public right-of-way , it shall be the responsibility of the
contractor to notify the Meridian Township Police of their existence.
   D.   Building demolition. Before a building or structure is demolished, the
owner, wrecking company, or person who requests the demolition permit shall
notify all utilities providing service to the building . A demolition permit
shall not be issued until all utilities have provided notification that service
has been properly terminated.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 2.16 EXCEPTIONS.
   A.   Essential services . 
      Essential services , as defined in
Article 1.00, shall be permitted as authorized and regulated by franchise
agreements and federal, state, and local laws and ordinances, it being the
intention of this Ordinance to permit modification to regulations governing lot
area, building or structure height, building or structure placement, and use of
land in the township when strict compliance with such regulations would not be
practical or feasible.
      Although essential services may be exempt from certain regulations,
proposals for construction of essential services shall still be subject to site
plan review and special land use review, it being the intention of the township
to achieve efficient use of the land and alleviate adverse impact on nearby
uses or lands. Essential services shall comply with all applicable regulations
that do not affect the basic design or essential operation of said services.
   B.   Exceptions to height standards. The height limitations of this
Ordinance shall not apply to chimneys, church spires, public monuments,
wireless transmission towers, farm buildings , water towers, and flag poles,
provided that the following requirements are complied with:
      1.   Windmills. The maximum height of windmills used for pumping water to
farm uses shall be 35 feet, provided that the windmill is set back from all
property lines a distance equal to the height of the windmill. Windmills shall
be located in the rear yard of a residential district, but may be located in
the non-required front yard of an agricultural district if necessitated by the
configuration of farm buildings and uses. Windmills for the generation of
electricity shall be subject to the standards of §
8.02, subsection KK, Wind Energy Systems . (revised 10/7/2008)
      2.   Wireless communications facilities. The maximum height of a wireless
communication facility tower shall be 120 feet, as specified in §
8.02, subsection V.3. (added 1/12/2010)
      3.   Flagpoles. Flagpoles in residential and agricultural districts shall
not exceed 25 feet in height. Flagpoles in nonresidential districts shall not
exceed 40 feet in height. (added 1/12/2010)
      4.   Variances. Variances from height standards may be sought from the
Zoning Board of Appeals . In considering such a request, the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall consider the character of the surrounding uses, the height of
surrounding structures , and potential detriment to the health, safety, or
general welfare of surrounding properties. (revised 10/7/2008)
   C.   Voting place. The provisions of this Ordinance shall not be construed
to interfere with the temporary use of any property as a voting place in
connection with a public election.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 2.17 SIDEWALKS.
   The Planning Commission may require sidewalks as a condition of site plan
approval where deemed necessary to facilitate safe pedestrian and non-motorized
travel. Sidewalks shall be subject to the requirements in the Township’s
Sidewalk Ordinance.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 2.18 PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE.
   A.   Intent and scope of requirements.
   To ensure compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance and any
conditions imposed there under, the Planning Commission or Township Board may
require that a performance guarantee be deposited with the Township to insure
faithful completion of improvements, in accordance with Section 505 of the
Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act 110 of 2006, as amended. (revised 10/
3/2006)
   Improvements for which the township may require a performance guarantee
include, but are not limited to, landscaping , berms , walls, lighting,
driveways and parking, acceleration/deceleration lanes, traffic control
devices, sidewalks, and land reclamation activities.
   B.   General requirements. (revised 1/12/2010) The performance guarantee
 shall meet the following requirements:
      1.   The performance guarantee shall be in the form of an insurance bond,
an irrevocable bank letter of credit, or cash escrow. Any such performance
guarantee shall not have an expiration date and shall include a provision that
calls for notification of the township if the bond is canceled. If the
applicant posts a letter of credit, the credit shall require only that the
township present the credit with a sight draft and an affidavit signed by the
Township Supervisor attesting to the township 's right to draw funds under the
credit. If the applicant posts a cash escrow, the escrow instructions shall
provide that the escrow agent shall have a legal duty to deliver the funds to
the township whenever the Township Supervisor presents an affidavit to the
agent attesting to the township 's right to receive funds whether or not the
applicant protests that right.
      2.   The performance guarantee shall be submitted at the time of issuance
of the permit authorizing the activity or project. If appropriate based on the
type of performance guarantee submitted, the township shall deposit the funds
in an interest bearing account in a financial institution with which the
township regularly conducts business.
      3.   The amount of the performance guarantee shall be sufficient to cover
the estimated cost of the improvements for which the performance guarantee is
required. The applicant shall provide an itemized schedule of estimated costs
to complete all such improvements. The exact amount of the performance
guarantee shall be determined by the Building Official .
      4.   The entire performance guarantee shall be returned to the applicant
following inspection by the Building Official and a determination that the
required improvements have been completed satisfactorily. The performance
guarantee may be released to the applicant in proportion to the work completed
on various elements, provided that a minimum of 10% shall be held back on each
element until satisfactory completion of the entire project.
      5.   An amount not less than 10% of the total performance guarantee may
be retained for a period of at least one year after installation of landscape
materials to insure proper maintenance and replacement, if necessary. This
amount shall be released to the applicant upon certification by the Zoning
Administrator that all landscape materials are being maintained in good
condition.
   C.   Unsatisfactory completion of improvements.
   Whenever required improvements are not installed or maintained within the
time stipulated or in accordance with the standards set forth in this
Ordinance, the township may complete the necessary improvements itself or by
contract to an independent developer, and assess all costs of completing said
improvements against the performance guarantee . Prior to completing said
improvements, the township shall notify the owner, site plan review applicant,
or other firm or individual responsible for completion of the required
improvements.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013; Ord. 59, passed 8-13-2014)
§ 2.19 TRASH REMOVAL AND COLLECTION.
   A.   Standards for siting and screening of trash dumpsters. Dumpsters may be
permitted or required as accessory to any use other than single- and two-family
residential uses, subject to the following conditions:
      1.   Location. Dumpsters shall be located in the rear yard , provided any
such dumpster shall not encroach on a required parking area, is clearly
accessible to servicing vehicles, and is located at least ten feet from any
building . Dumpsters shall comply with the setback requirements for the
district in which they are located, and shall be located as far as practicable
from any adjoining residential district.
      2.   Concrete pad. Dumpsters shall be placed on a concrete pad. The
concrete pad should extend a minimum of three feet in front of the dumpster
enclosure.
      3.   Screening. (revised 1/12/2010) Dumpsters shall be screened from view
from adjoining property and public streets and thoroughfares . Dumpsters shall
be screened on three sides with a permanent building , decorative masonry wall,
wood fencing, or earth mound, not less than six feet in height or at least one
foot above the height of the enclosed dumpster, whichever is taller.
      4.   Wood screening standards. If wood fencing is selected as the desired
dumpster screening alternative, the following standards shall apply:
         a.   Materials. Only solid No. 1 pressure-treated wood shall be
permitted.
         b.   Posts. Posts shall be set in concrete 42 inches below grade
level. Two types of posts shall be permitted:
            (i).   6-inch x 6-inch pressure-treated wood, or
            (ii).   3-inch diameter galvanized steel posts.
      5.   Bollards. Bollards (concrete filled metal posts) or similar
protective devices shall be installed at the opening to prevent damage to the
screening wall or fence .
      6.   Site plan requirements. The location and method of screening of
dumpsters shall be shown on all site plans and shall be subject to the approval
of the Planning Commission .
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 2.20 FLOODPLAINS.
   A.   Purpose.  It is the purpose of this section to significantly reduce
hazards to persons and damage to property as a result of flood conditions in
Williamstown Township, and to comply with the provisions and requirements of
the National Flood Insurance Program, as constituted in accord with the
National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, and subsequent enactments and the rules
and regulations promulgated in furtherance of this program by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency. Further, the objectives of this section include:
      1.   The protection of human life, health, and property from the
dangerous and damaging effects of flood conditions;
      2.   The minimization of public expenditures for flood control projects,
rescue and relief efforts in the aftermath of flooding, repair of flood damaged
public facilities and utilities, and the redevelopment of flood damaged homes,
neighborhoods, commercial, and industrial areas;
      3.   The prevention of private and public economic loss and social
disruption as a result of flood conditions;
      4.   The maintenance of stable development patterns not subject to the
blighting influence of flood damage;
      5.   To ensure that the public has access to information indicating the
location of land areas subject to periodic flooding; and
      6.   To preserve the ability of floodplains to carry and discharge a base
flood .
   B.   Delineation of flood hazard area.
      1.   The regulations in this section apply to the flood hazard area. The
boundaries of the flood hazard area, for the purposes of these regulations,
shall coincide with the boundaries of the 100-year flood area delineated on the
Flood Boundary and Floodway Map for Williamstown Township (dated 8/16/11). This
map is adopted by reference, appended, and declared to be a part of this
Ordinance. The most recent base flood elevation data received from the Federal
Emergency Management Agency shall take precedence over data from other sources.
      2.   Where there are disputes as to the location of a flood hazard area
boundary, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall resolve the dispute in accord with
§
29.05.
      3.   In addition to other requirements of this Ordinance, compliance with
the requirements of this section shall be necessary for all development
occurring within the flood hazard area. If there is a conflict between the
requirements of this section and other requirements of this Ordinance or any
other ordinance, the requirement that furthers the objectives of this section
to the greatest extent shall apply.
   C.   Permitted uses in the flood hazard area. Within the flood hazard area,
no land shall be used except for one or more of the following uses, which have
a low flood damage potential and present no, or minimal obstruction to flood
flows. Such uses are permitted to the extent that they are not prohibited by
any other ordinance and provided they do not require new structures , fill , or
storage of materials or equipment, unless specifically permitted by the
regulations herein. No use shall in any manner affect the capacity of the
channels or floodways of any tributary to the main stream, drainage ditch, or
any other drainage facility or system.
      1.   Agriculture, pasture land, and animal grazing.
      2.   Site grading.
      3.   Harvesting of a native or wild crop permitted by law such as wild
rice, marsh hay, berries, and seeds.
      4.   Harvesting of trees.
      5.   Parks, picnic areas, playgrounds, playfields, athletic fields, golf
courses , par three golf courses , golf driving ranges, bridle paths, nature
paths, and trails.
      6.   Wildlife preserves.
      7.   Fishing, trapping, and hunting in compliance with current laws and
regulations.
      8.   Hunting and conservation clubs , and noncommercial archery, rifle,
and shooting ranges.
      9.   Historic sites and structures .
      10.   Swimming beaches, fishing, and boating docks in accord with the
provisions of Part 301 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection
Act, Michigan Public Act 451 of 1994, being M.C.L.A. §§ 324.30101 through
324.83109, as amended.
      11.   Required open space or lot area for permitted uses that are outside
of the flood hazard area.
      12.   Uses incidental to single-family dwellings , including lawns,
gardens, and play areas.
      13.   The following accessory buildings , structures , and uses are
permitted, subject to the requirements that generally apply to such accessory
buildings , structures , and uses in §
2.03: off-street parking, streets , roads , bridges, outdoor play equipment,
sheds and garages, boathouses, boat hoists, utility lines, pumphouses, bank
protection structures , signs , fences , and similar outdoor equipment and
appurtenances, provided each of the following requirements are met:
         a.   Any such accessory building , structure , or use shall not cause
an increase in water surface elevation, obstruct flow, or reduce the
impoundment capacity of the floodplain .
         b.   All equipment, buildings and structures shall be anchored to
prevent flotation and lateral movement.
         c.   Lot coverage of an accessory structure shall not exceed 500
square feet.
         d.   Compliance with these requirements shall be certified by a
licensed engineer.
      14.   Extraction of sand, gravel, and other materials, provided that the
owner and/or operator of the extractive operation demonstrates to the
satisfaction of the Township Board that no threat of ground water or surface
water contamination will result from any part of the operation (including, but
not limited to mining, processing, sorting, operation of vehicles and
equipment, fueling, or any other part of the operation).
   D.   Filling and dumping. Dredging and fill and/or dumping or backfilling
with any material in any manner is prohibited unless through compensating
excavation and shaping of the floodplain , the flow and impoundment capacity of
the floodplain will be maintained or improved, and unless all applicable state
regulations are met including but not limited to regulations set forth in Parts
31, 301, 303 and 315 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act,
Michigan Public Act 451 of 1994, being M.C.L.A. §§ 324.3101 through 324.3134,
324.30101 through 324.30113, 324.30301 through 324.30329, and 324.31501 through
324.31529, as amended.
   E.   Standards for flood hazard areas.
      1.   Except as noted in subsection C, all new construction Shall be
prohibited in the flood hazard area. Substantial improvements to existing
structures shall be prohibited in the flood hazard area, except where the
improvements would clearly lessen the impact of the structure on the floodplain
.
      2.   No existing building or structure shall be converted, or
substantially improved or replaced unless the lowest floor, including the
basement , is elevated to or above the base flood level.
      3.   No existing building or structure shall be converted, or
substantially improved or replaced, and no land shall be filled or building or
structure used in a flood hazard area unless the proposed improvements are in
full compliance with the Zoning Ordinance. Any proposed conversion, substantial
improvement, or replacement of an existing structure shall also comply with
Appendix Chapter 31, Division I, of the Uniform Building Code, involving flood-
resistant construction. Approval shall not be granted until permits have been
submitted from the Department of Environmental Quality under authority of Part
31 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, Michigan Public
Act 451 of 1994, being M.C.L.A §§ 324.3101 through 324.3134, as amended; the
Ingham County Drain Commission, and Ingham County Department of Health.
      4.   Relocation of a building or structure may be permitted only where
the relocation would clearly lessen the impact of the structure on the
floodplain .
      5.   All public utilities and facilities shall be designed, constructed,
and located to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
      6.   Land shall not be divided in a manner that creates parcels or lots
which cannot be used in conformance with the requirements of this section.
      7.   The flood-carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse
not subject to state or federal regulations designed to insure flood carrying
capacity shall be maintained.
      8.   Available flood hazard data from federal, state, or other sources
shall be used to determine compliance with this section. Data furnished by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency shall take precedence over data from other
sources.
      9.   Developers of substantially improved or relocated structures within
the flood hazard area shall submit written documentation to the Building
Official indicating:
         a.   The elevation of the lowest floor in the structure , including
basement .
         b.   The elevation to which a structure has been floodproofed, if
floodproofing methods have been employed.
      10.   Proposed specifications and as-built drawings shall be kept on
record and made available for public inspection and for use in determining
flood insurance risk premium rates.
      11.   When floodproofing measures are employed, a licensed engineer or
architect shall certify that the methods used are adequate to withstand the
flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and any other
factors associated with the intermediate regional floodplain elevation. Such
certification shall indicate the elevation to which the structure is
floodproofed.
      12.   Improvements made to existing structures , including mobile homes ,
shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation and lateral movement, and shall
be constructed with flood resistant materials and methods.
      13.   If new and replaced utility and sanitary facilities must be located
below the 100-year flood elevation, they shall be constructed so as to be
watertight, to resist hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and to be resistant to
the effects of buoyancy. All measures to flood proof utility and sanitary
facilities are subject to approval of the Township Engineer .
      14.   On-site waste disposal systems, such as septic tanks and leach
fields, and service facilities, such as electrical and heating equipment, shall
not be located in a floodplain .
      15.   The application or discharge of persistent toxic compounds whose
direct or indirect effects through residuals have a half-life greater than six
months onto land within the flood hazard area shall not be permitted.
      16.   Fill shall be protected from erosion by rip-rap, vegetative cover,
bulkheading, or other appropriate technique approved by the Ingham County Drain
Commissioner.
      17.   Should any watercourse relocation or alteration be proposed,
notification of said change in the watercourse shall be sent by the developer
to adjacent affected communities, the Michigan Department of Environmental
Quality, and the Federal Emergency Management Agency. Such modifications shall
not impair the flow and impoundment capacity of the floodplain .
      18.   In no case shall any permanent structure be erected closer than 50
feet to the banks of the Red Cedar River or to the center of any open county
drain. The banks of the Red Cedar River shall be determined by legal survey.
The center of public drains shall be determined from legal descriptions which
are on public record.
      19.   New subdivisions and other developments shall be designed and
located to minimize flood damage within the flood hazard area, and to prevent
adverse impact in the flood hazard area as a result of chemical contamination
(for example, from fertilizer, herbicide, and pesticide usage; tree cutting;
expanding impervious surface area, etc.). Public utilities in subdivisions,
including sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, shall be located and
designed to minimize potential flood damage.
      20.   Where relocation of an existing structure is permitted, the
structure shall be placed on the site so as to minimize obstruction to the flow
of floodwaters; accordingly, whenever possible, the structure shall be placed
with its longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of flood flow.
      21.   No approval shall be granted for the substantial improvement or
relocation of existing structures , or development of any kind within the
floodway hazard area when such improvement, relocation, or development would
cause any increase in flood level associated with a 100-year flood.
   F.   Disclaimer of liability. Approval of the use of land under this section
shall not be considered a guarantee or warranty of safety from flood damage.
Any such approval shall not be considered a guarantee or warranty that areas
outside the flood hazard area will be free from flood damage.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 2.21 SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL.
   A.   Scope of requirements. Any development in Williamstown Township shall
comply with the Standards and Specifications for Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control as adopted by the Ingham County Soil Conservation District, as well as
the standards set forth in this section. All site plans, shall include
sufficient information to demonstrate compliance with the soil erosion and
sediment control standards of the Ingham County Soil Conservation District. The
applicant shall bear the full responsibility for the installation and
construction of all such required erosion control measures.
   B.   Information requirements. The following information shall be submitted
to the township on or with the site plan for the entire tract of land, whether
or not the tract will be developed in stages:
      1.   A boundary line survey of the site on which the work is to be
performed.
      2.   General topographic and soil conditions of the site.
      3.   Location and description of existing and proposed development .
      4.   Plans and specifications for proposed soil erosion and sedimentation
control measures to be implemented, based on standards and specifications of
the Ingham County Soil Conservation District.
      5.   A schedule indicating the anticipated starting and completion dates
of development .
   C.   Design standards. In addition to the Standards and Specifications for
Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control promulgated by the Ingham County Soil
Conservation District, the following design standards shall be used to provide
effective control of soil erosion and sedimentation:
      1.   The development plan shall complement the topography and soils on
the site so as to minimize erosion potential.
      2.   Permanent vegetation and improvements such as streets , storm sewers
or other features of the development , capable of carrying storm runoff in a
safe manner, shall be scheduled for installation prior to removing the
vegetative cover from an area, if feasible.
      3.   Where feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained where it aids
in soil erosion and sedimentation control.
      4.   The smallest practical area of land shall be exposed at any one time
during development , for the shortest practical period of time.
      5.   Soils exposed during construction shall be protected with temporary
vegetation, mulching, or other protection.
      6.   Sediment basins (debris basins, desilting basins, or silt traps)
shall be installed and maintained to remove sediment from run-off waters from
land undergoing development .
      7.   Provisions shall be made to accommodate the increasing run-off
caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and after development .
      8.   Permanent vegetation and soil erosion control devices shall be
installed as soon as practical during development .
   D.   Maintenance of soil erosion and sedimentation control. Individuals or
developers carrying out soil erosion and sediment control measures under this
Ordinance, and all subsequent owners of property on which such measures have
been installed, shall adequately maintain all permanent erosion control
measures, devices, and plantings in effective working condition.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 2.22 RECEPTION ANTENNA FACILITIES.
   In all zoning districts the installation of reception antenna facilities
shall be permitted as an accessory use , subject to the provisions in this
section.
   A.   Purpose. The purposes of this section are as follows:
      1.   To provide reasonable regulations for the placement of reception
antenna facilities.
      2.   To promote safety and prevent dangers to persons and property
resulting from accidents involving antenna facilities that may become dislodged
and fall due to wind load, snow load, or other forces.
      3.   To require screening of ground-mounted facilities and to minimize
the visibility of roof or structure mounted facilities in the interest of
maintaining the high architectural and aesthetic qualities of the township and
in the interest of maintaining and preserving property values.
   B.   Ground-mounted or tower-mounted antennas. Ground-mounted or tower-
mounted antennas shall be subject to the following conditions:
      1.   The maximum height of any part of a ground-mounted or tower-mounted
antenna shall be the minimum height necessary to achieve adequate reception.
(revised 1/12/2010)
      2.   Ground-mounted or tower-mounted antennas shall comply with the
setback requirements for the district in which they are located, and shall not
be located in front yards . However, an antenna may be located in the front
yard if suitable reception cannot be achieved in any other location on the
site, and provided that the antennas in the front yard are screened as noted in
the following subsection 3.
      3.   Ground-mounted or tower-mounted antennas shall be obscured from view
from adjacent properties and from any public road by a screen wall, fence ,
evergreen plantings, or a combination thereof in compliance with township
ordinances, provided that screening shall not be required that would
unreasonably prevent reception.
   C.   Roof-mounted antennas. Antennas mounted on a roof of a building shall
be subject to the following regulations:
      1.   The maximum length and width of the antenna facility itself shall be
eight feet. Antennas mounted on a building shall not exceed the minimum height
necessary to achieve adequate reception, but in no case shall a building -
mounted antenna be permitted to extend more than 20 feet above the roof line of
the building to which it is attached. (revised 1/12/2010)
      2.   Roof-mounted antennas shall be permitted on the side of building
facing a road only if there is no other option available to achieve adequate
reception.
      3.   Roof or structure -mounted antennas shall comply with the setback
requirements for the district in which they are located.
   D.   General requirements. All antennas shall comply with the following
regulations:
      1.   Antennas shall not be solid sheet or panel construction and shall
not be used as a sign or message board. Antennas shall be painted a flat grey
or other color to minimize visibility.
      2.   Permits required by the adopted building or electrical code shall be
obtained prior to construction of an antenna. The applicant shall submit a site
plan indicating the exact location where the antenna will be located, plus
electrical and structural plans and documentation.
      3.   All wiring to the antenna shall be installed underground.
      4.   In the event that approval is requested for an antenna that is
higher than the minimum standards specified in this section, or if other
variations from the required standards are proposed, documentation shall be
provided demonstrating the need for such variations in order to achieve
adequate reception.
      5.   Notwithstanding the setback requirements specified previously in
this section, antennas with a wind resistance surface of seven square feet or
more and all open element and monopole antennas shall be set back from all
property lines a minimum distance equal to 30% of the height of the antenna.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 2.23 IMPACT ASSESSMENT.
   A.   Intent. The purpose of an impact assessment is to assess the
developmental, ecological, social, economic, and physical impact from a
proposed development on and surrounding the development site, and to determine
if a proposed use will be in compliance with the site development and
performance standards set forth in this Ordinance. Where required, preparation
of the impact assessment shall be the responsibility of the applicant. The
applicant shall use qualified personnel to complete the impact assessment,
which shall address the following issues, at minimum:
      1.   Water, noise, and air pollution associated with the proposed use.
      2.   Effect of the proposed use on public utilities.
      3.   Historic and archeological significance of the site and adjacent
properties.
      4.   Displacement of people and other land uses by the proposed use.
      5.   Alteration of the character of the area by the proposed use.
      6.   Effect of the proposed use on the township ’s tax base and adjacent
property values.
      7.   Compatibility of the proposed use with existing topography, and
topographic alterations required.
      8.   Impact of the proposed use on surface and groundwater.
      9.   Operating characteristics and standards of the proposed use.
      10.   Proposed screening and other visual controls.
      11.   Impact of the proposed use on traffic.
      12.   Impact of the proposed use on flora and fauna.
      13.   Negative short-term and long-term impacts, including duration and
frequency of such impacts, and measures proposed to mitigate such impacts.
   B.   Information required. Where required, an impact assessment shall
contain all applicable information that is required for conceptual review of
planned development , as set forth in §
29.04.
   C.   Evaluation of the impact assessment. The Planning Commission and
Township Board shall consider the criteria listed below in their evaluation of
an impact assessment. Failure to comply with any of the criteria shall be
sufficient justification to deny approval of the application. The Township
Board and Planning Commission shall determine that the proposed use:
      1.   Will be harmonious with and in accordance with the general
objectives of the Master Plan ;
      2.   Will be designed, constructed, operated, and maintained in harmony
with the existing or future neighboring uses;
      3.   Will not be hazardous or disturbing to existing or future
neighboring uses;
      4.   Will represent a substantial improvement to property in the
immediate vicinity and to the community as a whole;
      5.   Will be served adequately by essential public services and
facilities, such as highways , streets , drainage structures , police and fire
protection, and refuse disposal, or persons or agencies responsible for the
establishment of the proposed use shall be able to provide adequately for such
services;
      6.   Will not create excessive additional requirements at public cost for
public facilities and services, and will not be detrimental to the economic
welfare of the community; and
      7.   Will not involve uses, activities, processes, materials, equipment,
and conditions of operations that will be detrimental to any persons, property,
or the general welfare by reason of excessive smoke, fumes, glare, noise,
vibration, or odors.
   D.   Applicability of other standards and ordinances. Approval of the impact
assessment shall not relieve the project’s sponsor from complying with other
land development standards of the Zoning Ordinance, or with any other township
ordinance, or with any other applicable local, state, or federal law or
regulation.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 2.24 WETLAND BUFFER REGULATIONS.
   A.   Legislative authority and scope of regulations. The authority for
requiring permits and regulating activities within upland adjacent to wetlands
(wetland buffers ) is derived from Article 4, Section 52 of the Michigan
Constitution and the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act 110 of 2006,
being M.C.L.A. § 125.3204, as amended.
      It is unlawful to conduct or maintain any regulated activity or use
within a regulated wetland buffer of a regulated wetland without full
compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance.
   B.   Activities requiring a wetland buffer area use permit. It shall be
unlawful for any person to conduct any of the following activities in a wetland
buffer area of a regulated wetland without first obtaining a wetland buffer
area use permit in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance:
      1.   Filling , grading, and dredging.
         a.   Depositing or permitting fill material to be deposited where the
total amount of fill exceeds five cubic yards .
         b.   Grading that results in displacement of more than five cubic
yards of soil material.
         c.   Dredging, removing, or permitting the removal of more than five
cubic yards of soil material.
         d.   The location, depth, and method of any such filling , grading,
and dredging shall be subject to township approval and monitoring to assure
minimal impact on the buffer and associated wetland .
      2.   Draining, or causing to be drained through artificial means any
water into or from a wetland .
      3.   Diverting, constructing, or impeding the flow of surface runoff
water.
      4.   Locating or constructing a septic system within a wetland buffer .
      5.   Construction of a building or other structure that diminishes the
ability of the buffer area to function.
      6.   Use of fertilizers, herbicides, and/or other chemicals or
contaminants that impede or accelerate the growth and/or functioning of native
vegetation within the wetland buffer area.
      7.   Burning, other than for commercial agricultural purposes or
ecological restoration purposes, and subject to the Township's Burn Ordinance.
   C.   Permissible activities. The following uses shall be allowed in a
wetland buffer without a permit, subject to other applicable state laws and
regulations:
      1.   Filling , grading, and dredging.
         a.   Depositing or permitting fill material to be deposited at a rate
exceeding one cubic yard of fill material per ten linear feet along the shared
boundary of the wetland and buffer zone, but not to exceed five cubic yards of
fill total.
         b.   Grading that results in displacement of more than one cubic yard
of soil material per ten linear feet along the shared boundary of the wetland
and buffer zone, but not to exceed five cubic yards of displacement total.
         c.   Dredging, removing, or permitting the removal of more than one
cubic yard of soil material per ten linear feet along the shared boundary of
the wetland and buffer zone, but not to exceed five cubic yards of soil
removal.
      2.   Fishing, trapping, or hunting.
      3.   Hiking.
      4.   Grazing of animals.
      5.   Farming, horticulture, silviculture, lumbering, and ranching
activities, including plowing, irrigation, irrigation ditching, seeding,
cultivating, minor drainage, harvesting for the production of food, fiber, and
forest products, or upland soil and water conservation practices. Wetlands
altered as permitted in this subsection shall not be used for a purpose other
than a purpose described in this subsection without a permit from the township
.
      6.   Maintenance or operation of serviceable structures in existence on
October 1, 1980 or constructed pursuant to Part 303 of the Natural Resources
and Environmental Protection Act.
      7.   Construction or maintenance of farm or stock ponds.
      8.   Maintenance, operation, or improvement which includes straightening,
widening, or deepening of the following which is necessary for the production
or harvesting of agricultural products:
         a.   An existing private agricultural drain.
         b.   That portion of a drain legally established pursuant to the drain
code of 1956, Act No. 40 of the Public Acts of 1956, as amended, being M.C.L.A.
§§ 280.1 to 280.630, which has been constructed or improved for drainage
purposes.
         c.   A drain constructed pursuant to other provisions of Part 303 of
the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act (Act 451, Public Acts of
1994, being M.C.L.A. §§ 324.30301 through 324.30329, as amended) or former Act
No. 203 of the Public Acts of 1979.
      9.   Construction or maintenance of farm  roads , forest roads , or
temporary roads for moving mining or forestry equipment, if the roads are
constructed and maintained solely for agricultural or silvicultural purposes,
and are constructed and maintained in a manner to assure that adverse effect on
the wetland will be otherwise minimized.
      10.   Drainage necessary for the production and harvesting of
agricultural products if the wetland is owned or leased by a person who is
engaged in commercial farming and the land is to be used for the production and
harvesting of agricultural products. Except as otherwise provided in Part 303
of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, wetlands modified
under this subsection after October 1, 1980, shall not be used for nonfarming
purposes without a permit from the MDEQ. This subdivision shall not apply to a
wetland which is contiguous to a lake or stream, or to a tributary of a lake or
stream, or to a wetland which the MDEQ has determined by clear and convincing
evidence to be a wetland which is necessary to be preserved for the public
interest, in which case a permit shall be required.
      11.   Maintenance or improvement of existing public streets , highways ,
or roads , within the right-of-way and in such a manner as to assure that any
adverse effect on the wetland will be otherwise minimized. Maintenance or
improvement does not include adding extra lanes, increasing the right-of-way ,
or deviating from the existing location of the street , highway , or road .
      12.   Maintenance, repair, or operation of gas or oil pipelines and
construction of gas or oil pipelines having a diameter of six inches or less,
if the pipelines are constructed, maintained, or repaired in a manner to assure
that any adverse effect on the wetland will be otherwise minimized.
      13.   Maintenance, repair, or operation of electric transmission and
distribution power lines and construction of distribution power lines if the
distribution power lines are constructed, maintained, or repaired in a manner
to assure that any adverse effect on the wetland will be otherwise minimized.
      14.   Operation or maintenance, including reconstruction of recently
damaged parts, of serviceable dikes and levees in existence on October 1, 1980,
or constructed pursuant to Part 303 of the Natural Resources and Environmental
Protection Act.
      15.   Any structure lawfully existing prior to the adoption date of this
Ordinance that is damaged by fire, explosion, an act of God, or other cause
beyond the control of the owner may be restored, rebuilt, or repaired, but only
to its former condition. Reconstruction must commence within two years from the
date the structure was damaged, and all necessary township , state, and federal
permits must be obtained.
      16.   The cutting of vegetation within the right-of-way of a public
street , highway , or road for the purpose of vehicular safety.
      17.   The cutting of vegetation in a wetland buffer so as to maintain an
established lawn or trail that was created and maintained on a regular basis
prior to adoption of this Ordinance.
      18.   Impacts to vegetation occurring for the sole purpose of ecological
restoration of native plant communities.
      19.   Removal and replacement of existing septic systems.
   D.   Criteria for evaluating permit applications and wetland buffer areas.
The criteria to evaluate wetland buffer area permit applications to permit a
use listed in subsection C are as follows:
      1.   A permit for an activity listed in subsection C shall not be
approved unless the township finds that issuance of the permit would be in the
public interest, would be otherwise lawful in all respects, and is necessary to
allow reasonable use of the property.
      2.   In determining whether an activity is in the public interest, the
benefit which reasonably may be expected to accrue from the activity shall be
balanced against the reasonably foreseeable detriments of the activity. The
decision shall reflect the national, state, and local concern for the
protection of natural resources from pollution, impairment, and destruction,
giving consideration to the following:
         a.   The relative extent of public and private need for the proposed
activity.
         b.   The availability of feasible and prudent alternative locations
and methods to accomplish the expected benefits from the activity.
         c.   The extent and permanence of beneficial or detrimental effects
that the proposed activity may have on the public and private uses for which
the area is suited, giving consideration to the benefits the wetland buffer
provides.
         d.   The probable impact of the proposal in relation to the cumulative
effect created by other existing and anticipated activities in the watershed.
         e.   The probable impact on recognized historic, cultural, scenic,
wildlife, ecological, or recreational values, and on public health or safety.
         f.   Economic value, both public and private, of the proposed
activity.
         g.   Findings of necessity for the proposed activity by other local,
county, or state agencies.
         h.   Proximity to any waterway.
         i.   Extent to which upland soil erosion adjacent to the protected
wetland is controlled.
      3.   In considering a permit application, the township shall give serious
consideration to the findings of necessity for the proposed activity which have
been made by state agencies.
      4.   A wetland buffer use permit shall not be issued unless it is shown
that an unacceptable disruption will not result to the aquatic resources,
giving consideration to the above criteria. A permit shall not be issued unless
the applicant also demonstrates that:
         a.   The proposed activity is primarily dependent upon being located
in the wetland buffer .
         b.   A feasible and prudent alternative does not exist.
      5.   Failure to submit a complete application is sufficient reason for
denial of a wetland buffer area use permit.
   E.   Wetland buffer area use permit application requirements. The
application for a wetland buffer area use permit shall include the following:
      1.   A completed application on the form supplied by the township .
      2.   A wetland delineation as described in the Williamstown Township
Wetland Protection Ordinance.
      3.   A plan indicating the location and limits of proposed activities,
including those within the wetland buffer area.
      4.   Soil drainage and stormwater management plans.
      5.   A written statement of the qualifications of the applicant’s wetland
expert.
   F.   Wetland buffer area use permit review procedures.
      1.   Approval authority.
         a.   Activities requiring Planning Commission review. The Township
Board , following a recommendation by the Planning Commission , shall be the
approval authority for any wetland buffer area use permit required in
conjunction with any development activity requiring site plan, special land use
, or plat approval.
         b.   Activities not requiring Planning Commission review. 
            The Township Supervisor or his or her designee shall be the
approval authority for any activity requiring a wetland buffer use permit not
proposed in conjunction with an activity requiring site plan, special land use
, or plat approval. The Township Supervisor or his or her designee shall render
a decision on the proposed wetland buffer use permit within 45 days of receipt
of a completed application.
            However, if the Township Supervisor or his or her designee
determines that the proposed activity within the wetland buffer area is of
sufficient intensity that the wetland may be negatively impacted, full review
and approval of the proposed wetland buffer use permit by the Planning
Commission and Township Board shall be required. If the application is
forwarded to the Planning Commission and Township Board , a decision on the
proposed wetland buffer area use permit shall be rendered within 90 days of
receipt of a completed application.
      2.   Administrative review procedures.
         Upon receipt of a wetland buffer area use permit application, the
Township Supervisor or his or her designee shall insure that all required
information has been submitted. If an application is not complete, the
applicant may be granted additional time to complete the application provided
that the applicant agrees that the additional time shall not be charged against
the township ’s 45-day decision period. The receipt of the application shall
constitute permission from the owner to conduct an on-site investigation.
         Upon receipt of an application the Township Supervisor or his or her
designee shall:
         a.   Transmit one copy of the application to the township ’s Wetlands
Consultant, who shall evaluate the proposed action and mitigation measures
based upon the criteria listed in subsection D and submit a written
recommendation to the Township Supervisor or his or her designee.
         b.   Post the subject property with a sign no less than six square
feet in size which shall indicate that an application for a wetland buffer area
use permit application has been submitted. The sign shall indicate the date
until which public comment may be submitted to the township .
         c.   Render a decision within 45 days of receipt of a completed
application on the proposed activity based upon public comment and the Wetland
Consultant’s review and recommendation. The Township Supervisor or his or her
designee may attach reasonable conditions to the wetland buffer area use permit
considered necessary to insure that the intent of this section will be
fulfilled, to minimize or mitigate damage or impairment to, encroachment in, or
interference with natural resources and processes within or adjacent to a
regulated wetland , or to otherwise improve or maintain water quality.
      3.   Request for reconsideration.
         a.   Any person who is aggrieved by a decision regarding a wetland
buffer permit may request that the Township Board reconsider the action by
filing a written request, which shall specify the reasons that reconsideration
is requested, and which shall include any additional information that the
township official may not have had when they first acted on the permit. The
request for reconsideration shall be submitted to the Township Clerk within ten
calendar days following the date of the initial decision. The timely filing of
a request for reconsideration shall have the effect of staying the permit
pending the outcome of the request.
         b.   The Township Board shall hold a hearing on the request for
reconsideration which shall be open to public comment and shall include an
opportunity for the appealing party to present evidence.
         c.   Notice of the time and place for consideration of a request for
reconsideration shall be sent by mail or personal delivery to the owners of the
property considered in the request. The notice may also be placed in a
newspaper of general circulation in the township not less than five days nor
more than 15 days prior to the date of the meeting at which the request will be
addressed.
         d.   The Township Board shall affirm, affirm with conditions, or
reverse their initial decision.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 2.25 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT.
   A.   Stormwater Management Regulations. Development in Williamstown Township
shall comply with the stormwater management design and construction standards
used by the Ingham County Drain Commissioner, as set forth in the Drain
Commissioner’s Standards for Stormwater Management: Systems, Procedures and
Design Criteria, as amended, which are hereby adopted by reference.
   B.   Stormwater Management Plan. In accordance with the requirements of the
Standards for Stormwater Management System: Systems, Procedures and Design
Criteria, a stormwater management plan shall be submitted as part of the plat,
condominium, or site plan review process. The stormwater management plan is
subject to review and approval by the Ingham County Drain Commissioner’s office
and Williamstown Township.
(Ord. passed 7-13-2022)
ARTICLE 3.00
NONCONFORMITIES
§ 3.01 INTENT.
   Nonconformities are uses, structures , buildings , or lots which do not
conform to one or more provisions or requirements of this Ordinance or a
subsequent amendment, but which were lawfully established prior to the time of
adoption of the Ordinance or amendment. Such nonconformities are not compatible
with the current or intended use of land in the district in which they are
located. Therefore, it is the intent of this Ordinance to permit such
nonconformities to continue under certain conditions, but to discourage their
expansion, enlargement, or extension. Accordingly, the purpose of this section
is to establish regulations that govern the completion, restoration,
reconstruction, extension, and/or substitution of nonconformities , and to
specify the circumstances and conditions under which nonconformities shall be
permitted to continue.
   The following table summarizes the nonconforming regulations contained in
this article:
Summary of Nonconformity Regulations
Issue Requirements
Summary of Nonconformity Regulations
Issue                                  Requirements
Period of non-use before nonconformity Nonconforming use of open land: 180 days
must cease                             Nonconforming use of structure or
                                       building : 12 months
Establishment of new conforming use    Nonconforming use must cease
Change in ownership                    No effect on nonconformity
Nonconforming single-family use        May be enlarged, subject to conditions
                                       (see 3.03.J)
Substitution of one nonconformity for  Permitted under certain conditions (see
another                                3.03.K and 3.05)
Nonconforming contiguous lots under    Must be combined if vacant
same ownership
Expansion of nonconforming use within  Permitted subject to conditions
building
Expansion of nonconforming use beyond  Not permitted
existing building
Enlargement of nonconforming structure Not permitted
Maintenance; structural repairs        Generally permitted (see 3.05.C)
Renovation; modernization              Maximum value; 50% of assessed value
                                       Permitted if damage is less than 50% of
Rebuilding after catastrophe           pre-catastrophe fair market value
                                       (except as permitted in 3.03.J)
 
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 3.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meaning ascribed to them:
   A.   EFFECTIVE DATE. Whenever this article refers to the EFFECTIVE DATE ,
the reference shall be deemed to include the effective date of any amendments
to this Ordinance if the amendments created a nonconforming situation.
   B.   NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE. A building ,
structure , or portion thereof that does not meet the limitations on building
size, location on a lot , or other regulations for the district in which such
building or structure is located.
   C.   NONCONFORMING LOT. A lot existing at the effective date of this
Ordinance, or amendments thereto, that does not meet the minimum area or
dimensional requirements of the district in which the lot is located.
   D.   NONCONFORMING SIGN. A sign that on the effective date of this Ordinance
does not conform to one or more regulations set forth in the Ordinance.
   E.   NONCONFORMING USE. A use which was lawfully in existence at the
effective date of this Ordinance, or amendment thereto, and which does not now
conform to the use regulations of this Ordinance for the zoning district in
which it is now located.
   F.   STRUCTURAL NONCONFORMITY.  A nonconformity that exists when the height,
size, or minimum floor space of a structure , or the relationship between an
existing building and other buildings or lot lines , does not conform to the
standards of the district in which the property is located. Also sometimes
referred to as a “dimensional nonconformity .”
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 3.03 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   The following regulations shall apply to all nonconforming uses , structures
, and lots :
   A.   Continuation of nonconforming uses and structures . 
      Any lawful nonconforming use existing on the effective date of this
Ordinance or amendment thereto may be continued and shall not be considered to
be in violation of this Ordinance, provided that (unless otherwise noted in
this Article) the use shall not be enlarged or extended to occupy a greater
area of land, nor moved in whole or in part to another portion of the lot .
      Any lawful building or structure existing on the effective date of this
Ordinance or amendment thereto may be continued and shall not be considered in
violation of this Ordinance, provided that (unless otherwise noted in this
Article) the building and land involved shall not be structurally altered,
enlarged, or moved unless such modifications conform to the provisions of this
Ordinance for the district in which it is located.
      Nothing in this Ordinance shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or
restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be
unsafe by an official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of
such official.
   B.   Buildings under construction. To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this
Ordinance shall be deemed to require a change in plans, construction, or
designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun
prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance and upon
which actual building construction has been diligently carried on. ACTUAL
CONSTRUCTION is hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials
in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner. Where demolition or
removal of an existing building has begun preparatory to rebuilding, such work
shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that such work shall be
diligently carried on until completion of the building involved.
   C.   Discontinuation of nonconforming uses .
      1.   Nonconforming uses of a structure . When a nonconforming use of a
structure , or structure and land in combination, is discontinued or abandoned
for 12 consecutive months without a present intention to reinstate the
nonconforming use , the structure (or structure and land in combination) shall
not thereafter be used except in conformance with the provisions of the
district in which it is located.
      2.   Nonconforming uses of open land. If any nonconforming use of open
land ceases for any reason for a period of more than 180 days, any subsequent
use of such land shall conform to the provisions set forth of the district in
which it is located.
      3.   Seasonal uses. In applying this subsection to seasonal uses, the
time during the off-season shall not be counted.
   D.   Purchase or condemnation. (revised 10/3/06) In order to accomplish the
elimination of nonconforming uses and structures which constitute a nuisance or
are detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare, Williamstown
Township may acquire, by purchase, condemnation or otherwise, private property
for the purpose of removal of nonconforming uses pursuant to Section 208(3) of
Public Act 110 of 2006, being M.C.L.A. § 125.3208(3), as amended.
   E.   Recording of nonconforming uses and structures . The Building Inspector
shall be responsible for maintaining records of nonconforming uses and
structures as accurately as is feasible, and for determining legal
nonconforming uses and structures in existence on the effective date of this
Ordinance. Failure on the part of a property owner to provide the Building
Inspector with necessary information to determine legal nonconforming status
may result in denial of required or requested permits.
   F.   Establishment of a conforming use or structure . In the event that a
nonconforming principal use or structure is superseded by a conforming
principal use or structure on a site, the nonconforming use or structure shall
be immediately and permanently removed.
   G.   Change of tenancy or ownership. In the event there is a change in
tenancy, ownership, or management, an existing nonconforming use or structure
shall be allowed to continue provided there is no change in the nature or
character of such nonconformity .
   H.   Exceptions and variances . Any use for which a special exception or
variance has been granted as provided in this Ordinance shall not be deemed a
nonconformity .
   I.   Unlawful nonconformities . No nonconformity shall be permitted to
continue in existence if it was unlawful at the time it was established.
   J.   Nonconforming single-family uses. Notwithstanding the limitations
outlined in this article, any structure used for single-family residential
purposes and maintained as a nonconforming use may be enlarged or replaced with
a similar structure of a larger size, so long as the enlargement or replacement
does not create new nonconformities or increase the extent of existing
nonconformities with respect to such matters as setback and parking
requirements.
   K.   Substitution. A nonconforming use may be changed to another
nonconforming use upon approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals provided that no
structural alterations are required to accommodate the new nonconforming use ,
and that the proposed use is equally or more appropriate in the district than
the existing nonconformity . In permitting such a change, the Zoning Board of
Appeals may require conditions to accomplish the purposes of this Ordinance.
   L.   Change of location. Should a nonconforming structure be moved to
another parcel or to another location on the same parcel for any reason
whatsoever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in
which it is located after it is moved.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 3.04 NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD.
   The following regulations shall apply to any nonconforming lot of record or
nonconforming lot described in a deed or land contract executed and delivered
prior to the effective date of this Ordinance or amendment thereto:
   A.   Use of nonconforming lots . Any nonconforming lot shall be used only
for a use permitted in the district in which it is located. Notwithstanding
limitations imposed by other provisions of this Ordinance, a permitted use may
be erected on any single lot of record in existence at the effective date of
adoption or amendment thereto, unless such use has been restricted by a prior
affidavit recorded with the Ingham County Register of Deeds or as evidenced in
the records of the township . This provision shall apply even though such lot
fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, provided that the
lot can be developed as proposed without any significant adverse impact on
surrounding properties or the public health, safety, and welfare.
   B.   Variance from area and bulk requirements. If the use of nonconforming
lot requires a variance from the area or bulk requirements, then such use shall
be permitted only if a variance is granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals .
   C.   Nonconforming contiguous lots under the same ownership. If two or more
lots or combination of lots with contiguous frontage in single ownership are of
record at the time of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, and if all or
part of the individual lots do not meet the requirements established for lot
width and area, the lots involved shall be considered to be an individual
parcel for the purposes of this Ordinance. No portion of said parcel shall be
used, occupied , or sold in a manner which diminishes compliance with lot width
and area requirements established by this Ordinance, nor shall any division of
a parcel be made which creates a lot with width or area less than the
requirements stated in this Ordinance. These provisions shall not apply to
contiguous lots in single ownership where each of the lots is occupied by an
existing home.
   D.   Combination of nonconforming lots . The Township Assessor may permit
the combination, in whole or in part, of nonconforming lots of record into
building sites less than the size requirements established by this Ordinance,
provided that the combination of lots reduces the degree of nonconformity and
results in a parcel which is capable of accommodating a structure that is in
conformance with the building area and setback requirements of this Ordinance.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 3.05 MODIFICATION TO NONCONFORMING USES OR STRUCTURES.
   No nonconforming use or structure shall be enlarged, extended, or
structurally altered, nor shall any nonconformity be changed to a different
nonconformity which increases the intensity of use or nonconformity , except as
permitted in this section.
   A.   Applicability. The following regulations shall apply to any
nonconforming use or structure , including:
      1.    Nonconforming uses of open land.
      2.    Nonconforming use of buildings designed for a conforming use.
      3.    Nonconforming use of buildings specifically designed for the type
of use which occupies them but not suitable for a conforming use.
      4.    Buildings designed and used for a conforming use but not in
conformance with area and bulk , parking, loading, or landscaping requirements.
      5.    Nonconforming structures , such as fences and signs .
   B.   Enlargement, extension, or alteration.
      1.   Increase in nonconformity prohibited. Except as specifically
provided in this section, no person may engage in any activity that causes an
increase in the extent of any nonconformity . For example, physical alteration
of structures or the placement of new structures on open land is unlawful if
such activity results in:
         a.   An increase in the total amount of space devoted to a
nonconforming use ; or
         b.   Greater nonconformity with respect to dimensional restrictions,
such as setback requirements, height limitations, density requirements, or
other requirements in the district in which the property is located.
      2.   Permitted extension. Any nonconforming use may be extended
throughout any part of a building which was manifestly arranged or designed for
such use at the time of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, but no such
use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building . No
nonconforming use of land shall be enlarged, increased, or extended to occupy a
greater area of land, nor shall any such use be moved in whole or in part to
any portion of the lot or parcel than was occupied on the effective date of
this Ordinance or amendment thereto.
      3.   Alterations that decrease nonconformity . Any nonconforming
structure or any structure or portion thereof containing a nonconforming use ,
may be altered if such alteration serves to decrease the nonconforming nature
of the structure or use. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall determine if a
proposed alteration will decrease the degree of nonconformity .
      4.   Variance to area and bulk requirements. If a proposed alteration is
deemed reasonable by the Zoning Board of Appeals by virtue of the fact that it
would decrease the nonconforming nature of a structure or use, but such
alteration requires a variance from the area or bulk requirements, then such
alteration shall be permitted only if a variance is granted by the Zoning Board
of Appeals .
   C.   Repairs, improvements, and modernization.
      1.   Required repairs. Repairs or maintenance deemed necessary by the
Building Official to keep a nonconforming building structurally safe and sound
are permitted. However, if a nonconforming structure or a structure containing
a nonconforming use becomes physically unsafe and/or unlawful due to lack of
maintenance and repairs and is declared as such by the Building Official , it
shall not thereafter be restored, repaired, or rebuilt except in full
conformity with the regulations in the district in which it is located.
      2.   Additional permitted improvements. Additional repairs, improvements,
or modernization of nonconforming structures , beyond what is required to
maintain the safety and soundness of the structure , shall be permitted
provided such repairs or improvements do not exceed 50% of the assessed value
of the structure during any period of 12 consecutive months. Any such repairs,
improvements, and modernization shall not result in enlargement of the cubic
content of the nonconforming structure . The provisions in this paragraph shall
apply to all structures except as otherwise provided in this article for
single-family residential uses and for reconstruction of structures damaged by
fire or other catastrophe.
   D.   Damage by fire or other catastrophe. 
      Any nonconforming structure or structure housing a nonconforming use that
is damaged by fire, flood, or other means in excess of 50% of the structure's
pre-catastrophe fair market value (as determined by the Township Assessor)
shall not be rebuilt, repaired, or reconstructed, except in complete conformity
with the provisions of this Ordinance. Single-family residences may be restored
according to the provisions of §
3.03, subsection J.
      In the event that the damage is less than 50% of the structure ’s pre-
catastrophe fair market value, the structure may be restored to its pre-
catastrophe status. Such restoration shall take place only upon approval of the
Zoning Board of Appeals and in full compliance with applicable provisions of
this Ordinance.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
ARTICLE 4.00
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
§ 4.01 OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   A.   Scope of off-street parking requirements. Compliance with the off-
street parking regulations shall be required as follows:
      1.   General applicability. For all buildings and uses established after
the effective date of this Ordinance, off-street parking shall be provided as
required in this article prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
However, where a building permit has been issued prior to the effective date of
the Ordinance and construction has been diligently carried on, compliance with
the parking requirements at the time of issuance of the building permit shall
be required.
      2.   Change in use or intensity. 
         Whenever use of a building , structure , or lot is changed, parking
facilities shall be provided as required by this Ordinance for the new use,
regardless of any variance which may have been in effect prior to change of
use.
         If the intensity of use of any building , structure , or lot is
increased through the addition of dwelling units , increase in floor area,
increase in seating capacity, or through other means, additional off-street
parking shall be provided for such increase in intensity of use.
      3.   Existing parking facilities. 
         Off-street parking facilities in existence on the effective date of
this Ordinance shall not thereafter be reduced below, or if already less than,
shall not be further reduced below the requirements for the use being served as
set forth in this Ordinance.
         An area designated as required off-street parking shall not be changed
to any other use unless equal facilities are provided elsewhere in accordance
with the provisions of this Ordinance.
      4.   Additional off-street parking; maximum parking. Nothing in this
Ordinance shall be deemed to prevent voluntary establishment of off-street
parking facilities to serve an existing use of land or buildings , or to
prevent provision of additional parking facilities beyond what is required by
the Ordinance, provided all such parking is in conformance with the regulations
herein. Except for single-family detached residential uses, any person
proposing the provision of greater than 125% of the minimum required off-street
parking as specified in this article shall demonstrate to the Planning
Commission sufficient justification for the additional parking.
      5.   Review procedures. Compliance with the requirements in this article
shall be subject to site plan review and approval as specified in §
29.02.
   B.   General requirements. In all zoning districts off-street vehicle
parking facilities shall be provided and maintained as herein prescribed.
      1.   Location.
         a.   Proximity to building or use being served. Off-street parking for
multiple-family and nonresidential uses shall be located on the same lot or
parcel as the building or use being served or within 300 feet of the building
it is intended to serve (measured from the nearest point of the building or use
to the nearest point of the parking).
         b.   Within yards . Off-street parking in commercial, office ,
multiple-family, and industrial districts may only be located in a side or rear
yard or non-required front yard , provided that all landscaping requirements in
Article 5.00 are complied with, and provided further that off-street parking
shall not be permitted within 20 feet of a single-family residential or
agricultural district boundary.
      2.   Residential parking. 
         Off-street parking spaces in single-family residential districts shall
consist of a parking strip, driveway , garage, or combination thereof, and
shall be located on the premises they are intended to serve. No parking shall
be permitted on a regular basis on lawns or other unpaved areas on residential
lots , with the exception of approved gravel parking areas.
         Commercial and recreational vehicle parking in residential districts
shall comply with the standards in §
4.01, subsection E.
      3.   Control of off-site parking. It shall be unlawful to park or store
any motor vehicle on another’s private property without the written consent of
the owner, holder, occupant, lessee, agent, or trustee of said private
property.
      4.   Access to parking. Each off-street parking space shall open directly
onto a clearly-defined aisle or driveway of sufficient width and design as to
provide safe and efficient access to or from a public street or alley in a
manner that will least interfere with the smooth flow of traffic. Parking
designed for backing directly onto a street or road is prohibited. Access to
off-street parking which serves a nonresidential use shall not be permitted
across land that is zoned or used for residential purposes.
      5.   Collective use of off-street parking. Off-street parking for
separate buildings or uses may be provided collectively subject to the
following:
         a.   The total number of spaces provided collectively shall not be
less than the sum of spaces calculated according to the procedure below.
            (i).   Multiply the minimum parking required for each use, as set
forth in §
4.01(C)(6), by the appropriate percentage indicated in the Shared Parking
Factors table for each of the six designated time periods.
            (ii).   Add together the resulting figures for each of the six
columns. The minimum collective parking requirement shall be the highest sum
among the six columns.
            (iii).   If a particular land use proposing to make use of
collective parking facilities (e.g., religious institution , municipal use)
does not conform to the general classifications in the Shared Parking Factors
table (as determined by the Township Planner ), the applicant shall submit
sufficient data to indicate the principal operating hours of the proposed use.
Based upon this documentation, the Township Planner shall determine the
appropriate collective parking requirement (if any) for the proposed use.
 
Shared Parking Factors
                  Weekdays                      Weekends
Land Use          1AM - 7AM 7AM - 7PM 7PM - 1AM 1AM - 7AM 7AM - 7PM 7PM - 1AM
Residential       95%       25%       95%       95%       75%       95%
Commercial/Retail 0%        95%       75%       0%        90%       75%
Office /Service   5%        95%       5%        0%        10%       0%
 
         b.   Each use served by collective off-street parking shall have
direct access to the parking without crossing streets .
         c.   The collective off-street parking shall not be located farther
than 300 feet from the building or use being served.
         d.   Written easements which provide for continued use and maintenance
of the parking shall be submitted to the township for approval before filing
with the Ingham County Register of Deeds.
Example of Collective Parking Calculation (see §
4.01, subsection B.5)
Example of Collective Parking Calculation (see §
4.01, subsection B.5)
                       30 townhouse residential units,   60 parking
                       requiring                         spaces
            Proposed
            Uses: (on  15,000 square feet of retail      48 parking
            shared     space, requiring                  spaces
            site)
                       5,000 square feet of office       20 parking
                       space, requiring                  spaces
            Weekdays   Weekdays  Weekdays    Weekends    Weekends    Weekends
            1 AM - 7   7 AM - 7  7 PM - 1 AM 1 AM - 7 AM 7 AM - 7 PM 7 PM - 1AM
            AM         PM
Residential 95% of 60  25% = 15  95% = 57    95% = 57    75% = 45    95% = 57
            = 57
Retail      0% of 48 = 95% = 46  75% = 36    0% = 0      90% = 43    75% = 36
            0
Office      5% of 20 = 95% = 19  5% = 1      0% = 0      10% = 2     0% = 0
            1
   Total 58 spaces  80 spaces 94 spaces   57 spaces   90 spaces   93 spaces
The shared parking factors table predicts the parking demand to be highest
during weekday evenings, with a total demand of 94 spaces across the three
uses. A total of 94 parking spaces would be required in a shared lot , provided
all of the other requirements for collective off-street parking are met.
If the parking were not to be provided collectively, the three proposed uses
would have to construct a total of 128 parking spaces .
 
      6.   Cross access. Common, shared parking facilities are encouraged in
the township . Wherever feasible, cross-access connections between adjacent
parking lots (or a reserved connection when no adjacent parking lot exists but
can reasonably be expected to be constructed at a future date) are required.
Blanket cross-access easements across the entire parking lot area shall be
provided for connected lots under separate ownership or management. The cross-
access easements shall be without limitation and shall be recorded with the
County Register of Deeds.
      7.   Storage and repair prohibited. The storage of merchandise, sale of
motor vehicles, storage of inoperable vehicles, or repair of vehicles are
prohibited in required off-street parking lots or areas. Emergency service
required to start vehicles shall be permitted.
      8.   Duration. Except when land is used as permitted storage space in
direct connection with a legitimate business, a 24-hour time limit for parking
in nonresidential off-street parking areas shall prevail provided that it shall
be unlawful to permit the storage of wrecked, inoperable, or junked vehicles in
any parking area in any district for any period of time.
      9.   Parking structures . Parking structures shall be permitted subject
to the following standards:
         a.   Any parking structure shall comply with the required building
 setbacks for the district in which it is located.
         b.   Parking structures shall be designed as integral elements of the
overall site plan, taking into account the relationship to the principal
building and other structures on the site.
         c.   The facade of the parking structure shall be compatible in
design, color, and type of material to the principal building (s) on the site.
         d.   Landscaping shall be placed around the parking structure in
accordance with an approved landscape plan. Any such landscaping shall be
compatible with the overall landscape plan for the entire site.
   C.   Off-street parking standards. The following standards shall be used in
determining the required number and characteristics of off-street parking
spaces :
      1.   Units of measurement. 
         a.   Floor area. For the purposes of determining required number of
parking spaces , “floor area” shall be measured in accordance with the
definitions in
Article 1.00. If the usable floor area of a building is not known at the time
of review, 80% of the gross floor area shall be used as the basis for parking
calculations.
         b.   Fractional spaces. When calculations for determining the required
number of parking spaces results in a fractional space, any fraction of less
than one-half may be disregarded, while a fraction of one-half or more shall be
counted as one space.
         c.   Employee parking. Parking spaces required for employees shall be
based on the maximum number of employees on the premises at any one time during
the largest typical daily work shift. However, the number of required parking
spaces may be reduced if an employer provides documentation of participation in
an organized rideshare program.
         d.   Places of assembly. For religious institutions , sports arenas,
or similar places of assembly in which those in attendance occupy benches,
pews, or similar seating, each 24 inches of such seating shall be counted as
one seat.
         e.   Persons. Any parking standard calculated on the basis of
“persons,” “students,” “employees,” or a similar group shall be based upon the
maximum permitted occupancy of the structure or facility.
      2.   Use of loading space. Required loading space shall not be counted or
used for required parking.
      3.   Parking during construction. Temporary off-street parking shall be
provided for workers during construction a rate of one space per employee.
Gravel surfacing may be permitted for such temporary parking.
      4.   Banked parking. If the minimum number of required parking spaces
exceeds the amount necessary to serve a proposed use, the Planning Commission
may approve the construction of a lesser number of parking spaces , subject to
the following:
         a.   The banked parking shall be shown on the site plan and set aside
as landscaped open space .
         b.   Banked parking shall be located in areas suitable for future
parking and that meet Ordinance requirements.
         c.   The township may require construction of the banked parking area
upon finding that vehicles are regularly parked on unpaved surfaces, on the
road , or off-site.
      5.   Bicycle parking. Parking facilities for short- and long-term bicycle
parking shall be provided to meet the needs of the business or residential use.
Bicycle parking facilities shall allow a cyclist to safely secure a bicycle
from incidental damage or theft, while not hindering access for pedestrians or
other vehicles. Bicycle parking facilities shall be located in highly-visible
and accessible areas.
         a.   Bicycle parking facilities shall be located at least three feet
from adjacent walls, poles, landscaping , street furniture, drive aisles, and
primary pedestrian routes and at least six feet from vehicle parking spaces .
      6.   Barrier-free parking requirements. Each parking lot that serves a
building , except single- and two-family dwelling units, shall have a number of
level parking spaces , identified by an above-grade  sign which indicates the
spaces are reserved for physically handicapped persons. Barrier-free parking
shall comply with the State of Michigan Barrier-Free Rules, Michigan Public Act
No. 1 of 1966, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1351 through 125.1356, as amended, the
adopted Township Building Code, and the Federal Americans with Disabilities
Act.
         a.   Dimensions of barrier-free parking spaces . Each barrier-free
parking space shall have no more than a nominal 3% grade and shall be not less
than eight feet in width and be adjacent to an access aisle not less than five
feet in width. Required van-accessible barrier-free spaces must be eight feet
in width and be adjacent to an access aisle not less than eight feet in width.
         b.   Minimum required number of barrier-free parking spaces . The
number of barrier-free spaces required is as follows:
Total Number of Parking Minimum Number of Barrier- Number of Van-Accessible
Spaces Provided in Lot  Free Spaces Required       Barrier-Free Spaces Required
Total Number of Parking Minimum Number of Barrier- Number of Van-Accessible
Spaces Provided in Lot  Free Spaces Required       Barrier-Free Spaces Required
Up to 25                1                          1
26 to 50                2                          1
51 to 75                3                          1
76 to 100               4                          1
101 to 150              5                          1
151 to 200              6                          1
201 to 300              7                          1
301 to 400              8                          1
401 to 500              9                          2
501 to 1000             2% of total parking        1/8 of total barrier-free
                        provided                   spaces
1001 and over           20, plus 1 for each 100    1/8 of total barrier-free
                        over 1000                  spaces
 
   D.   Schedule of required parking.
      1.   Parking spaces required. The amount of required off-street parking
(including stacking spaces for certain uses) shall be determined in accordance
with the schedules which follow. Applicants are encouraged to minimize the
amount of parking provided in order to minimize excessive areas of pavement,
which negatively impact aesthetic standards and contribute to high volumes of
storm water runoff. The Planning Commission may modify the numerical
requirements for off-street parking, based on evidence that another standard
would be more reasonable, because of the level of current or future employment
and/or level of current or future customer traffic.
      2.   Uses not cited. For those uses not specifically mentioned, the
requirements for off-street parking for a similar use shall apply, subject to
review by the Planning Commission and/or Township Planner .
 
Section 4.01(D)(3) - Schedule of Off-Street Parking: Residential Uses
Land Use                   Minimum Parking Required
Single-Family Detached     2 spaces per dwelling unit
Two-Family /Duplex
Single-Family Attached
Multiple-Family            2.5 spaces per dwelling unit
Senior Apartments
Senior Congregate Housing  0.5 spaces per bedroom, plus 1 space per employee
Adult Foster Care Facility
Mobile Home Park           Parking shall be provided in accordance with state
                           regulations
 
Section 4.01(D)(4) - Schedule of Off-Street Parking: Institutional Uses
   Parking requirements based on persons or students shall be based upon
maximum facility occupancy.
Land Use Minimum Parking Required
Section 4.01(D)(4) - Schedule of Off-Street Parking: Institutional Uses
   Parking requirements based on persons or students shall be based upon
maximum facility occupancy.
Land Use                             Minimum Parking Required
Default standard if not specified    0.33 spaces per person
Child Care Center‡                 1 space per 350 sq. ft. UFAa
Fraternity, Sorority, Dormitory      0.5 spaces per person
Hospital                             3 spaces per bed
Nursing Home                         0.33 spaces per bed
Home for the Aged
Municipal Building or Facility‡    1 space per 300 sq. ft. UFAa
(post office, museum, library, etc.)
Place of Assembly‡
(theater, religious institution,     0.33 spaces per seat
etc.)
School, elementary or junior highb   1.5 spaces per classroom and
                                     administrative office
                                     1 space per classroom and administrative
School, senior highb                 office, plus
                                     0.25 spaces per student
a   UFA = usable nonresidential floor area, as defined in
Article 1.00.
b   All schools shall additionally provide one space for every three seats in
each public assembly space (e.g., gymnasium, theater, auditorium, stadium).
‡   In addition to the parking requirement specified above, one
automobile parking space shall be required for each employee on the largest
typical daily work shift.
 
Section 4.01(D)(5) - Schedule of Off-Street Parking: Commercial Uses
Parking requirements based on persons shall be based upon maximum facility
occupancy.
Land Use Minimum Parking Required
Section 4.01(D)(5) - Schedule of Off-Street Parking: Commercial Uses
Parking requirements based on persons shall be based upon maximum facility
occupancy.
Land Use                             Minimum Parking Required
Automobile Service and Repair‡     2 spaces per service bay
Automobile Sales‡                  1 space per 200 sq. ft. UFAa
                                     (exclusive of spaces for dealer stock)
Gas Station/Filling Station‡       1.5 spaces per fueling location
Car Wash‡                          Stacking spaces only; see §
                                     4.01(D)(8)
The above uses shall additionally provide one space per 200 sq. ft. UFAa of any
associated retail sales area.
General Retail Sales                 1 space per 250 sq. ft. UFAa
Banks & Financial Institutions       1 space per 200 sq. ft. UFAa
Beauty and/or Barber Shops‡        1.5 spaces per chair
Nail Salons‡
Convenience Stores                   1 space per 200 sq. ft. UFAa
Exhibition & Assembly Halls‡       0.5 spaces per person
Home Improvement Stores‡
Lumber Yards‡                      1 space per 500 sq. ft. UFAa
Machinery/Equipment Sales‡
Construction Showroom‡
Hotel, Motel, or Other Lodging‡    1 space per room/suitec
Laundromats                          0.5 spaces per machine
Mortuaries                           1 space per 50 sq. ft. UFAa in parlor area
Funeral Homes
Mini-warehouse; Self-storage units   0.1 spaces per storage unit, plus 5 spaces
                                     at site office
Open Air Businessb                   1 space per 200 sq. ft. sales area
                                     1 space per 50 sq. ft. UFAa or 0.5 spaces
Restaurants‡                       per seat,
                                     whichever is greater
Uses not otherwise specified and not 1 space per 250 sq. ft. UFAa
deemed similar to above uses‡
a   UFA = usable nonresidential floor area, as defined in
Article 1.00.
b   Any indoor retail sales area associated with an open-air business shall
additionally provide parking at the rate of one space for every 250 square feet
of usable nonresidential floor area.
c   Any use(s) accessory to a hotel, motel, or other lodging (e.g., restaurant/
bar, assembly room) shall provide additional parking according to the type of
accessory use, as provided for in this section. The total parking provided for
such multi-use establishments shall not be less than 90% of the sum of the
minimum requirements for each use individually. Swimming pools reserved for the
exclusive use of overnight guests shall not require additional parking.
‡   In addition to the parking requirement specified above, one
automobile parking space shall be required for each employee on the largest
typical daily work shift.
 
Section 4.01(D)(6) - Schedule of Off-Street Parking: Office & Industrial Uses
Land Use Minimum Parking Required
Section 4.01(D)(6) - Schedule of Off-Street Parking: Office & Industrial Uses
Land Use                            Minimum Parking Required
Business & Professional Offices,    1 space per 200 sq. ft. UFAa
except as otherwise specified
Medical, Dental, Veterinary Offices 1 space per 125 sq. ft. UFAa
Real Estate Offices                 1 space per 125 sq. ft. UFAa
Contractor or Construction Usesb    1 space per employee
General Industrial or Manufacturing 1 space per 750 sq. ft. gross floor area
Usesc
Wholesale Salesc                    1 space per 1,500 sq. ft. gross floor
Warehousing Establishmentsc         area
a   UFA = usable nonresidential floor area, as defined in
Article 1.00.
b   Equipment storage shall be provided separately from any required parking
area.
c   Any accessory retail or office use shall provide additional parking at
the rates specified in this section for general retail or office uses.
 
Section 4.01(D)(7) - Schedule of Off-Street Parking: Recreation Uses§
Parking requirements based on persons or students shall be based upon maximum
facility occupancy.
Land Use Minimum Parking Required
Section 4.01(D)(7) - Schedule of Off-Street Parking: Recreation Uses§
Parking requirements based on persons or students shall be based upon maximum facility
occupancy.
                                                                              Minimum
Land Use                                                                      Parking
                                                                              Required
                                                                              1.5
Archery Facilities                                                            spaces
                                                                              per
                                                                              target
                                                                              50
BMX Course                                                                    spaces
                                                                              per
                                                                              course
Bowling                                                                       4 spaces
                                                                              per lane
                                                                              25
Field Sports (e.g., baseball, football)                                       spaces
                                                                              per
                                                                              field
Tennis Clubs                                                                  4 spaces
Other Court-based Recreation                                                  per
                                                                              court
                                                                              0.5
Arcade‡                                                                     spaces
                                                                              per
                                                                              machine
                                                                              0.5
Clubs and Lodges‡                                                           spaces
                                                                              per
                                                                              person
                                                                              0.5
Indoor Recreation‡ (fitness centers, pool or billiard halls, skating rinks, spaces
etc.)                                                                         per
                                                                              person
Golf Course (standard or miniature)‡                                        4 spaces
                                                                              per hole
Golf Driving Range‡                                                         1 space
                                                                              per tee
                                                                              0.25
Swimming Pools or Swim Clubs‡                                               spaces
                                                                              per
                                                                              person
                                                                              0.33
Stadium or Sports Arena‡                                                    spaces
                                                                              per seat
§    Any use(s) accessory to a recreation use (e.g., pro shop, game room, restaurant/
bar) shall provide additional parking according to the type of accessory use and as
provided for in this section. The total parking provided for such multi-use
establishments shall not be less than 90% of the sum of the minimum requirements for
each use individually.
‡   In addition to the parking requirement specified above, one automobile parking
space shall be required for each employee on the largest typical daily work shift.
 
Section 4.01(D)(8) - Schedule of Off-Street Parking: Stacking Spaces
Land Use Minimum Stacking Spaces Required
Section 4.01(D)(8) - Schedule of Off-Street Parking: Stacking Spaces
Land Use                         Minimum Stacking Spaces Required
Banks and Financial Institutions 6 spaces per service lane
Car Wash, automatic              8 spaces before wash lane, plus 2 spaces after
Car Wash, self-service           3 spaces before each wash bay, plus 2 spaces
                                 after
Drive-Through Restaurants        10 spaces per service lane
Other Drive-Through Uses         6 spaces per service lane
   Stacking spaces shall have a minimum width of 8 feet and a minimum length of
20 feet.
 
   E.   Layout and construction. Off-street parking facilities containing four
or more spaces shall be designed, constructed, and maintained in accordance
with the following requirements:
      1.   Review and approval requirements. 
         Plans for the construction of any parking lot in conjunction with a
new development shall be submitted for review and approval according to the
normal site plan review procedures. Plans for expansion of an existing parking
lot that is not associated with other new development shall be submitted to the
Building Official for review and approval prior to the start of construction.
Upon completion of construction, the parking lot must be inspected and approved
by the Building Official before a certificate of occupancy can be issued for
the parking lot and for the building or use the parking is intended to serve.
         Plans shall be prepared at a scale of not less than 50 feet equal to
one inch. Plans shall indicate existing and proposed grades , drainage, water
mains and sewers, surfacing and base materials, and the proposed parking
layout. The plans shall conform to the construction and design standards
established by the Township Engineer .
   In the event that required parking cannot be completed because of cold or
inclement weather, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued by the
Building Official provided the applicant first deposits a performance guarantee
in accordance with §
2.18.
   2.   Dimensions.
         a.   Off-street parking shall be designed in conformance with the
following standards and diagram:
 
                                                      Total Width (wall-to-
              Parking Stall Dimensions Drive Aisle    wall) of Drive Aisle and
Parking Angle                          Width          Parking
              Width     Depth to Wall                 One Row of Two Rows of
                                                      Stalls (x) Stalls (y)
                                       12.0 ft (one-  20.0 feet  28.0 feet
0º (parallel)24.0 feet 8.0 feet       way)           (one-way)  (one-way)
                                       24.0 ft (two-  32.0 feet  40.0 feet
                                       way)           (two-way)  (two-way)
Up to 45º    8.5 feet  16.6 feet      12.0 feet      28.6 feet  45.2 feet
                                       (one-way only)
46º to 60º  8.5 feet  18.2 feet      16.0 feet      34.2 feet  52.4 feet
                                       (one-way only)
61º to 75º  8.5 feet  18.5 feet      20.0 feet      38.5 feet  57.0 feet
76º to 90º  9.0 feet  18.5 feet      24.0 feet      42.5 feet  61.0 feet
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/71d151aa824b5086a107ad3293684d8be35e4585/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1899.jpg]
   Figure 4.1: Off-Street Parking Layouts [see §
4.01(E)(2a)]
         b.   Spaces adjacent to landscape area. Any parking space abutting a
landscaped area on the driver's or passenger's side of the vehicle shall
provide an additional 18 inches above the minimum stall width requirement to
allow for access without damaging the landscaped area.
         c.   Driveways . Driveways providing access to residential,
commercial, or industrial uses shall comply with the standards in §
2.10.
      3.   Layout.
         a.   Ingress and egress . All spaces shall be provided with adequate
access by means of clearly defined maneuvering lanes and driveways . Spaces
backing directly onto a street shall be prohibited. Entrances and exits from
off-street parking lots shall be located at least 25 feet from the nearest
point of any adjacent property zoned for single-family residential use.
         b.   Parking rows. Continuous rows of parking shall be limited to not
more than 20 contiguous spaces. Longer rows shall provide landscaped breaks
(e.g., islands or bioswales) with shade trees.
         c.   Consolidated landscaping . Parking spaces and rows shall be
organized to provide consolidated landscape areas and opportunities for on-site
stormwater management. The use of bioswales and/or rain gardens is encouraged.
         d.   Pedestrian circulation. The parking lot layout shall accommodate
direct and continuous pedestrian circulation, clearly divided from vehicular
areas. Pedestrian crosswalks shall be provided, distinguished by textured
paving or pavement striping and integrated into the sidewalk network.
      4.   Surfacing and drainage.
         a.   All off-street parking areas, access lanes, driveways , and other
vehicle maneuvering areas shall be hard-surfaced with concrete or plant-mixed
bituminous material. Porous paving materials may be permitted at the discretion
of the Planning Commission , provided that installation and maintenance plans
are in accordance with the manufacturer's guidelines. A written maintenance
plan must be submitted for the Planning Commission ’s review.
            (i).   The Planning Commission may permit a gravel surface for
heavy machinery storage areas, provided the applicant or property owner
provides sufficient evidence that a paved surface could not support the heavy
machinery without being damaged and dust control is provided to the
satisfaction of the township .
         b.   Off-street parking areas, access lanes, and driveways shall be
graded and drained so as to dispose of surface waters. Surface water shall not
be permitted to drain onto adjoining property, unless in accordance with an
approved drainage plan.
         c.   Grading, surfacing, and drainage plans shall be subject to review
and approval by the Building Official and/or Township Engineer . Where
appropriate, on-site stormwater management shall be provided to 1) capture and
hold water during storms to be released later at an agricultural rate, and 2)
to screen pollutants so they do no enter streams, wetlands , or the Red Cedar
River.
      5.   Curbs, wheel chocks. A curb of at least six inches in height shall
be installed to prevent motor vehicles from being driven or parked so that any
part of the vehicle extends within two feet of abutting landscaped areas,
sidewalks, streets , buildings , or adjoining property. Curbs shall be
continuous except as part of an overall stormwater management design
incorporating bioswales and/or rain gardens. In lieu of a curb, wheel chocks
may be provided to prevent vehicles from extending over grass areas, setback
lines, or lot lines .
      6.   Lighting. All parking areas, driveways , and walkways shall be
illuminated to ensure the security of property and the safety of persons using
such areas, in accordance with the requirements in §
2.12. Parking lot entrances shall be illuminated.
      7.   Buildings . No building or structure shall be permitted on an off-
street parking lot , except for a maintenance building and/or parking attendant
shelter, which shall not be more than 50 square feet in area and not more than
15 feet in height.
      8.   Signs . Accessory directional signs shall be permitted in parking
areas in accordance with
Article 7.00.
      9.   Screening and landscaping . All off-street parking areas, except
those serving single- and two-family residences, shall be screened and
landscaped in accordance with the provisions set forth in
Article 5.00.
      10.   Maintenance. All parking areas shall be maintained free of dust,
trash, and debris. Surfacing, curbing, lighting fixtures, signage, and related
appurtenances shall be maintained in good condition.
      11.   Electric vehicle charging stations. If and when appropriate,
charging stations shall be provided for electric-powered vehicles. The
placement of charging stations shall be subject to review by the Planning
Commission .
   F.   Commercial and recreational vehicle parking in residential districts.
      1.   Commercial vehicle parking. (revised 2/3/2004)
         One commercial vehicle with a rated capacity of less than one ton and
owned/operated by a resident of the premises, or one piece of commercial
equipment, may be parked on each lot located in a residential district,
provided that the vehicle or piece of equipment is not a utility truck, such as
a wrecker, septic tank pumper, or a truck that carries flammable or toxic
materials.
         The parking or storage of vehicles with a rated capacity of over one
ton may be permitted where such vehicles are used in conjunction with an
agricultural operation on a farm that is five acres or greater in size.
         The parking of no more than one commercial vehicle with a rated
capacity of over one ton, or one piece of commercial equipment, may be
permitted on a residential parcel subject to the following conditions and
review and approval by the Planning Commission :
         a.   The parcel of land must be at least five acres in size and shall
not be part of a recorded plat or other single or multiple-family residential
development .
         b.   The parcel of land shall have a minimum width of at least 330
feet.
         c.   The commercial vehicle or equipment must be owned and operated by
a resident of the premises.
         d.   The vehicle or equipment shall be fully screened when parked.
Such screening may be provided by parking the vehicle in a garage, or by
parking the vehicle in a rear yard which provides complete screening from
adjacent properties. Screening of vehicles or equipment located outdoors may be
accomplished with existing or new landscaping , topographic barriers, or
through construction of screening walls or fences .
         e.   Approval to park a commercial vehicle or equipment shall not
constitute approval to park additional trailers , parts, or other equipment or
materials associated with the operation of the commercial vehicle or equipment
.
         f.   In considering whether to permit parking of a commercial vehicle
or equipment on a site, the Planning Commission shall consider the potential
off-site impacts, including: the impact from additional dust, odors, fumes, and
noise generated by the vehicle or equipment; the disruption from additional
vehicular traffic at various times during the day; and, possible safety hazards
related to operation of a commercial vehicle or equipment on public or private
residential roads .
      2.   Recreational vehicle parking. (revised 1/9/1996) Recreational
vehicles as defined in
Article 1.00, including campers and other recreational equipment, may be parked
or stored by the owner on residentially-used property subject to the following
requirements. Unless otherwise noted, the requirements in this subsection apply
to recreational vehicles that are parked or stored for a period of more than 48
hours.
         a.   Connection to utilities. Recreational vehicles parked or stored
shall not be connected to electricity, water, gas, or sanitary sewer
facilities.
         b.   Use as living quarters. At no time shall recreational vehicles
parked or stored in residential districts be used for living or housekeeping
purposes.
         c.   Location. Recreational vehicles that are not parked or stored in
a building may be parked or stored on a lot provided that the vehicles are
located no closer to the front of the lot than any portion of the principal
structure and no closer than ten feet from a side or rear property line . If
any portion of a recreational vehicle is parked or stored within a required
side or rear yard  setback , or if more than two vehicles are parked or stored,
then the vehicle(s) shall be screened from adjoining property in accordance
with §
5.02(E). Vehicles shall be stored in a location where they are readily
accessible and capable of being moved. (revised 2/3/98)
         d.   Lot coverage . Recreational vehicles may occupy no more than 20%
of the required rear yard .
         e.   Temporary parking. Not-withstanding the above provisions
concerning “Location”, recreational vehicles may be parked elsewhere on the
premises prior to or after a trip for loading or unloading purposes for a
period of not more than 48 hours prior to and 48 hours after use of the vehicle
within a seven-day period.
         f.   Condition. Parked or stored recreational vehicles must be kept in
good repair. Vehicles capable of being moved from place to place under their
own power must be maintained in good running condition. All such vehicles must
be properly registered in the name of the occupant of the dwelling unit .
         g.   Storage of mobile homes . The parking or storage of an unoccupied
mobile home as defined in
Article 1.00, being designed as a permanent structure for residential
occupancy, is prohibited, except as may be permitted in the Mobile Home Park
District.
         h.   Waiver of regulations. The provisions concerning connection to
utilities, use as living quarters, and location may be waived for a period of
up to two weeks to permit repair of the occupant's or owner's equipment or to
permit the parking of a recreational vehicle of a guest. Permits for any such
waiver shall be obtained from the Building Official . No more than two permits
shall be issued for each activity (repair, storage of guest vehicle) per
calendar year.
         i.   Multiple-family complexes and mobile home parks . The Planning
Commission may require that a screened storage area be provided on the site of
a multiple-family complex or mobile home park for parking and storage of
recreational vehicles .
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 4.02 LOADING SPACE REQUIREMENTS.
   A.   Scope of loading space requirements. Compliance with the loading space
regulations set forth herein shall be required in order to avoid interference
with the public use of streets , alleys, parking areas, driveways , sidewalks,
and other public areas.
      1.   General applicability. On the same premises with every building , or
part thereof, erected and occupied for manufacturing, storage, warehousing,
display and sale of goods, including department stores, wholesale stores,
markets, hotels , hospitals , mortuaries , laundries, dry cleaning
establishments, and other uses involving the receipt or distribution of
materials, merchandise, or vehicles, there shall be provided and maintained
adequate space for loading and unloading as required in this section.
      2.   Change in use or intensity. Whenever use of a building , structure ,
or lot is changed, loading space shall be provided as required by this
Ordinance for the new use, regardless of any variance which may have been in
effect prior to change of use.
   B.   General requirements. 
      1.   Location. Required loading space shall be located to the rear of the
building being served such that it is screened from view from adjoining roads .
Loading/unloading operations shall not interfere with traffic on public streets
or off-street parking.
      2.   Size. Unless otherwise specified, each required loading space shall
be a minimum of ten feet in width and 50 feet in length, with a vertical
clearance of 15 feet.
      3.   Surfacing and drainage. Loading areas shall be hard-surfaced with
concrete or plant-mixed bituminous material. Loading areas shall be graded and
drained so as to dispose of surface waters. Surface water shall not be
permitted to drain onto adjoining property, unless in accordance with an
approved drainage plan. Grading, surfacing, and drainage plans shall be subject
to review and approval by the Building Inspector and/or Township Engineer .
      4.   Storage and repair prohibited. The storage of merchandise, sale of
motor vehicles, storage of inoperable vehicles, or repair of vehicles is
prohibited in required loading space.
      5.   Use of loading space. Required loading space shall not be counted or
used for required parking.
      6.   Central loading. Central loading facilities may be substituted for
individual loading spaces serving businesses on separate lots provided that all
of the following conditions are fulfilled:
         a.   Each business served shall have direct access to the central
loading area without crossing streets or alleys.
         b.   Total loading space provided shall meet the minimum requirements
specified herein, in consideration of total floor area of all businesses served
by the central loading space.
         c.   No building served shall be more than 300 feet from the central
loading area.
      7.   Minimum loading space. The amount of required loading space shall be
determined in accordance with the schedule that follows. The Planning
Commission may modify these requirements upon making the determination that
another standard would be more appropriate because of the number or type of
deliveries experienced by a particular business or use.
Schedule of Loading Space Requirements
Gross Floor Area Number of Loading Spaces
Schedule of Loading Space Requirements
Gross Floor Area          Number of Loading Spaces
0 - 4,999 sq. ft.         see note below
5,000 - 19,000 sq. ft.    1 space
20,000 - 99,999 sq. ft.   1 space, plus 1 space for each 20,000 sq. ft.
                          in excess of 20,000 sq. ft.
100,000 - 499,999 sq. ft. 5 spaces, plus 1 space for each 50,000 sq. ft.
                          in excess of 100,000 sq. ft.
500,000 sq. ft. and over  13 spaces, plus 1 space for each 80,000 sq. ft.
                          in excess of 500,000 sq. ft.
Establishments containing less than 5,000 square feet of gross floor area
shall be provided with adequate off-street loading space that is accessible by
motor vehicle, but which does not interfere with pedestrian or vehicular
traffic. The size of any such loading space shall be based on the types of
delivery vehicles typically utilized by the establishment, provided that in
industrial districts sufficient land area must be available to provide a 10
ft. by 50 ft. space if the use of the property changes.
 
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 4.03 PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT.
   A.   Any violation of this Ordinance, or any part thereof, shall be deemed a
municipal civil infraction and is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500. Upon
notice of a violation, the appropriate township employee shall investigate any
violation and then make a determination as to whether the penalty shall be
imposed. The imposition of a penalty for a violation shall not excuse the
violation or be considered a permit to allow the violation to continue. Each
day that a violation exists or continues to exist shall constitute a separate
offense. The Township Supervisor or his/her designated agent is hereby
authorized to write and serve municipal civil infraction tickets. This
municipal civil infraction ticket shall serve as notice of the alleged
violation. Proceedings for the municipal civil infraction shall proceed as
provided in the Township Municipal Civil Infractions Ordinance.
   B.   If the township determines that the owner of the vehicle, building , or
parking structure/lot is in violation of this Ordinance, the township shall
provide written notice to the owner, which shall identify the violation and
request corrective action to cure the violation and restore the properly within
a specific period of time.
   C.   If the violation has not been cured and property restored within the
specified period of time, the township is authorized to take appropriate legal
action, which may include injunctive or other equitable relief or issuance of a
municipal civil infraction ticket.
(Ord. 54, passed 6-11-2014)
ARTICLE 5.00
LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING
Cross reference:
   Weeds, grasses, brush and other vegetation, see §
91.11
§ 5.01 INTENT AND SCOPE OF REQUIREMENTS.
   A.   Intent. Landscaping enhances the visual image of the township , while
preserving natural features, improving property values, and alleviating the
impact of noise, traffic, and visual distraction associated with certain uses.
Screening is important to protect less intensive uses from the noise, light,
traffic, litter and other impacts of more intensive, nonresidential uses. These
provisions are intended to set minimum standards for the design and use of
landscaping , greenbelts , and screening, and for the protection and
enhancement of the township ’s environment. More specifically, the intent of
these provisions is to:
      1.   Improve the appearance of off-street parking areas, vehicular use
areas, and property abutting public rights-of-way ;
      2.   Protect and preserve the appearance, character, and value of the
neighborhoods that abut nonresidential areas, parking areas, and other
intensive use areas, thereby protecting the public health, safety, and welfare;
      3.   Reduce soil erosion and depletion; and
      4.   Increase soil water retention, thereby helping to prevent flooding.
   B.   Scope of application. No site plan shall be approved unless it shows
landscaping consistent with the requirements of this article. A building permit
shall not be issued until the required landscape plan is submitted and
approved, and a certificate of occupancy shall not be issued unless provisions
set forth in this section have been met or a performance guarantee has been
posted in accordance with the provisions set forth in §
2.18. The requirements in this article shall not apply to single-family
detached homes, unless otherwise specifically noted.
   C.   Minimum requirements. The requirements in this article are minimum
requirements, and under no circumstances shall they preclude the developer and
the township from agreeing to more extensive landscaping .
   D.   Design creativity . Creativity in landscape design is encouraged.
Accordingly, required trees and shrubs may be planted at uniform intervals, at
random, or in groupings, depending on the designer’s desired visual effect and,
equally important, the intent of the township to coordinate landscaping on
adjoining properties.
   E.   Summary of regulations. The following table summarizes the landscaping
regulations contained in this Article. In the case of a discrepancy between the
table and the text of §
5.02, the text shall control.
Summary of Minimum Landscaping Requirements (see §
5.02)
                                        Minimum Plant Material Quantities
 General                  Minimum       Deciduous or
 Landscaping Plant Height Planting Area Evergreen Trees Ornamental Trees Shrubs
 Ratio                    Width
Summary of Minimum Landscaping Requirements (see §
5.02)
                                           Minimum Plant Material Quantities
            General     Plant   Minimum    Deciduous or Ornamental
            Landscaping Height  Planting   Evergreen    Trees      Shrubs
            Ratio               Area Width Trees
General                                    1 tree per
Site        --          --      --         3,000 sq.    --         --
Landscaping                                ft.a
Landscaping                                1 tree per   1 tree per 8 shrubs per
Adjacent to --          --      15 feet    40 linear    100 linear 40 linear
Roads                                      feet         feet       feet
Berms in                3 feet,            1 tree per   1 tree per 8 shrubs per
Front Yard  --          maximum see text   40 linear    100 linear 40 linear
                                           feet         feet       feet
                                           1 tree per
Greenbelts  --          --      20 feetb   30 linear    --         c
                                           feet
Landscape   --          6 feet, d          e            --         --
Screening               minimum
Parking Lot 30 sq. ft.                     1 shade tree
Landscaping per parking --      9 feet     per 5 spaces --         --
            space
a   Multiple-family residential developments and mobile home parks shall
provide 2 trees and 4 shrubs per dwelling unit or lot .
b   Greenbelts provided in conjunction with a screening wall shall be a minimum
of 9 feet in width.
c   Shrubs may be substituted for up to 50% of the total number of required
trees, at a rate of 8 shrubs for each tree.
d   The minimum width of landscape screening shall be equal to the minimum
width for the installation used (i.e., greenbelt or berm .
e   Landscaped screening shall consist of closely-spaced (not more than 15 feet
on center) evergreens, arranged to form a complete visual barrier within 3
years of planting.
N.B. The Clear Vision Area requirements of §
5.02, subsection H, and §
2.09 shall be observed for all landscaping installations.
 
 
Summary of Plant Material Specification (see §
5.04, subsection C)
                 Minimum Caliper       Minimum Height         Minimum Spread
                 2.5 inches
Deciduous Trees  measured at 12 inches 4 feet to first branch --
                 above grade
                 1.5 inches
Ornamental Trees measured at 6 inches  4 feet to first branch --
                 above grade
Evergreen Trees  --                    5 feet                 2.5 feet
Shrubs           --                    2 feet                 2 feet
Hedges           --                    2 feet                 --
 
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 5.02 GENERAL LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.
   A.   General site requirements. All developed portions of the site shall
conform to the following general landscaping standards, except where specific
landscape elements, such as a greenbelt , berms , or screening are required:
      1.   All unpaved portions of the site shall be planted with grass, ground
cover, shrubbery, or other suitable live plant material. Such plant material
shall extend to the edge of any abutting paved area, roadway, or gravel
shoulder, except that trees and shrubs shall be set back a minimum of ten feet
from the edge of any uncurbed paved area, roadway, or gravel shoulder. Grass
areas in the front yard of all nonresidential uses shall be planted with sod or
hydro-seeded.
      2.   A mixture of evergreen and deciduous trees shall be planted on
nonresidential parcels at the rate of one tree per 3,000 square feet or portion
thereof of any unpaved open area for which specific landscaping requirements do
not appear later in this Article. Required trees may be planted at uniform
intervals, at random, or in groupings.
   B.   Landscaping adjacent to roads .
      1.   Planting requirements. Where required, landscaping adjacent to roads
shall comply with the following planting requirements:
 
Type of Plant Material            Minimum Amount Required
Deciduous Shade or Evergreen Tree 1 per 40 linear feet of road frontage
Ornamental Tree                   1 per 100 linear feet of road frontage
Shrubs                            8 per 40 linear feet of road frontage
 
   For the purposes of computing length of road frontage, openings for
driveways and sidewalks shall not be counted (see diagram). Trees and shrubs
may be planted at uniform intervals, at random, or in groupings. Fractional
amounts shall be rounded up to the next whole tree or shrub.
      2.   Location and dimensions. Required landscaping adjacent to roads
shall be located totally on private property within a planting strip adjacent
to the road  right-of-way . The minimum width of the planting strip shall be 15
feet.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/71d151aa824b5086a107ad3293684d8be35e4585/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1901.jpg]
 
Example Calculation for Landscaping Adjacent to Roads (§
5.02, subsection B)
Total Parcel Width = 250 Driveway Width = 30 feet Road Frontage = 250-30 = 220
feet                                              feet
Deciduous or Evergreen Trees Required = 220 feet/40 = 5.5 [https://
export.amlegal.com/media/71d151aa824b5086a107ad3293684d8be35e4585/IMAGES/0-0-
0-1852.gif] 6 trees required
Ornamental Trees Required = 220 feet/100 = 2.2 [https://export.amlegal.com/
media/71d151aa824b5086a107ad3293684d8be35e4585/IMAGES/0-0-0-1852.gif] 3
ornamental trees required
Shrubs Required = 220 feet/40 = 5.5 x 8 = 44 shrubs required
 
   C.   Berms. Where required, berms shall conform to the following standards:
      1.   Dimensions. Unless otherwise indicated or appropriate, required
berms shall be measured from the grade of the parking lot or flat ground
adjacent to the berm , and shall be constructed with slopes no steeper than one
foot vertical for each three feet horizontal (33% slope), with at least a two-
foot flat area on top. Berms may undulate in height, subject to review and
approval of berm design as shown on the site plan. Unless otherwise indicated,
the maximum height of required berms shall be three feet.
      2.   Protection from erosion. Any required berm shall be planted with
sod, ground cover, or other suitable live plant material to protect it from
erosion so that it retains its height and shape. The use of railroad ties,
cement blocks, and other types of construction materials to retain the shape
and height of a berm shall be prohibited unless specifically reviewed and
approved by the Planning Commission .
      3.   Required plantings. 
         a.   Front yard  berms . Berms located in the front yard of
nonresidential parcels shall be landscaped in accordance with the requirements
for landscaping adjacent to roads , §
5.02, subsection B.
         b.   Screening berms . Berms used for screening other than in the
front yard shall be landscaped in accordance with the requirements for
screening, §
5.02, subsection E.
      4.   Measurement of berm length. For the purpose of calculating required
plant material, berm length shall be measured along the exterior edge of the
berm .
   D.   Greenbelts . Where required, greenbelts shall conform to the following
standards:
      1.   Measurement of greenbelt length. For the purposes of calculating
required plant material, greenbelt length shall be measured along the exterior
edge of the greenbelt .
      2.   General planting requirements. 
         a.   Grass or ground cover requirements. Grass, ground cover, or other
suitable live plant materials shall be planted over the entire greenbelt area,
except where paved walkways are used.
         b.   Tree and shrub requirements. Except where the greenbelt is used
for screening, a minimum of one deciduous or evergreen tree shall be planted
for each 30 linear feet or portion thereof of required greenbelt . Shrubs may
be substituted for up to 50% of the total number of required trees, at a rate
of eight shrubs for each tree. Trees and shrubs may be planted at uniform
intervals, at random, or in groupings.
         c.   Greenbelt width. The minimum width of any required greenbelt
shall be 20 feet, except where used to obscure a screening wall as noted below,
in which case the greenbelt shall be at least nine feet in width.
         d.   Distance from sidewalk. Plant materials other than turfgrass or
ground cover shall not be placed closer than four feet to the right-of-way line
where the greenbelt abuts a public sidewalk.
      3.   Greenbelts used for screening. Greenbelts used for screening shall
be landscaped in accordance with the requirements for screening, §
5.02, subsection E.
      4.   Linking greenbelts . Every effort shall be made to link greenbelts
on adjacent parcels so as to provide a continuous landscaped or natural area .
   E.   Screening.
      1.   General screening requirements. Unless otherwise specified, wherever
an evergreen or landscaped screen is required, screening shall consist of
closely spaced evergreen plantings (i.e., no farther than 15 feet apart) which
can be reasonably expected to form a complete visual barrier that is at least
six feet above ground level within three years of planting. Deciduous plant
materials may be used provided that a complete visual barrier is maintained
throughout the year. Wherever screening is required adjacent to residentially
zoned or used property, the screening must be installed prior to the beginning
of site grading and general construction, except where such activity would
result in damage to the screening.
      2.   Screening of equipment. Mechanical equipment, such as air
compressors, pool pumps, transformers, sprinkler pumps, satellite dish
antennae, and similar equipment shall be screened on at least three sides.
Insofar as practical, said screening shall exceed the vertical height of the
equipment being screened by at least six inches within two years of planting.
   F.   Parking lot landscaping . In addition to required screening, all off-
street parking areas shall be landscaped as follows:
      1.   Landscaping ratio. Off-street parking areas containing greater than
ten spaces shall incorporate at least 30 square feet of interior landscaping
per parking space .
         a.   Interior parking lot landscaping shall include the following:
            (i).   Internal islands and medians.
            (ii).   Landscaped areas surrounded on three sides by a parking
area (i.e., peninsulas or fingers).
            (iii).   Landscaped areas at the corners of a parking area and
bordered by parking on at least two sides.
         b.   Interior parking lot landscaping shall be located within the
parking area to improve its appearance and screen lot edges, reinforce
circulation routes, define pleasing pedestrian routes through the parking lot,
and maximize shade and stormwater benefits.
         c.   Interior parking lot landscape areas should be coordinated with
the location of light poles and other utilities.
      2.   Minimum dimensions.
         a.   Landscaped areas in parking lots shall be no less than nine feet
in any single dimension and no less than 300 square feet in area.
         b.   Landscaped areas in or adjacent to parking lots shall be
protected with curbing to prevent encroachment of vehicles. Curbs shall be a
minimum of six inches in height and shall be continuous around the parking
area, except for curb cuts required for integrated on-site stormwater
management or pedestrian accessibility.
      3.   Other landscaping. Required landscaping elsewhere on the parcel
shall not be counted in meeting the parking lot landscaping requirements.
      4.   Required plantings.
         a.   At least 50% of each interior landscaped area shall be covered by
living plant material, such as sod, shrubs, ground cover, or trees. Plant
materials other than turfgrass or ground cover shall not be placed closer than
two feet to the curbed edge of any interior parking lot landscape area. Trees
shall be set back a minimum of four feet from the curbed edge of any interior
parking lot landscape area.
         b.   A minimum of one deciduous shade tree shall be planted within the
parking lot for every ten vehicle parking spaces in the lot .
         c.   Plantings within parking lots shall comply with the requirements
for unobstructed sight distance set forth in §
2.09. The landscape plan shall indicate the types, sizes, and quantities of all
plant material proposed for interior parking lot landscape areas.
   G.   Landscaping of rights-of-way . Public rights-of-way located adjacent to
required landscaped areas and greenbelts shall be planted with grass or other
suitable live ground cover, and shall be maintained by the owner or occupant of
the adjacent property as if the rights-of-way were part of the required
landscaped areas or greenbelts .
   H.   Maintenance of unobstructed visibility for drivers. No landscaping
shall be established or maintained on any parcel or in any parking lot that
will obstruct the view of drivers. Accordingly, all landscaping shall comply
with the provisions concerning unobstructed sight distance set forth in §
2.09.
   I.   Potential damage to utilities. In no case shall landscaping material be
planted in a way that will interfere with or cause damage to underground
utility lines, public roads , or other public facilities. Species of trees
whose roots are known to cause damage to public roadways, sewers, or other
utilities shall not be planted closer than 15 feet from any such roadways,
sewers, or utilities. Trees shall be set back from overhead utility lines as
indicated in the following chart:
 
Mature Tree Height Minimum Distance from Center of Trunk to Nearest Overhead
                   Utility Line
Up to 15 feet      10 feet
15 to 25 feet      20 feet
25 to 45 feet      30 feet
Over 45 feet       50 feet
 
   J.   Landscaping of divider medians. Where traffic on driveways ,
maneuvering lanes, private roads , or similar vehicle accessways is separated
by a divider median, the median shall be curbed and have a minimum width of ten
feet. A minimum of one deciduous or evergreen tree shall be planted for each 30
linear feet or portion thereof of median. Trees may be planted at uniform
intervals, at random, or in groupings, but in no instance shall the center-to-
center distance between trees exceed 60 feet. Plant materials other than
turfgrass or ground cover shall not be placed closer than two feet to the
curbed edge of any landscaped median. Trees shall be set back a minimum of four
feet from the curbed edge of any landscaped median.
   K.   Irrigation. The site plan shall indicate the proposed method of
watering landscaped areas. Although not required, installation of an in-ground
irrigation/sprinkler system is encouraged, particularly in front yards .
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 5.03 SPECIFIC LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS FOR ZONING DISTRICTS.
   A.   Requirements for commercial, office , and industrial districts. All
lots or parcels of land located in the OS-1, B-1, B-2, and I-1 zoning districts
shall comply with the following landscaping requirements:
      1.   General site landscaping . All developed portions of the site shall
conform to the general site requirements in §
5.02, subsection A, except where specific landscape elements are required.
      2.   Landscaping adjacent to road . All commercial, office , and
industrial developments shall comply with the requirements for landscaping
adjacent to the road in §
5.02, subsection B.
      3.   Berm requirements. A berm may be used to screen off-street parking
from view of the road , in which case the berm shall be a maximum of three feet
in height and shall be planted in accordance with §
5.02, subsection B. The berm shall be located totally on private property,
adjacent to the road  right-of-way .
      4.   Screening. Screening in the form of a landscaped berm , greenbelt ,
or wall shall be required wherever a nonresidential use in a commercial, office
, or industrial district abuts directly upon land zoned for residential or
agricultural purposes, and/or where loading areas would be visible from
residential or agricultural districts. Landscaped screening shall comply with
the requirements in §
5.02, subsection E. If a wall is used instead of landscaping , the requirements
in
Article 6.00 shall be complied with, but a landscaped greenbelt (planted in
accordance with §
5.02, subsection D) shall be required on the side of the wall facing the
residential or agricultural district.
      5.   Parking lot landscaping . Off-street parking areas containing
greater than ten spaces shall comply with the requirements for parking lot
landscaping in §
5.02, subsection F.
   B.   Requirements for multiple-family districts. All lots or parcels of land
located in the RM-1 zoning district shall comply with the following landscaping
requirements:
      1.   General site landscaping . A minimum of two deciduous or evergreen
trees plus four shrubs shall be planted per dwelling unit . Unless otherwise
specified, required landscaping elsewhere in the multiple-family development
shall not be counted in meeting these requirements for trees.
      2.   Landscaping adjacent to road . All multiple-family developments
shall comply with the requirements for landscaping adjacent to the road in §
5.02, subsection B.
      3.   Berm requirements. A berm may be used to screen off-street parking
from view of the road , in which case the berm shall be a maximum of three feet
in height and shall be planted in accordance with §
5.02, subsection B. The berm shall be located totally on private property,
adjacent to the road  right-of-way .
      4.   Screening. Screening in the form of a landscaped berm , greenbelt ,
or wall shall be required on all sides of a multiple-family development .
Landscaped screening shall comply with the requirements in §
5.02, subsection E. A wall may be used instead of landscaping adjacent to
nonresidential districts, subject to the requirements in
Article 6.00. If a wall is used instead of landscaping , the requirements in
Article 6.00 shall be complied with, but a landscaped greenbelt (planted in
accordance with §
5.02, subsection D) shall be required on the side of the wall facing away from
the multiple-family development .
      5.   Parking lot landscaping . Off-street parking areas containing
greater than ten spaces shall comply with the requirements for parking lot
landscaping in §
5.02, subsection F.
      6.   Privacy screen. Where multiple-family dwellings are designed so that
rear open areas or patio areas front onto a public street , a landscaped
privacy screen shall be provided (see illustration). The screen may consist of
a combination of trees, shrubs, and berms , subject to review by the Planning
Commission .
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/71d151aa824b5086a107ad3293684d8be35e4585/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1903.jpg]
   Privacy Screen (see §
5.03, subsection B.6)
   C.   Requirements for nonresidential uses in residential or agricultural
districts. All nonresidential uses developed in residential or agricultural
zoning districts shall comply with the following landscaping requirements:
      1.   General site landscaping . All developed portions of the site shall
conform to the general site requirements in §
5.02, subsection A, except where specific landscape elements are required.
      2.   Landscaping adjacent to road. All nonresidential developments
located in residential districts shall comply with the requirements for
landscaping adjacent to the road in §
5.02, subsection B.
      3.   Berm requirements. A berm may be used to screen off-street parking
from view of the road , in which case the berm shall be a maximum of three feet
in height and shall be planted in accordance with §
5.02, subsection B. The berm shall be located totally on private property,
adjacent to the road  right-of-way .
      4.   Screening. Screening in the form of a landscaped berm , greenbelt ,
or wall shall be required wherever a nonresidential use abuts directly upon
land zoned for residential purposes. Landscaped screening shall comply with the
requirements in §
5.02, subsection E. If a wall is used instead of landscaping , the requirements
in
Article 6.00 shall be complied with, and a landscaped greenbelt (planted in
accordance with §
5.02, subsection D) shall be provided on the side of the wall facing away from
the nonresidential use.
      5.   Parking lot landscaping . Off-street parking areas containing
greater than ten spaces shall comply with the requirements for parking lot
landscaping in §
5.02, subsection F.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 5.04 STANDARDS FOR LANDSCAPE MATERIALS.
   Unless otherwise specified, all landscape materials shall comply with the
following standards:
   A.   Plant quality. Plant materials used in compliance with the provisions
of this Ordinance shall be nursery grown, free of pests and diseases, hardy in
central Michigan, in conformance with the standards of the American Association
of Nurserymen, and shall have passed inspections required under state
regulations.
   B.   Non-living plant material. Plastic and other non-living plant materials
shall not be considered acceptable to meet the landscaping requirements of this
Ordinance.
   C.   Plant material specifications. Use of native plant species to comply
with landscaping requirements is encouraged so as to preserve the diversity and
health of Michigan's unique natural heritage. Lists of native wildflowers,
ferns, trees, shrubs, and vines, and grasses, sedges, and rushes are available
at the Township Hall. The following specifications shall apply to all plant
material proposed in accordance with the landscaping requirements of this
Ordinance:
      1.   Deciduous shade trees. Deciduous shade trees shall be a minimum of
two and one-half inches in caliper measured 12 inches above grade with the
first branch a minimum of four feet above grade when planted.
      2.   Deciduous ornamental trees. Deciduous ornamental trees shall be a
minimum of one and one-half inches in caliper measured six inches above grade
with a minimum height of four feet above grade when planted.
      3.   Evergreen trees. Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of five feet in
height when planted. Furthermore, evergreen trees shall have a minimum spread
of two and one-half feet, and the size of the burlapped root ball shall be at
least ten times the caliper measured six inches above grade .
      4.   Shrubs. Shrubs shall be a minimum of two feet in height when
planted. Low growing shrubs shall have a minimum spread of 24 inches when
planted.
      5.   Hedges. Hedges shall be planted and maintained so as to form a
continuous, unbroken, visual screen within two years after planting, barring
unusual growing conditions, such as drought or disease. Hedges shall be a
minimum of two feet in height when planted.
      6.   Ground cover. Ground cover used in lieu of turf grasses in whole or
in part shall be planted in such a manner as to present a finished appearance
and reasonably complete coverage after one complete growing season.
      7.   Grass. Grass area shall be planted using species normally grown as
permanent lawns in central Michigan. Grass, sod, and seed shall be clean and
free of weeds, pests, and diseases. Grass may be sodded, plugged, sprigged, or
seeded. When grass is to be established by a method other than complete sodding
or seeding, nurse grass seed shall be sown for immediate effect and protection
until complete coverage is otherwise achieved. Straw or other mulch shall be
used to protect newly seeded areas.
      8.   Mulch. Mulch used around trees, shrubs, and vines shall be a minimum
of three inches deep, and installed in a manner as to present a finished
appearance.
      9.   Undesirable plant material. Use of plant materials that are invasive
to natural habitats, that cause disruption to storm drainage, or that are
susceptible to pests or disease is not encouraged. The following plant
materials exhibit such characteristics, and therefore their use is not
encouraged in the township :
 
Box Elder         Norway Maple     Silver Maple     Tree of Heaven
Acer negundo      Acer platanoides Acer saccharinum Ailanthus altissima
European Barberry Northern Catalpa Ash              Common Privet
Berberis vulgaris Catalpa speciosa Fraxinus spp.    Ligustrum spp.
Honeysuckle       Mulberry         Poplar           Callery Pear
Lonicera spp.     Morus spp.       Populus spp.     Pyrus calleryana
Buckthorn         Willow           Elm              Russian-olive
Rhamnus spp.      Salix spp.       Ulmus spp.       Elaeagnus angustifolia
 
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 5.05 INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE.
   The following standards shall be observed where installation and maintenance
of landscape materials are required:
   A.   Installation.  Landscaping shall be installed in a sound, workmanlike
manner to ensure the continued growth of healthy plant material. Trees, shrubs,
hedges, and vines shall be generously mulched at the time of planting.
   B.   Installation of perimeter landscaping . Landscaping along the perimeter
shall be installed prior to construction, except where such landscaping would
be destroyed during construction.
   C.   Seeding or sodding. Lots or parcels shall be seeded or sodded within 90
days after occupancy.
   D.   Protection from vehicles.  Landscaping shall be protected from vehicles
through use of curbs or wheel stops in parking lots. Except for stormwater
management features such as bioswales, landscape areas shall be elevated above
the pavement to a height that is adequate to protect the plants from snow
removal, salt, and other hazards.
   E.   Off-season planting requirements. If development is completed during
the off season when plants cannot be installed, the owner shall provide a
performance guarantee to ensure installation of required landscaping in the
next planting season, in accordance with §
2.18.
   F.   Maintenance.
      Landscaping required by this Ordinance shall be maintained in a healthy,
neat, and orderly appearance, free from refuse and debris. All unhealthy and
dead plant material shall be replaced immediately upon notice from the Building
Official , unless the season is not appropriate for planting, in which case
such plant material shall be replaced at the beginning of the next planting
season.
      All landscaped areas shall be provided with a readily available and
acceptable supply of water, with at least one spigot located within 300 feet of
all plant material to be established and maintained. Trees, shrubs, and other
plantings and lawn areas shall be watered regularly throughout the growing
season.
      All constructed or manufactured landscape elements, such as but not
limited to benches, retaining walls, edging, and so forth, shall be maintained
in good condition and neat appearance. Rotted, deteriorated, or damaged
landscape elements shall be repaired, replaced, or removed.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 5.06 TREATMENT OF EXISTING PLANT MATERIAL.
   The following regulations shall apply to existing plant material:
   A.   Consideration of existing elements in the landscape design. 
      In instances where healthy plant material exists on a site prior to its
development , the Planning Commission may permit substitution of such plant
material in place of the requirements set forth previously in this section,
provided such substitution is in keeping with the spirit and intent of this
article and the Ordinance in general.
      Existing hedges, berms , walls, or other landscape elements may be used
to satisfy the requirements set forth previously, provided that such
landscaping is in conformance with the requirements of this section.
   B.   Preservation of existing plant material. 
      Site plans shall show all existing trees which are located in the
portions of the site that will be built upon or otherwise altered, and are five
inches or greater in caliper, measured 12 inches above grade .
      Trees shall be labeled “To Be Removed” or “To Be Saved” on the site plan.
If existing plant material is labeled “To Be Saved” on the site plan,
protective measures should be implemented, such as the placement of fencing or
stakes at the drip line around each tree. No vehicle or other construction
equipment shall be parked or stored within the drip line of any tree or other
plant material intended to be saved.
   In the event that healthy plant materials which are intended to meet the
requirements of the Ordinance are cut down, damaged, or destroyed during
construction, said plant material shall be replaced with the same species as
the damaged or removed tree, in accordance with the following schedule, unless
otherwise approved by the Planning Official based on consideration of the site
and building configuration, available planting space, and similar
considerations:
 
Damaged Tree Size          Replacement Tree Size   Replacement Ratio
Less than 6 inches caliper 2 ½ to 3 inches caliperTree-for-tree
                                                   One replacement tree for
Greater than 6 inches      2 ½ to 3 inches calipereach 6 inches caliper (or
caliper                                            fraction thereof) of damaged
                                                   tree
**Tree caliper is to be measured at 12 inches above grade for damaged and
replacement trees.
 
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 5.07 MODIFICATIONS TO LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS.
   In consideration of the overall design and impact of a specific landscape
plan, and in consideration of the amount of existing plant material to be
retained on the site, the Planning Commission may modify the specific
requirements outlined herein, provided that any such adjustment is in keeping
with the intent of this article and Ordinance in general. In determining
whether a modification is appropriate, the Planning Commission shall consider
whether the following conditions exist:
   •   Topographic features or other unique features of the site create
conditions such that strict application of the landscape regulations would
result in a less effective screen than an alternative landscape design.
   •   Parking, vehicular circulation, or land use are such that required
landscaping would not enhance the site or result in the desired screening
effect.
   •   The public benefit intended by the landscape regulations could be better
achieved with a plan that varies from the strict requirements of the Ordinance.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
ARTICLE 6.00
WALLS AND FENCES
§ 6.01 OBSCURING WALLS AND FENCES.
   Where permitted or required by this Ordinance, obscuring walls and fences
shall be subject to the requirements in this section. An obscuring wall or
fence is one where more than 50% of the vertical surface is opaque so as to
obstruct vision or prevent observation of activities enclosed in the fence .
   A.   Location. Required obscuring walls and fences shall be placed inside
and adjacent to the lot line except in the following instances:
      1.   Underground utilities. Where underground utilities interfere with
placement of the wall at the property line , the wall shall be placed on the
utility easement line located nearest the property line .
      2.   Front setback requirements. Where this Ordinance requires
conformance with front setback standards in the R-1 and R-1-S Districts, the
Planning Commission may modify or waive the wall or fence requirements provided
the intent of this section is complied with.
   B.   Time of construction. Wherever construction of an obscuring wall or
fence is required adjacent to residentially zoned or used property, the wall
shall be installed prior to the beginning of site grading and general
construction, except where such activity would result in damage to the wall or
fence , in which case the wall or fence shall be constructed as soon as
feasible after construction commences.
   C.   Wall and fence specifications. For the uses and districts listed below,
an obscuring wall or fence shall be provided as specified along property lines
that abut a lot in an R-1, R-1-S, RR, RE or AG-SF District or a lot in any
zoning district that is used for residential purposes. The height of the wall
or fence shall be measured from ground level adjacent to the wall or fence ,
provided that fill shall not be permitted for the purpose of achieving a higher
fence than otherwise would be permitted.
 
Proposed Use                      Wall or Fence Height Requirements
                                  Minimum                             Maximum
Any Off-Street Parking, including 4.5 feet                            6.0 feet
P-1, Vehicular Parking District
Office or Commercial District     4.5 feet                            6.0 feet
                                  6 feet, or minimum required to
Industrial District               completely screen storage, loading, 8.0 feet
                                  and service areas
Utility Buildings, Substations    6.0 feet                            6.0 feet
 
   D.   Substitution or waiver. 
      As a substitute for a required obscuring wall or fence , the Planning
Commission may, in its review of the site plan, approve the use of other
existing or proposed living landscape features (such as closely spaced
evergreens) that would produce substantially the same results in terms of
screening, durability, and permanence. Any such substitute screening shall
comply with the applicable requirements in §
5.02.
      The Planning Commission may waive the requirements for an obscuring wall
or fence upon making the determination that:
      1.   The adjoining residential district is in transition and will become
nonresidential in the future; or
      2.   Existing physical features provide adequate screening; or
      3.   The abutting residential district is a sufficient distance (at least
200 feet) from the area or district to be screened so that the Planning
Commission determines the screening is unnecessary to meet the intent of the
Ordinance; or
      4.   The abutting residential district is separated from the area or
district to be screened by an arterial or collector road .
   E.   Non-required fences in nonresidential districts. Fences , other than
required obscuring walls and fences , shall be permitted in nonresidential
districts, subject to the following conditions:
      1.   Location. Fences shall be permitted in the rear or side yard of
nonresidential districts, provided that no fence shall extend closer toward the
front of the lot than the portion of the principal structure closest to the
front lot line . These restrictions shall not apply to agricultural uses.
      2.   Height. Fences in nonresidential districts shall not exceed eight
feet in height.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 6.02 FENCES AND WALLS IN RESIDENTIAL AND AGRICULTURAL DISTRICTS.
   A.   Fences in the R-1, R-1-S, MHP, and RM-1 Districts. Fences in the R-1,
R-1-S, MHP and RM-1 Districts may be located in the required front, side, or
rear yard subject to the following requirements:
      1.   Maximum height. The maximum height shall be six feet for fences
located in the rear or side yard . The maximum height shall be three feet for
fences  located closer to the road  than the portion of the principal dwelling
. (See graphics.)
      2.   Fence design. Fences in the front yard shall be non-obscuring (i.e.,
less than 50% opaque) in design.
      3.   Fences on corner parcels . On corner lots the following regulations
shall apply on the side yard facing a road :
         a.   A six-foot high fence shall be permitted provided it does not
extend closer to the street than the portion of the principal dwelling closest
to the street .
         b.   A 30-inch high fence may be erected in the setback area, provide
that any such fence shall be non-obscuring in design.
   B.   Fences in the RR, RE, AG-SF, and AG-C Districts. Fences in the RR, RE,
AG-SF, and AG-C Districts may be located in the required front, side, or rear
yard subject to the following requirements:
      1.   Maximum height. The maximum fence height shall be six feet, except
that fences located within the required front setback shall not exceed five
feet in height.
      2.   Fence design. Fences in the required front setback shall be non-
obscuring (i.e., less than 50% opaque) in design.
      3.   Electric fence  setback . Electric fences in agricultural areas
shall be set back at least 18 inches from all property lines .
   C.   Fences in public areas.
      1.   Fences that enclose public parks, playgrounds, or similar public
areas located within a developed residential area shall not exceed six feet in
height, measured from the surface of the ground. No greater than 25% of the
vertical surface of such fences shall be opaque so as to obstruct vision.
      2.   Fences designed as part of a recreational structure (e.g., ball
field backstops, tennis court enclosures) shall be exempt from the height
limitation required above.
   D.   Walls in residential and agricultural districts. Walls shall be
permitted only in the side or rear yards of residential and agricultural
districts, subject to the following requirements:
      1.   General standards. The maximum wall height shall not exceed six
feet, measured from ground level adjacent to the wall, provided that fill shall
not be permitted for the purpose of achieving a higher wall than otherwise
would be permitted.
      2.   Walls on corner parcels . On corner parcels , walls shall not be
permitted to extend closer to the road than any portion of the principal
building .
   E.   Entranceway structures . 
      1.   Entrance to residential developments . Residential subdivision
entranceway structures , such as walls, columns or gates which mark the
entrance to a single family subdivision or multiple-family development , shall
be permitted in the required setback area, provided that:
         a.   Entranceway structures shall not exceed eight feet in height and
48 square feet in size;
         b.   Entranceway structures shall not be located in the existing or
planned right-of-way ;
         c.   Approval of the Building Official and issuance of a building
permit shall be required prior to construction; and
         d.   Such structures shall not restrict emergency vehicle access.
      2.   Entrances to individual residential parcels . Residential
entranceway structures , such as walls, columns or gates shall be permitted to
mark the entrance to individual single-family residential parcels , subject to
the following conditions:
         a.   Entranceway structures shall not exceed four feet in height and
eight feet in length;
         b.   Entranceway structures shall be permitted in the required setback
area, provided they are not located in the existing or planned right-of-way ;
         c.   Entranceway structures may include a gate which shall not exceed
the height standards for front yard  fences in the district in which the
structure is located;
         d.   Approval of the Building Official and issuance of a building
permit shall be required prior to construction; and
         e.   Such structures shall not restrict emergency vehicle access.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013; Ord. passed 4-13-2022)
§ 6.03 GENERAL FENCE AND WALL STANDARDS.
   A.   Corner clearance. Walls and fences shall comply with the specifications
for maintenance of unobstructed sight distance for drivers, §
2.09.
   B.   Wall, fence , and gate materials. 
      Walls shall be constructed of masonry material that is architecturally
compatible with the materials used on the facade of the principal structure on
the site, such as face brick, decorative block, or poured concrete with
simulated brick or stone patterns.
      Fences shall consist of materials commonly used in conventional fence
construction, such as wood, vinyl or plastic, and metal. Razor wire shall not
be permitted. Fences that carry electric current shall be permitted only in
conjunction with an agricultural use, provided that any such fence shall be set
back at least 18 inches from all property lines . Barbed wire may be permitted
in nonresidential districts, provided that the barbed wire is at least six feet
above the ground, except in the Commercial-Agricultural District, where barbed
wire is permitted up to a height of six feet. Wood fences shall be constructed
of redwood, cedar, or an appropriate grade of pressure-treated wood. Chain link
fences shall not be permitted for screening purposes.
   C.   Finished appearance. If one side of a fence or wall has a more finished
appearance than the other, then the side of the fence or wall with the more
finished appearance shall face the exterior of the lot . This requirement shall
not apply to land used for agriculture and on residential lots greater than two
acres outside of a subdivision plat or site condominium .
   D.   Obstruction to use of adjoining property. No fence or wall shall be
erected where it would prevent or unreasonably obstruct the use adjacent
property, nor shall a fence or wall be erected where it would obstruct or
prevent the continued safe use of an existing driveway or other means of access
to adjacent property. In enforcing this provision, the Building Official may
require a fence or wall to be set back a minimum distance from a driveway or
property line .
   E.   Fence and wall maintenance. Fences and walls shall be maintained in
good condition. Rotten, crumbled, or broken components shall be replaced,
repaired, or removed. As required, surfaces shall be painted, stained, or
similarly treated.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
ARTICLE 7.00
SIGNS
§ 7.01 PURPOSE.
   These regulations are intended to permit signs and other displays that are
needed for the purpose of identification or advertising, subject to the
following objectives:
   1.   Safety. The requirements with regard to placement, installation,
maintenance, size, and location of signs are intended to minimize distractions
to motorists, maintain unobstructed vision for motorists, protect pedestrians,
and otherwise minimize any threat to public health or safety.
   2.   Aesthetics. Signs should enhance the aesthetic appeal of the township .
Thus, these regulations are intended to: 1) regulate signs that are out of
scale with surrounding buildings and structures , 2) prevent an excessive
accumulation of signs , and 3) encourage signs that enhance the appearance and
value of the business districts.
   3.   Equal protection and fairness. These regulations are designed to be
fair to each property owner by establishing uniform standards that provide
adequate exposure of signs to the public for all property owners.
   4.   Land use planning objectives. The placement and design of signs should
further the land use planning objectives of the township , and protect
neighborhood character and the value of surrounding properties.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 7.02 SCOPE OF REQUIREMENTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect,
construct, or alter any sign in Williamstown Township except in conformance
with the provisions of this article, including the issuance of a permit, except
as otherwise provided herein. (revised 12/1/1998)
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 7.03 DEFINITIONS.
   Words and phrases used in this article shall have the meaning set forth in
this section. Words and phrases not defined in this section but defined in
Article 1.00 shall be given the meanings set forth in
Article 1.00. All other words and phrases shall be given their common, ordinary
meaning, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
   ACCESSORY SIGN. A sign that pertains to the use of the premises on that it
is located.
   ANIMATED SIGN. A sign that uses lights, moving parts, or other means to
depict action, create an image of a living creature or person, or create a
special effect or scene.
   AWNING SIGN. A sign that is painted on, printed on, or attached flat against
the surface of an awning.
   BANNER SIGN. A sign made of fabric, cloth, paper, or other non-rigid
material that is typically not enclosed in a frame.
   BILLBOARDS. See OFF-PREMISES ADVERTISING SIGN.
   BULLETIN BOARD. A type of changeable copy sign that displays the name of an
institution, school, religious institution , library, community center,
fraternal lodge, golf course , country club , park, or other recreational
facility, and that displays announcements of its services and activities upon
the premises.
   CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN. A sign on that the message is designed to change,
either manually or automatically (for example, electronic time and temperature
signs ).
   COMMUNITY SPECIAL EVENT SIGN.   Signs and banners, including decorations and
displays celebrating a traditionally accepted patriotic or religious holiday,
identifying a special event of a municipal or non profit association, or school
activities.
   CONSTRUCTION SIGN. A temporary sign identifying the designer, contractors
and sub-contractors, and material suppliers participating in construction on
the property on that the sign is located.
   CYLINDRICAL SIGN. A ground sign that is in the shape of a cylinder or
barrel. A cylindrical sign has a footprint that is more or less in the shape of
a circle.
   DIRECTIONAL SIGN. A sign that is intended to direct the flow of vehicular
and pedestrian traffic to, from, and within a development site.
   FESTOON. A string of ribbons, tinsel, small flags, pinwheels or lights,
typically strung overhead in loops.
   FLASHING SIGN. A sign that contains an intermittent or sequential flashing
light source.
   FREESTANDING SIGN. A sign that is erected upon or supported by the ground,
including pole signs , pedestal signs , and ground signs .
   GASOLINE PRICE SIGN. A sign that is used to advertise the price of gasoline.
In the event that the brand identification sign is attached to or is a part of
the sign advertising price, that portion of the sign used for advertising price
shall be considered the gasoline price sign .
   GROUND SIGN. See PEDESTAL SIGN.
   ILLEGAL SIGN. A sign that does not meet the requirements of this Ordinance
and that has not received legal nonconforming status.
   ILLUMINATED SIGN. A sign that is lit by artificial light by either emission
or reflection.
   INCIDENTAL SIGN. A small sign , emblem, or decal informing the public of
goods, facilities, or services available on the premises. Examples of
incidental signs include credit card signs , signs indicating the hours of
business, no smoking signs , signs used to designate bathrooms, and signs
providing information on credit cards and business affiliations.
   INFLATABLE SIGN. A temporary sign consisting of a non porous bag or balloon
inflated with a gas.
   MANSARD. A sloped roof or roof-like facade. Signs mounted on the face of a
mansard roof shall be considered wall signs .
   MARQUEE. A permanent roof-like structure or canopy, supported by and
extending from the face of the building .
   MARQUEE SIGN. A sign attached to or supported by a marquee  structure .
   MOVING SIGN. A sign in that the sign itself or any portion of the sign moves
or revolves. A “rotating sign ” is a type of  MOVING SIGN. Such motion does not
refer to the method of changing the message on the sign.
   NAMEPLATE. A non-electric, on-premises identification sign giving only the
name, address, and/or occupation of an occupant or group of occupants.
   NEON SIGN. See OUTLINE TUBING SIGN.
   NONCOMMERCIAL MESSAGE SIGN. A sign that is not related to or connected with
trade and traffic or commerce in general and includes an election (political)
sign or a sign expressing an opinion or other point of view. (revised 2/6/2007)
   NONCONFORMING SIGN.
      a.   A sign that is prohibited under the terms of this Ordinance, but was
erected lawfully and was in use on the date of enactment of this Ordinance, or
amendment thereto.
      b.   A sign that does not conform to the requirements of this Ordinance,
but for which a variance has been granted.
   OBSOLETE SIGN.  A sign that advertises a product that is no longer made, a
business that is no longer in operation, or an activity or event that has
already occurred.
   OFF-PREMISES ADVERTISING SIGN. A sign that contains a message unrelated to a
business or profession conducted or to a commodity, service, or activity sold
or offered upon the premises where such sign is located. A “billboard” is a
type of off-premise advertising sign .
   ON-PREMISES ADVERTISING SIGN. A sign that contains a message related to a
business or profession conducted or to a commodity, service, or activity sold
or offered upon the premises where the sign is located.
   OUTLINE TUBING SIGN. A sign consisting of glass tubing, filled with a gas
such as neon, that glows when electric current is sent through it.
   PARAPET. The extension of a false front or wall above a roof line . Signs
mounted on the face of a parapet shall be considered wall signs .
   PEDESTAL SIGN. A three-dimensional, self-supporting, base-mounted
freestanding sign , consisting of two or more sides extending up from the base,
and upon that a message is painted or posted. A pedestal sign may also consist
of a base mounted cylindrical structure upon that a message is painted or
posted.
   PENNANT. A triangular, tapering flag, several of that are typically strung
together on or across a site or building for the purpose of attracting
attention.
   POLE SIGN. A type of freestanding sign that is elevated above the ground on
a pole.
   POLITICAL SIGN. A noncommercial message sign relating to matters to be voted
on in a local, state, or national election or referendum. See NONCOMMERCIAL
MESSAGE SIGN. (revised 2/6/2007)
   PORTABLE SIGN. A sign designed to be moved easily and not permanently
affixed to the ground or to a structure .
   POSTER PANEL. A type of temporary sign that is used to draw attention to
matters that are temporary in nature, such as price changes or sales. “A” frame
or sandwich signs are types of poster panel signs .
   PROJECTING SIGN. A sign, other than a flat wall sign , that projects more
than 12 inches from the face of the building or structure upon that it is
located. A projecting roof sign is one that projects beyond the face or
exterior wall surface of the building upon that the roof sign is mounted.
   PUBLIC SIGN. A sign erected in the public interest by or upon orders from a
local state, or federal public official. Examples of public signs include:
legal notices, safety signs , traffic signs , memorial plaques, signs of
historical interest, and similar signs .
   REAL ESTATE SIGN. A temporary sign that makes it known that real estate upon
which the sign is located is for sale, lease, or rent.
   REAL ESTATE DEVELOPMENT SIGN. A sign that is designed to promote the sale or
rental of lots , homes, or building space in a real estate development (such as
a subdivision or shopping center ) that is under construction.
   RESIDENTIAL ENTRANCEWAY SIGN. A sign that marks the entrance to a
subdivision, apartment complex, condominium  development , or other residential
development .
   ROOF LINE. The top edge of a roof or building parapet, whatever is higher,
excluding cupolas, pylons, chimneys, or similar minor projections.
   ROOF SIGN. Any sign that extends above the roof line or is erected over the
surface of the roof.
   ROTATING SIGN. See MOVING SIGN.
   SIGN. Any device, structure , fixture, or placard that uses words, numbers,
figures, graphic designs, logos or trademarks for the purpose of informing or
attracting the attention of persons.
   TEMPORARY SIGN. A sign not constructed or intended for long term use.
Examples of temporary signs include signs that announce a coming attraction, a
new building under construction, a community or civic project, or other special
events that occur for a limited period of time.
   TIME AND TEMPERATURE SIGNS.   Signs that display the current time and/or
temperature.
   UNDERHANGING SIGN. A sign suspended from the underside of a horizontal
surface, such as a canopy or marquee .
   VEHICLE SIGN.   Signs painted or mounted on the side of a vehicle, including
signs on the face of a truck trailer .
   WALL SIGN.  A sign attached parallel to and extending not more than 12
inches from the wall of a building . Painted signs , signs that consist of
individual letters, cabinet signs , and signs mounted on the face of a mansard
roof shall be considered WALL SIGNS. Permanent signs that are not affixed
directly to a window or are positioned next to a window so that they are
visible from the outside shall also be considered WALL SIGNS.
   WINDOW SIGN. A sign located in or on a window that is intended to be viewed
from the outside. Permanent  WINDOW SIGNS that are not affixed directly to a
window or are positioned next to a window so that they are visible from the
outside shall be considered “wall signs .”
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/71d151aa824b5086a107ad3293684d8be35e4585/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1905.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/71d151aa824b5086a107ad3293684d8be35e4585/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1907.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/71d151aa824b5086a107ad3293684d8be35e4585/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1909.jpg]
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 7.04 ENFORCEMENT.
   A.   Plans, specifications, and permits.
      1.   Permits. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, alter,
relocate, or structurally change a sign or other advertising structure , unless
specifically exempted by the article, without first obtaining a permit in
accordance with the provisions set forth herein. A permit shall require payment
of a fee, that shall be established by the Township Board .
      2.   Applications. Application for a sign permit shall be made upon forms
provided by the Building Official . The following information shall be
required:
         a.   Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant.
         b.   Location of the building , structure , or lot on that the sign is
to be attached or erected .
         c.   Position of the sign in relation to nearby buildings , structures
, and property lines .
         d.   Plans showing the dimension, lettering style, color, materials,
method of construction, method of illumination, and method of attachment to the
building or in the ground.
         e.   Copies of stress sheets and calculations, as required by the
Building Code.
         f.   Name and address of the person, firm, or corporation owning,
erecting, and maintaining the sign .
         g.   Information concerning required electrical connections.
         h.   Insurance policy or bond, as required in this article.
         i.   Written consent of the owner and/or lessee of the premises upon
that the sign is to be erected .
         j.   Other information required by the Building Official to make the
determination that the sign is in compliance with all applicable laws and
regulations.
      3.   Review of application.
         a.   Planning Commission review. Sign permit applications submitted in
conjunction with the proposed construction of a new building or addition to an
existing building shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission as a part of the
required site plan review. Proposed signs must be shown on the site plan.
         b.   Building Official review. Unless otherwise specified herein, the
Building Official shall review the sign permit application for any sign
proposed on a site or existing building where no other new construction is
proposed.
         c.   Issuance of a permit. Following review and approval of a sign
application by the Planning Commission or Building Official as appropriate, the
Building Official shall have the authority to issue a sign permit.
      4.   Exceptions. A new permit shall not be required for ordinary
servicing or repainting of an existing sign message, cleaning of a sign , or
changing of the message on the sign where the sign is designed for such changes
(such as lettering on a marquee or numbers on a gasoline price sign ).
Furthermore, a permit shall not be required for certain exempt signs listed in
§
7.05, subsection A. However, an electrical permit shall be required for all
signs that make use of electricity.
   B.   Inspection and maintenance.
      1.   Inspection of new signs . 
         All signs for which a permit has been issued shall be inspected by the
Building Official when erected . Approval shall be granted only if the sign has
been constructed in compliance with the approved plans and applicable Zoning
Ordinance and Building Code standards.
         In cases where fastenings or anchorages are to be eventually bricked
in or otherwise enclosed, the sign erector shall advise the Building Official
when such fastenings are to be installed so that inspection may be completed
before enclosure.
      2.   Inspection of existing signs. The Code Enforcer shall have the
authority to routinely enter onto property to inspect existing signs .
      3.   Maintenance. All signs shall be maintained at all times in a safe,
secure, and aesthetically attractive manner. Exposed surfaces shall be cleaned
and painted as necessary. Broken and defective parts shall be repaired and
replaced. Tattered, faded, or torn window signs shall be removed.
      4.   Signs in violation of ordinance declared a public nuisance . Any
sign that is erected , constructed, maintained, enlarged, altered, moved, or
converted in violation of any of the provisions of this Ordinance is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance per se, and may be abated by order of any
court of competent jurisdiction.
      5.   Correction of violations.
         a.   If the Code Enforcer finds that any sign is in violation of this
Ordinance, he or she shall notify one or more of the responsible persons to
correct the violations by repair, removal, or other action, within a timetable
established by the Code Enforcement Officer.
         b.   The notice provided in subsection (a) may be accompanied or
followed by a written order, sent to the responsible persons, requiring
correction of violations by repair, removal, or other action within 30 days.
Where there is imminent danger to public safety, immediate removal or action
may be required, pursuant to this Ordinance or other applicable ordinances.
         c.   For purposes of this section, responsible persons includes
persons who own, erect, or maintain a sign , the owner and/or operator of the
business to that a sign pertains and the owner and/or operator of the building
, structure , or premises upon that the sign is located.
   C.   Removal of obsolete signs . 
      Any sign that identifies a business that is no longer in operation, or
that identifies an activity or event that has already occurred, shall be
considered abandoned and shall be removed by the owner, agent, or person having
use of the building or structure . Upon vacating a commercial or industrial
establishment, the proprietor shall be responsible for removal of all signs
used in conjunction with the business within 30 days after vacating the
business.
      However, where a conforming sign  structure and frame are typically
reused by a current occupant in a leased or rented building , the building
owner shall not be required to remove the sign  structure and frame in the
interim periods when the building is not occupied , provided that the sign
 structure and frame are maintained in good condition.
   D.   Nonconforming signs . No nonconforming sign shall be altered or
reconstructed, unless the alteration or reconstruction is in compliance with
Article 3.00 of this Ordinance, except that nonconforming signs shall comply
with the following regulations:
      1.   Repairs and maintenance. Normal maintenance shall be permitted,
provided that any nonconforming sign that is destroyed by any means to an
extent greater than 50% of the sign ’s pre-catastrophe fair market value,
exclusive of the foundation, shall not be reconstructed. Normal maintenance
shall include painting of chipped or faded signs ; replacement of faded or
damaged surface panels; or, repair or replacement of electrical wiring or
electrical devices.
      2.   Nonconforming changeable copy signs . The message on a nonconforming
changeable copy sign or nonconforming bulletin board sign may be changed
provided that the change does not create any greater nonconformity .
      3.   Substitution. No nonconforming sign shall be replaced with another
nonconforming sign . However, the sign face containing the message may be
replaced with a different message without affecting the legal nonconforming
status of a sign , provided that the sign  structure or frame is not altered.
      4.   Modifications to the principal building . Whenever the principal
building on a site that a nonconforming sign is located is modified to the
extent that site plan review and approval is required, the nonconforming sign
shall be removed.
   E.   Appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals . Any party who has been refused
a sign permit for a proposed sign or received a correction or removal order for
an existing sign may file an appeal with the Zoning Board of Appeals , in
accordance with §
29.05 of this Ordinance.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 7.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   A.   Permitted exempt signs. A sign permit shall not be required for the
following signs , that shall be permitted subject to applicable provisions
herein:
      1.   Address numbers with a numeral height no greater than six inches for
residences and 18 inches for businesses.
      2.   Nameplates identifying the occupants of the building , not to exceed
two square feet.
      3.   Memorial signs or tablets.
      4.   Signs on a bus, truck, trailer , or other vehicle while operated and
used for transport in the normal course of a business, provided that the
primary use of the vehicle displaying the sign shall not be for the purpose of
advertising a business on the premises where the vehicle is parked.
      5.   Public signs , including the authorized signs of a government body
or public utility , including traffic signs , legal notices, railroad crossing
signs , warnings of a hazard, and similar signs .
      6.   Up to five flags per parcel bearing the official design of a nation,
state, municipality , educational institution, or noncommercial organization.
(revised 2/3/1998)
      7.   Incidental signs , provided that total of all such signs shall not
exceed two square feet.
      8.   Traffic-control signs that conform to the requirements of the
Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
      9.   One private parking lot and driveway identification sign , not to
exceed three square feet per sign and six feet in height.
      10.   Permanent signs on vending machines, gas pumps, or ice containers
indicating only the contents of such devices, provided that the sign area of
each device shall not exceed 15 square feet.
      11.   Real estate signs that advertise the rental, sale, or lease of the
property on which they are located, subject to the requirements in §
7.05, subsection C.
      12.   “Help wanted” signs soliciting employees for the place of business
where posted, provided that the maximum area for all such signs shall be four
square feet.
      13.   Any sign that is located completely within an enclosed building ,
and that is not visible from outside the building .
      14.   Plaques or signs designating a building as a historic structure ,
and names of buildings and date of construction when cut into a masonry surface
or when constructed of bronze or similar material.
      15.   “No Trespassing,” “No Hunting,” and “No Dumping” signs .
      16.   Signs used to direct vehicular or pedestrian traffic to parking
areas, loading areas, or to certain buildings or locations on the site, subject
to the following conditions:
         a.   Directional signs shall not contain logos or other forms of
advertising.
         b.   Directional signs shall not exceed four square feet in area, or
four feet in height.
         c.   Directional signs may be located in the front setback area.
      17.   Temporary window signs , subject to the requirements in §
7.05, subsection C.
      18.   Historical markers, including centennial farm  signs .
   B.   Prohibited signs. The following signs are prohibited in all districts:
      1.   Any sign not expressly permitted.
      2.   Signs that incorporate flashing or moving lights; however, time and
temperature or stock market signs shall be permitted.
      3.   Banners, pennants , festoons , spinners, and streamers, unless
specifically permitted elsewhere is this article.
      4.   String lights used for commercial purposes, other than holiday
decorations, that shall be permitted for a period not to exceed 60 days.
      5.   Moving signs , including any sign that has any visible moving parts,
visible revolving parts, visible mechanical movement, or other visible movement
achieved by electrical, electronic, or mechanical means, including intermittent
electric pulsations or movement caused by normal wind current.
      6.   Any sign or sign  structure that:
         a.   Is structurally unsafe;
         b.   Constitutes a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate
maintenance, dilapidation, or abandonment;
         c.   Is capable of causing electric shock to persons who come in
contact with it; or
         d.   Is not kept in good repair, such that it has broken parts,
missing letters, or non-operational lights.
      7.   Any sign  erected on a tree or utility pole, except signs of a
government or utility, except for “No Trespassing,” “No Hunting,” or “No
Dumping” signs .
      8.   Obsolete signs , as specified in §
7.04, subsection C, except signs of an identifiably historic nature, such as
painted barn signs .
      9.   Portable signs , except where expressly permitted in this Ordinance.
      10.   Signs affixed to a parked vehicle or truck trailer that is being
used principally for advertising purposes, rather than for transportation
purposes.
      11.   Any sign that obstructs free access to or egress from a required
door, window, fire exit, or other required exit.
      12.   Any sign that by reason of its size, location, content, coloring,
or manner of illumination, constitutes in the opinion of the Ingham County
Sheriff a traffic hazard or a detriment to traffic safety by obstructing the
vision of drivers, by distracting drivers, or by obstructing, or detracting
from the visibility of any traffic sign or control devices on public streets
and roads .
      13.   Any sign that makes use of the words “Stop”, “Look”, or “Danger,”
or any other words, phrases, symbol or characters, in such a manner as to
interfere with, mislead, or confuse traffic.
      14.   Any sign containing obscene, indecent, or immoral matter.
      15.   Any sign unlawfully installed, erected , enlarged, altered, or
maintained.
      16.   Roof signs .
      17.   Projecting signs .
      18.   Poster panel (A-frame or sandwich) signs , except when used to
advertise seasonal agricultural commodities.
      19.   Signs on street furniture, including but not limited to, signs on
benches and trash receptacles.
      20.   Real estate signs no longer valid due to the sale, rental, or lease
of the property.
   C.   Temporary signs . Temporary signs shall be permitted as specified in
the table on the following page. (revised 3/6/2001; 2/6/2007)
   D.   Off-premises advertising signs. Freestanding off-premises advertising
signs shall be permitted only in the I-1, Light Industrial District, subject to
the following requirements:
      1.   Maximum size. No off-premises advertising sign shall exceed 72
square feet in area per sign face. (revised 10/7/97)
      2.   Maximum height. The maximum height for such signs shall be 25 feet.
      3.   Setbacks . 
         a.   Off-premises advertising signs shall comply with the setback
requirements for principal structures in the district in that they are located.
         b.   No part of any such sign shall be located closer than 300 feet to
any park, school, church , hospital , cemetery , or government building .
      4.   Distance from other signs .
         a.   There shall be a minimum of 1,000 feet between off-premises
advertising signs along any public road or highway .
         b.   There shall be a minimum of 100 feet between any off-premises
advertising sign and any freestanding  on-premises  sign .
      5.   Location. Off-premises advertising signs shall not be located on or
over the roofs of buildings .
      6.   Special land use review. Off-premises advertising signs shall be
subject to special land use review (§
29.03).
   Table 7.1: Temporary Sign Standards [see §
7.05, subsection C]
               P = Portable Sign      G = Ground Sign      W = Wall Sign
Type of                     Max   Max
Temporary Districts Form of Size  Height  Max # of Permit   Req’d Permitted
Sign      Permitted Sign    (sq.  (feet)  Signs    Req’d? Setback Duration
                            ft.)
                                                     Max  Max    Max #
Type of Temporary  Districts Permitted      Form of  Size Height of     Permit   Req’d Permitted
Sign                                        Sign     (sq. (feet) Signs  Req’d? Setback Duration
                                                     ft.)
                                                                                         From
                                                                                         issuance of
Construction Sign  All                      G, W     32   10 ft. 1      Yes      [a]     building
                                                                                         permit to
                                                                                         issuance of
                                                                                         C of O
       Sale or
       lease of
       individual  Residential;Agricultural P, G     6    6      1[b]   No       [d]
       home or
       residential
       lot                                                                               Remove
Real   Sale or                                                                           within 30
Estate lease of    Office ; Commercial;                                                  days of
       individual  Industrial               P, G, W  6    6      1[b]   No       [d]     sale or
       business or                                                                       lease
       vacant lot
       Sale or
       lease of    All                      P, G     32   10     1[b]   Yes      [d]
       unplatted
       vacant land
                                                                                         Remove
                                                                                         within 30
Real Estate        All                      P, G     32   10     [c]    Yes      [d]     days after
Development Sign                                                                         all units
                                                                                         or lots are
                                                                                         sold/leased
Grand Opening Sign Commercial               G, W     16   10     1      No       [a]     30 days
                                                                                         4
Garage Sale Sign   All                      G, W     2    5      2      No       [d]     consecutive
                                                                                         days
                                                                                         14 days
Community Special                                    32                                  prior
Event Sign         All                      G, W[e]  [e]  10[e]  2[e]   Yes      [a]     through 7
                                                                                         days after
                                                                                         event
Noncommercial      All [h]                  P, G, W  16   10     --     No       [d]     --
Message Sign
Temporary Window                            Paper;
Sign               Commercial; Office       Plastic; [f]  [f]    [f]    No       --      30 days [g]
                                            Fabric
Seasonal Signs                                                                           During the
Advertising        All                      P, G     16   10     1 per  No       [d]     seasonal
Agricultural                                                     parcel                  selling
Commodities                                                                              period
 
Footnotes:
[a]   The temporary sign shall comply with the setback requirements for
principal structures in the district in that it is located.
[b]   On a corner parcel , two signs (one facing each street ) shall be
permitted.
[c]   One sign shall be permitted for each frontage on a principal or minor
arterial road .
[d]   The temporary sign may be located in the required setback area, provided
that the applicant has obtained permission from the property owner and provided
further that the sign does not obstruct the vision of drivers or detract from
the visibility of any traffic sign or traffic control device. No such sign
shall be located within the road  right-of-way .  (revised 2/6/2007)
[e]   Community special event signs may include ground or wall signs , subject
to obtaining a permit from the Building Official . Banners, pennants , or
similar displays may be permitted subject to Building Official approval.
(revised 12/1/1998)
[f]   The total of all window signs , temporary and permanent, shall not exceed
one-third of the total window area and shall not exceed two square feet in
office district. The area of permanent window signs shall also be counted in
determining compliance with standards for total area of wall signs .
[g]   Temporary window signs that are faded, yellowed, ripped, or otherwise
damaged shall be removed immediately.
[h]   Noncommercial message signs are prohibited on property owned or under the
control of Williamstown Township, Ingham County, the State of Michigan, the
United States of America, or any school district. (revised 2/6/2007)
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 7.06 SIGN DESIGN STANDARDS.
   A.   Construction standards.
      1.   General requirements. All signs shall be designed and constructed in
a safe and stable manner in accordance with the township ’s adopted building
code, electrical code, and other applicable codes and ordinances. All
electrical wiring associated with a freestanding sign shall be installed
underground.
   B.   Illumination. 
      1.   General requirements. Signs shall be illuminated only by steady,
stationary, shielded light sources directed solely at the sign , or internal to
it. Signs and billboards shall be lit from above only. All illuminated outdoor
advertising signs shall be equipped with an automatic time controller that
prevents the operation of the lighting fixtures between the hours of 11:00 p.m.
and sunrise.
      2.   Non-glare, shielded lighting. Use of glaring, unshielded, or
unfiltered lights or bulbs shall be prohibited. Lights shall be shielded so as
not to project onto adjoining properties or thoroughfares .
      3.   Traffic hazards. Sign illumination that could distract motorists or
otherwise create a traffic hazard shall be prohibited.
      4.   Bare bulb illumination. Illumination by bare bulbs or flames is
prohibited.
      5.   Exceptions. Signs constructed of translucent material and lit wholly
from within do not require shielding (dark backgrounds with light lettering are
preferred). (revised 3/6/2001)
   C.   Location.
      1.   Within a public right-of-way . No sign shall be located within,
project into, or overhang a public right-of-way , except as otherwise permitted
herein.
      2.   Compliance with setback requirements. All signs shall comply with
the setback requirements for principal structures in the district in that they
are located, except as otherwise permitted herein.
      3.   Sight lines for motorists. Signs shall comply with the requirements
for unobstructed motorist visibility in §
2.09.
   D.   Measurement.
      1.   Sign area. Sign area shall be computed as follows:
         a.   General requirements. Where a sign consists of a generally flat
surface or sign face on that lettering and other information is affixed, the
sign area shall be computed by measuring the entire face of the sign . In the
case of freestanding , ground , pedestal , and cylindrical signs , the area of
the sign shall include the entire structure (including posts or poles) upon
that the sign is located. If the sign or sign  structure has openings (for
example, between the structure and the sign ), the sign area shall be computed
by measuring the area of the envelope required to enclose the entire sign and
sign  structure . (revised 3/6/2001)
         b.   Individual letters. Where a sign consists of individual letters
and logo affixed directly to a building , the area of the sign shall be
computed by measuring the area of the envelope required to enclose the
lettering and logo.
         c.   Freestanding sign . The area of a double-faced freestanding sign
shall be computed using only one face of the sign provided that:
            1)   The outline and dimensions of both faces are identical (i.e.,
the outlines of back to back faces shall be coterminous), and
            2)   The faces are back to back so that only one face is visible at
any given time. The area of a double faced signs shall be computed using the
area of the larger face if the two faces are of unequal area.
         d.   Ground sign or pedestal sign . The area of a ground or pedestal
sign shall be computed by measuring the entire vertical surface of a face upon
that the letters and logo are attached. In the case of a multi-faced ground
sign , the area of the sign shall be computed using only one face of the sign .
         e.   Cylindrical sign . The area of a cylindrical ground sign shall be
computed by multiplying the diameter of the cylinder by its height.
      2.   Sign height. The height of a freestanding sign shall be measured
from ground level at or beneath the midpoint of the face of the sign to the
highest point of the sign or supporting structure . For the purposes of
determining sigsign n height, “ground level” shall be measured from the
finished grade , or if there has been filling , from the native grade .
      3.   Setback and distance measurements. The following guidelines shall be
used to determine compliance with setback and distance measurements:
         a.   The distance between two signs shall be measured along a straight
horizontal line that represents the shortest distance between the two signs .
         b.   The distance between a sign and a parking lot or building shall
be measured along a straight horizontal line that represents the shortest
distance between the sign and the outer edge of the parking lot or building .
         c.   The distance between a sign and a building or property line shall
be measured along a straight horizontal line that represents the shortest
distance between the sign and the building or property line .
   E.   Sign design features. The following standards shall apply to signs in
office and commercial districts:
      1.   Location. Signs shall not cover architectural details such as
arches, transom windows, moldings, columns, capitals, sills, cornices, and
similar details.
      2.   Material. Sign materials shall complement the construction materials
and architectural style of the building facade.
      3.   Lettering style. Lettering style shall be clean and simple to assure
readability and shall be in harmony with the style of architecture of the
building . No more than two different type styles shall be used on each sign .
      4.   Colors. No more than three colors may be used per sign . Sign colors
shall be in harmony with the building colors and architecture.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 7.07 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT SIGNS.
   The following signs shall be permitted in all districts zoned for
residential or agricultural use (including the R-1, R-1-S, RR, RE, AG-SF, AG-C,
RM-1, and MHP Districts). (revised 12/1/1998)
   A.   Nameplate and street address. A nameplate sign and street address shall
be permitted in accordance with §
7.05, subsection A.
   B.   Temporary signs . Real estate signs , garage sale signs , and other
temporary signs shall be permitted in accordance with §
7.05, subsection C.
   C.   Management office identification. Rental or management offices in the
RM 1 or MHP districts shall be permitted one identification sign not to exceed
six square feet in area.
   D.   Residential entranceway or identification signs . Permanent residential
entranceway or identification signs shall be permitted in accordance with the
following regulations:
      1.   There shall be no more than one such sign located at each entrance
to a subdivision or other residential development .
      2.   Entranceway structures shall not exceed eight feet in height and 48
square feet in size.
      3.   The sign shall cover no more than 50% of the entranceway structure .
      4.   Such signs shall be set back a minimum distance of ten feet from any
property line or right-of-way line.
      5.   Such signs shall comply with the requirements for unobstructed sight
distance, §
2.09.
   E.   Signs for permitted principal nonresidential uses. Permitted principal
nonresidential uses in residential districts, such as schools, colleges ,
museums, municipal buildings , churches , and country clubs , shall be
permitted to erect the following signage:
      1.   Number. There shall be no more than one freestanding or wall sign
per parcel , except on a corner parcel , one sign may be permitted per street
frontage, provided that no more than one sign is a freestanding sign .
      2.   Size. The maximum size of each sign shall be as permitted in §
7.08, subsections D.2 and E.2.
      3.   Setback . Freestanding signs shall be located no closer than 15 feet
to any right-of-way line, property line , driveway , or vehicular approach.
      4.   Height. The maximum height of any freestanding sign shall be five
feet.
   F.   Signs for nonconforming nonresidential uses. Each nonconforming
nonresidential use located in a residential district shall be permitted one
non-illuminated wall sign , not to exceed two square feet in area.
   G.   Permanent farm signs.
      1.   Number and type. There shall be no more than one freestanding  or
one wall sign  per parcel.
      2.   Size. The maximum size of the freestanding  or wall sign  shall be
24 square feet.
      3.   Setback of freestanding sign. Freestanding signs  may be located in
the required front yard, provided that no portion of any such sign shall be
located closer than 15 feet to the existing or planned right-of-way line.
      4.   Height. The height of a freestanding sign  shall not exceed six
feet.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013; Ord. passed 12-14-2022)
§ 7.08 NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICT SIGNS.
   The following on-premises advertising  signs shall be permitted in districts
zoned for nonresidential use, including districts zoned OS-1, B-1, B-2, I-1,
and M (revised 10/7/1997):
   A.   Signs for residential district uses in a nonresidential district. Signs
for nonconforming residential district uses in a nonresidential district shall
be governed by the sign regulations for residential district uses set forth in
§
7.07.
   B.   Signs for nonconforming nonresidential uses. Signs for nonconforming
nonresidential uses in an office , commercial, or industrial district (for
example, a nonconforming commercial use in an industrial district) shall be
governed by the sign regulations that are appropriate for the type of use, as
specified in this section.
   C.   Temporary signs . Real estate signs and other temporary signs shall be
permitted in accordance with §
7.05, subsection C.
   D.   Wall signs. Wall signs shall be permitted in office , commercial, and
industrial districts subject to the following regulations:
      1.   Number. One wall sign , that may be an on-premises or off-premises
advertising sign , shall be permitted per street or highway frontage on each
parcel or each tenant’s space in a multi-tenant structure . Tenants who occupy
a corner space in a multi-tenant structure shall be permitted to have one sign
on each side of the building . Where several tenants use a common entrance in a
multi-tenant structure , only one wall sign shall be permitted, but the total
sign area should be allocated on an equal basis to all tenants.
      2.   Size. The total area of a wall sign shall not exceed one and one-
half square feet per linear foot of building frontage, but in no case shall the
wall sign exceed 48 square feet in area. In the case of a multi-tenant building
or shopping center where each tenant has its own entrance and building
frontage, these size requirements shall apply to each tenant individually,
based on the width of each tenant’s unit at the front façade. (revised 10/7/
1997)
      3.   Location. One wall sign may be located on each side of a building
that faces a street or highway .
      4.   Vertical dimensions. The maximum vertical dimension of any wall sign
shall not exceed one-third of the building height .
      5.   Horizontal dimensions. The maximum horizontal dimension of any wall
mounted sign shall not exceed two-thirds of the width of the building .
      6.   Height. The top of a wall sign shall not be higher than whatever is
lowest:
         a.   The maximum height specified for the district in that the sign is
located.
         b.   The top of the sills at the first level on windows above the
first story .
         c.   The top of the wall on that the sign is located.
   E.   Freestanding signs . Freestanding signs shall be permitted in office ,
commercial, and industrial districts subject to the following regulations:
      1.   Number. One freestanding sign , that may be an on-premises or off-
premises advertising sign , shall be permitted per street or highway frontage
on each parcel . However, only one sign shall be permitted on lots having
frontage on more than one street if a single sign can be located such that it
is visible from both streets . In multi-tenant buildings or shopping centers
the total permitted sign area may be allocated for use by individual tenants.
(revised 10/7/1997)
      2.   Size. The total area of a freestanding sign shall not exceed one-
half of a square foot per linear foot of lot frontage, but in no case shall a
freestanding sign exceed 48 square feet in area. One freestanding sign up to 72
square feet in size may be permitted for a mixed use or nonresidential Planned
Development , subject to review in accordance with §
29.04. (revised 10/7/1997, 12/1/1998)
      3.   Setback from the right-of-way . Freestanding signs may be located in
the required front yard , provided that no portion of any such sign shall be
located closer than 15 to the existing or planned right-of-way line. If a
parcel is served by a service drive , no portion of a freestanding sign shall
be closer than five feet to the edge of the drive.
      4.   Setback from residential districts. Freestanding signs shall be
located no closer than 50 feet to any residential or agricultural district.
      5.   Height. The height of a freestanding sign in any nonresidential
district shall not exceed six feet. However, freestanding signs up to 15 feet
in height may be permitted by the Township Board , subject to special land use
review, §
29.03.
   F.   Marquee signs . Marquee signs shall be permitted for theaters located
in commercial districts subject to the following requirements:
      1.   Construction. Marquee signs shall consist of hard incombustible
materials. The written message shall be affixed flat to the vertical face of
the marquee .
      2.   Vertical clearance. A minimum vertical clearance of ten feet shall
be provided beneath any marquee .
      3.   Projection. Limitations imposed by this Ordinance concerning
projection of signs from the face of a wall or building shall not apply to
marquee signs , provided that marquee signs shall comply with the setback
requirements for the district in that they are located.
      4.   Number. One marquee shall be permitted per lot .
      5.   Size. The total size of a marquee sign shall not exceed one and one-
half square feet per linear foot of building frontage.
      6.   Compliance with size requirements for wall sign . The area of
permanent lettering on a marquee sign shall be counted in determining
compliance with the standards for total area of wall signs permitted on the
parcel .
   G.   Awnings and canopies. Signs on awnings and canopies in commercial,
office , and industrial districts shall be permitted, subject to the following
standards:
      1.   Coverage. The total area of the lettering and logo shall not exceed
25% of the total area of the awning or canopy that would be visible in a
drawing of a facade on that the awning is located.
      2.   Compliance with size requirements for wall signs . The area of signs
on awnings or canopies shall be counted in determining compliance with the
standards for total area of wall signs permitted on the parcel .
      3.   Projection. Limitations imposed by this Ordinance concerning
projection of signs from the face of a wall or building shall not apply to
awning and canopy signs , provided that such signs shall comply with the
setback requirements for the district in that they are located.
   H.   Gasoline price signs . Gasoline price signs shall be permitted subject
to the following standards:
      1.   Number. In addition to other permitted signs , gasoline filling
stations shall be permitted one gasoline price sign per street frontage.
      2.   Size. The total sign area dedicated to displaying gasoline prices
shall not exceed 20 square feet. The gasoline price sign shall be counted in
determining compliance with the standards for total area of signs permitted on
the parcel .
      3.   Setback. Gasoline price signs shall comply with the setback and
height requirements specified for freestanding signs in the district in that
the signs are located.
      4.   Electronic changeable copy. Gasoline price signs may incorporate
electronic changeable copy as up to 50% of the sign face, provided that the
copy shall not change more than once every ten seconds. Illumination levels
from any electronic changeable copy sign shall not exceed 0.5 foot-candles at
all property lines , measured five feet from the ground; a photometric plan
shall be submitted for all such signs to confirm compliance with this standard.
   I.   Incidental signs . Incidental signs , as defined in §
7.03, shall be permitted in accordance with §
7.05, subsection A.
   J.   Window signs . Temporary and permanent window signs shall be permitted
on the inside of buildings in commercial and office districts provided that the
total combined area of such signs (including incidental signs ) shall not
exceed one-quarter of the total window area. The area of permanent window signs
shall be counted in determining compliance with standards for total area of
wall signs on the parcel . Temporary window signs shall comply with the
requirements in §
7.05, subsection C.
   K.   Time/temperature/stock market signs . Time, temperature, and stock
market signs shall be permitted in commercial and office districts subject to
the following conditions:
      1.   Frequency of message change. The message change shall not be more
frequent than once every three seconds.
      2.   Size. The area of these types of signs shall be included within the
maximum sign area permitted on the site.
      3.   Number. One such sign shall be permitted per street frontage.
   L.   Underhanging signs . One underhanging sign shall be permitted for each
business, subject to the following conditions:
      1.   Vertical clearance. A minimum vertical clearance of eight feet shall
be provided between the bottom edge of the sign and the surface of the
sidewalk.
      2.   Setback . Underhanging signs shall be located at least four inches
behind the outer edge of the horizontal surface from that they are suspended.
      3.   Orientation. Underhanging signs shall be designed to serve
pedestrians rather than vehicular traffic.
      4.   Size. Underhanging signs shall not exceed six square feet in area.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 7.09 PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT.
   A.   Any violation of this Ordinance, or any part thereof, shall be deemed a
municipal civil infraction and is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500. Upon
notice of a violation, the appropriate township employee shall investigate any
violation and then make a determination as to whether the penalty shall be
imposed. The imposition of a penalty for a violation shall not excuse the
violation or be considered a permit to allow the violation to continue. Each
day that a violation exists or continues to exist shall constitute a separate
offense. The Township Supervisor or his/her designated agent is hereby
authorized to write and serve municipal civil infraction tickets. This
municipal civil infraction ticket shall serve as notice of the alleged
violation.
   Proceedings for the municipal civil infraction shall proceed as provided in
the Township Municipal Civil Infractions Ordinance.
   B.   If the township determines that the owner of the offending sign is in
violation of this Ordinance, the township shall provide written notice to the
owner, which shall identify the violation and request corrective action to cure
the violation and restore the property within a specific period of tune.
   C.   If the violation has not been cured and property restored within the
specified period of time, the township is authorized to take appropriate legal
action, which may include injunctive or other equitable relief or issuance of a
municipal civil infraction citation.
(Ord. 54, passed 6-11-2014)
ARTICLE 8.00
SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO SPECIFIC USES
§ 8.01 INTENT AND SCOPE OF APPLICATION.
   Each use listed in this article, whether permitted by right or subject to
approval as a special land use , shall be subject to the site development
standards specified, in addition to applicable standards and requirements for
the district in which the use is located. These standards are intended to
alleviate the impact from a use which is of a size or type, or which possesses
characteristics which are unique or atypical in the district in which the use
is located. These standards are further intended to assure that such uses will
be compatible with surrounding uses and the orderly development of the
district. Conformance with these standards shall be subject to site plan
review.
   Unless otherwise specified, each use listed in this article shall be subject
to all applicable yard , bulk and other standards for the district in which the
use is located. Compliance with the standards in this article does not relieve
the owner or operator of a permitted use from complying with additional
standards in other applicable township ordinances, including the Township
Nuisance Ordinance.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 8.02 SCOPE OF REQUIREMENTS.
   A.   Adult book or supply stores, adult motion picture theaters , adult live
stage performing theaters , adult outdoor motion picture theaters , and group
“A” cabarets. In the development and execution of this Ordinance and this
section, it is recognized that there are certain uses which, because of their
very nature, have serious objectionable characteristics, particularly when
several of them are concentrated under certain circumstances, thereby having a
deleterious effect upon the adjacent areas. The special regulations in this
section are intended to prevent a concentration of these uses in any one area,
so as to prevent the blighting, deterioration, or downgrading of an area. The
following requirements are intended to accomplish these purposes:
      1.   The establishment of the types of adult regulated uses listed below
shall be prohibited if the establishment of such use will constitute the second
such use within a 1,000 foot radius (i.e., not more than one such use within
1,000 feet of another). The distance between uses shall be measured
horizontally between the nearest property lines .
         a.   Adult book or supply stores.
         b.   Adult motion picture theaters .
         c.   Adult motion picture arcade.
         d.   Adult motel .
         e.   Adult model studio.
         f.   Adult live stage performing theaters .
         g.   Adult outdoor motion picture theaters .
         h.   Group “A” cabarets.
      2.   It shall be unlawful to hereafter establish any adult regulated use
if the proposed regulated use will be within a 600-foot radius of the
following:
         a.   Any “Class C” establishment licensed by the Michigan Liquor
Control Commission.
         b.   Pool or billiard halls.
         c.   Coin-operated amusement centers.
         d.   Dance centers which typically cater to teens.
         e.   Ice or roller skating rinks.
         f.   Pawn shops.
         g.   Indoor or drive-in movie theaters .
         h.   Public parks, playgrounds, or other recreation uses.
         i.   Churches , convents, monasteries, synagogue, or similar religious
institutions .
         j.   Day care centers or nurseries.
         k.   Any public, private, or parochial nursery , primary, or secondary
school.
         l.   Any residentially used or zoned land, including land that is
zoned R-1, R-I-S, RR, AG-SF, RM-1, or AG-C.
      3.   The distance between uses shall be measured horizontally between the
nearest property lines .
      4.   The building and premises shall be designed and constructed so that
material depicting, describing, or relating to “specified sexual activities” or
“specified anatomical areas” (as defined in this Ordinance) cannot be observed
by pedestrians or from vehicles on any public right-of-way . This provision
shall apply to any display, decoration, sign , show window, or other opening.
   B.   Airports and related uses. Airports , landing sites and platforms,
hangars, masts, and other facilities for the operation of aircraft may be
permitted, subject to the following conditions:
      1.   Airports for public use, landing sites for commercial use , and
related accessory uses .
         a.   Plan approval. The plans for such facilities shall be approved by
the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and the Michigan Department of
Transportation, Office of Aeronautics prior to submittal to the township for
review and approval.
         b.   Minimum standards. Such facilities shall comply with the
standards established by the FAA and the Michigan Office of Aeronautics
concerning obstruction of air navigation.
         c.   Clear zones. All required “clear zones” (as defined by the FAA)
shall be acquired and owned by the airport .
         d.   Aircraft and vehicle parking. Sufficient parking shall be
provided for aircraft storage. Vehicular parking shall be provided for airport
users, and for offices, restaurants , sales, and other uses associated with the
airport , subject to the requirements in
Article 4.00.
         e.   Approval from utility companies. The plans for such facilities
shall be submitted to all utility companies serving the area, including
companies that have communication towers within two miles of the proposed
facility.
         f.   Setbacks . No portion of any landing site or pad, runway, or
similar facility shall be located closer than 500 feet to any parcel of land
that is zoned or used for residential purposes. This setback shall not apply to
landing sites used for private, noncommercial use.
      2.   Landing sites for personal aircraft and limited commercial use .
Landing sites for personal aircraft and limited commercial use may be permitted
subject to the following conditions:
         a.   All such landing sites shall comply with applicable laws and
regulations promulgated by the Federal Aviation Administration and the Michigan
Office of Aeronautics.
         b.   Landing sites for personal aircraft use shall be for the sole use
of the person who owns or maintains the landing area and his or her invited
guests.
         c.    LIMITED COMMERCIAL USE shall mean that a landing area may be
used by aircraft used for crop dusting or spraying, flying banners, or
transporting parachutists. A landing site may also be used as a take-off point
for hot air balloons.
         d.    Twelve take-offs and 12 landings may be permitted per day.
         e.   No more than one accessory building (e. g., hangar, garage,
storage building , etc.) shall be permitted.
         f.   Landing sites shall not be used by aircraft for commercial
passenger or cargo operations, except as specifically noted herein.
         g.   Landing sites shall not be used for conducting flight
instruction.
         h.   Landing sites shall not be used as a base for charters or rental
of aircraft .
         i.   Landing sites shall not be used for commercial maintenance or
overhaul of aircraft , or for the sale of fuel, except that maintenance for or
by the person who owns or maintains the landing site on his/her own aircraft is
permitted.
   C.   Automobile or vehicle dealers . Automobile or vehicle dealers with
repair facilities or outdoor sales space shall be subject to the following
requirements. These requirements shall apply to operations involved in the
sale, lease, or rental of new or used vehicles, house trailers , recreational
vehicles , trucks, and other vehicles.
      1.   Grading, surfacing, and drainage. Outdoor sales lots , parking
areas, and other vehicle maneuvering areas shall be hard-surfaced with concrete
or plant-mixed bituminous material and shall be graded and drained so as to
dispose of surface waters. Grading, surfacing, and drainage plans shall be
subject to review and approval by the County Drain Commissioner.
      2.   Driveway location. The nearest edge of any driveway serving an
outdoor vehicle sales area shall be located at least 60 feet from any street or
road intersection (as measured from the nearest intersection right-of-way
line).
      3.   Servicing of vehicles. Any servicing of vehicles, including major
motor repair and refinishing, shall be subject to the following requirements:
         a.   Service activities shall be clearly incidental to the vehicle
sales operation.
         b.   Vehicle service activities shall occur within a completely
enclosed building .
         c.   Partially dismantled vehicles, damaged vehicles, new and used
parts, and discarded parts shall be stored within a completely enclosed
building .
         d.   The building containing service operations shall be located a
minimum of 50 feet from any property line .
         e.   There shall be no external evidence of the service operations, in
the form of dust, odors, or noise, beyond the service building .
      4.   Broadcasting devices prohibited. Devices for the transmission or
broadcasting of voice or music shall be prohibited outside of any building .
      5.   Setbacks . Outdoor sales lots , parking areas, and other vehicle
maneuvering areas shall comply with the locational requirements for parking
lots, as specified in §
4.01, subsection B.1.
      6.   Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area required for such uses shall
be 43,560 sq. ft.
   D.   Automobile filling stations , automobile or vehicle service stations ,
automobile repair garages . The following regulations shall apply to automobile
filling stations and automobile or vehicle service stations , including tire,
battery, muffler, and undercoating shops:
      1.   Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area required for such uses shall
be 40,000 sq. ft.
      2.   Minimum lot width . The minimum lot width required for such uses
shall be 200 ft.
      3.   Minimum setbacks . Repair garages or other buildings shall comply
with the setback requirements for the district in which the use is located.
However, a minimum setback of 40 feet shall be maintained on all sides which
abut property that is zoned or used for residential purposes. Pump islands and
canopies shall comply with the following requirements:
 
                            Minimum Setback from Right- Minimum Setback from
                            of-Way Line                 Residential Use or Zone
Nearest Edge of Pump Island 30 ft.                      50 ft.
Nearest Edge of Unenclosed  20 ft.                      40 ft.
Canopy
 
      4.   Ingress and egress . 
         Ingress and egress drives shall be a minimum of 30 feet and a maximum
of 40 feet in width. No more than one such drive or curb opening shall be
permitted for every 75 feet of frontage (or fraction thereof) along any street
. The nearest edge of any such drive shall be located at least 25 feet from the
nearest point of any property zoned or used for residential purposes.
         Curb openings for drives shall not be permitted where the drive would
create a safety hazard or traffic nuisance because of its location in relation
to other ingress and egress drives, its location in relation to the traffic
generated by other buildings or uses or its location near vehicular or
pedestrian entrances or crossings.
      5.   Layout. All lubrication equipment, automobile wash equipment,
hoists, and pits shall be enclosed entirely within a building . Gasoline pumps
shall be located so that motor vehicles do not park on or extend over abutting
landscaped areas, sidewalks, streets , buildings , or adjoining property while
being served. Service bay doors and windows shall be oriented so they face away
from abutting residentially zoned or used property.
      6.   Outside storage. Inoperable, wrecked, or partially dismantled
vehicles shall not be stored or parked outside for a period exceeding two days.
Such vehicles must be stored in the rear yard within a masonry screening wall
that is not less than six feet in height.
      7.   Vehicle sales and storage. The storage, sale, or rental of new or
used cars, trucks, trailers , and any other vehicles on the premises is
prohibited.
   E.   Automobile wash or car wash establishment . The following regulations
shall apply to automobile wash or car wash establishments :
      1.   Minimum lot size. The minimum lot size required for automobile or
car wash establishments shall be 21,780 sq. ft.
      2.   Layout. All washing activities shall be carried on within a fully
enclosed building . Vacuuming activities shall be permitted in the rear yard
only, provided such activities are located at least 50 feet from adjacent
residentially zoned or used property. Entrances and exits shall not face
abutting residentially zoned or used property.
      3.   Entrances and exits. Sufficient space shall be provided on the lot
so that vehicles do not enter or exit the wash building directly from an
adjacent street or alley . All maneuvering areas, stacking lanes, and exit
aprons shall be located on the car wash parcel itself. Streets and alleys shall
not be used for maneuvering or parking by vehicles to be serviced by the
automobile wash .
      4.   Orientation of open bays. Buildings should be oriented so that open
bays, particularly for self-serve automobile washes, do not face onto adjacent
thoroughfares unless screened by landscaping .
      5.   Exit lane drainage. Exit lanes shall be sloped to drain water back
to the wash building to drainage grates.
   F.   Bed and breakfast establishments . Bed and breakfast establishments ,
as defined in §
1.03, shall be subject to the following regulations:
      1.   Bed and breakfast establishments an accessory use . A bed and
breakfast establishment shall be clearly incidental to the principal residence
on the site. Accordingly, the bed and breakfast operations shall be confined to
the single-family dwelling unit which is the principal dwelling on the site.
Not more than 30% of the total floor area of the dwelling unit be used for bed
and breakfast sleeping rooms .
      2.   Maximum number of units.
 
Lot Size            Maximum Number of Units per Establishment
Up to 2.5 acres     3 units, depending on building requirements
More than 2.5 acres Based on good planning and design principles, as determined
                    by the Planning Commission
 
      3.   Principal residence. The dwelling unit shall be the principal
residence of the operator, and the operator shall live in the dwelling unit
when the bed and breakfast facility is in operation.
      4.   Kitchen facilities. There shall be no separate cooking facilities
for the bed and breakfast establishment , other than those which serve the
principal residence. Food may be served only to those persons who rent a room
in the bed and breakfast facility .
      5.   Building requirements. A building used for a bed and breakfast
establishment shall comply with the following minimum requirements:
         a.   There shall be at least two exits to the outdoors.
         b.   Rooms used for sleeping shall have a minimum size of 100 square
feet for two occupants, plus and additional 30 square feet for each additional
occupant. Rooms shall be designed to accommodate no more than four occupants.
         c.   Each sleeping room shall be equipped with a smoke detector.
         d.   Bed and breakfast establishments shall comply with the Fire Code.
      6.   Parking. Adequate off-street parking shall be provided for bed and
breakfast patrons, in accordance with
Article 4.00.
   G.   Cemeteries . The following regulations shall apply to the establishment
of new cemeteries or expansion of existing cemeteries :
      1.   Location. No portion of any cemetery that is located in a wetland or
within the 100-year flood boundary shall be developed or platted for grave
sites.
      2.   Accessory buildings. A crematorium, mausoleum, columbarium, or other
accessory building may be permitted within a cemetery provided that any such
building shall be designed and located in accordance with a cemetery  master
plan , which plan shall be subject to Planning Commission review.
      3.   Setbacks. No building or structures containing bodies or remains,
other than subterranean graves, shall be located closer than 100 feet to the
boundary line of any residential or commercial district. A crematorium located
within a cemetery shall be setback a minimum of 400 feet from the boundary line
of any residential district.
      4.   Location of entrances. Entrances to cemeteries shall be from a major
or secondary thoroughfare , and shall be designed to minimize traffic
congestion.
      5.   Screening. Screening shall be provided along all property lines
abutting a residential district or street in a residential district, in
accordance with §
5.02, subsection E.
   H.   Composting centers . 
      1.   The applicant shall submit an impact assessment (§
2.23) describing the expected odors, aesthetic impact, environmental impacts,
vehicular and truck impacts associated with the use, and any mitigation
measures to be employed.
      2.   The site plan shall clearly illustrate the layout of the composting
operation, including: buildings , staging area, parking, on-site truck
maneuvering (truck turning radii shall be illustrated), curbing area,
landscaped buffers, sales area, and fencing.
      3.   Composting operations shall be at least 500 feet from any
residential district.
      4.   All composting operations shall be at least 200 feet from the
boundary of any lake , stream, drain, wetland , or other surface water body.
The applicant shall describe procedures for managing stormwater runoff and
preventing pollution of surface water bodies or groundwater. Groundwater
quality monitoring devices shall be provided.
      5.   Documentation shall be provided indicating that the soils percolate
and are not characterized by a high water table.
      6.   The applicant shall describe acceptable methods for control of
odors.
      7.   A landscaped greenbelt , as described in §
5.02(E) shall be provided on all sides adjacent to a residential district. A
landscaped greenbelt as described in §
5.02(D) shall be provided on all other sides unless waived by the Planning
Commission in consideration of adjacent uses and topographic features.
      8.   Access shall be provided solely on Class A truck routes.
      9.   All storage areas shall be enclosed in a building .
      10.   The requirements in this section shall not apply to composting
undertaken by a property owner for his or her own benefit, provided that
organic matter is not brought in from off-site.
   I.   Concrete plants . Concrete plants shall comply with the following
regulations:
      1.   Minimum lot size. Concrete plants shall have a minimum lot area of
three acres.
      2.   Setbacks. In order to reduce the effects of airborne dust, dirt, and
noise, plant equipment, stockpiles, truck staging areas, and similar operations
shall be located no closer than 300 feet to any public or private road  right-
of-way line, no closer than 100 feet to any adjacent property lines , and no
closer than 1,000 feet to any property that is residentially zoned.
      3.   Access. Concrete plants shall have direct access onto a paved
principal arterial. All driveways , loading areas, staging areas, and truck
maneuvering areas within the site shall be paved.
      4.   Stacking spaces. A minimum of five stacking spaces shall be provided
on the premises for trucks waiting to be loaded.
      5.   Hours of operation. Mixing, loading, and related plant activities
shall occur only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through
Saturday.
      6.   Maximum size. Concrete plants shall be of a low profile design and
production shall be restricted to no more than 250 cubic yards per day.
      7.   Layout. Concrete batch plants and operations shall be entirely
enclosed within a building .
      8.   Outside storage. Outside storage of materials other than sand,
gravel, and other natural materials used in the concrete manufacturing process
shall be prohibited. Sand and gravel storage shall be enclosed on three sides
with a wall or landscaped berm . The location and size of sand and gravel
storage areas shall be shown on the site plan. At no time shall stockpiles
exceed 15 feet in height.
      9.   Screening. Concrete plant facilities, including parking and loading
areas, shall be screened in accordance with §
5.02, subsection E.
      10.   Truck traffic. Truck traffic shall be limited to 25 trips leaving
the site per day. Trucks hauling concrete mixing materials to the site shall be
loaded and covered in accordance with all applicable state and county and local
regulations.
      11.   Back-up alarm. All trucks using the facility shall be fitted with
an automatic back-up alarm. Such alarm shall have a listening device which
automatically adjusts the volume so the alarm can be heard just above the
ambient noise level.
      12.   Truck washes. All truck washing activities shall be carried on
within a designated hard surfaced area. Such area shall be designed so that
wash water is captured and disposed of by an approved method as noted below.
Truck washing shall be limited to only those trucks that are permanently housed
on the concrete plant site.
      13.   Pollution control. Concrete plants shall comply with the dust and
noise standards set forth in
Article 9.00. The plan for fugitive dust control shall address emissions from
stockpiles, process sources, and traffic. Concrete plant  building floor drains
shall not be permitted to connect with a dry well or septic system. Unless a
groundwater discharge permit has been obtained from the Michigan Department of
Environmental Quality or successor agency, all drains must be connected to a
closed holding tank. A plan for off-site disposal of holding tank effluent must
be noted on the site plan.
      14.   Plan approval. The applicant shall obtain required approvals from
all state or county agencies having jurisdiction, including but not limited to:
the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ) or successor agency.
Air Quality Control Division, Michigan Pollution Control Commission and Ground
Water Division. Evidence of approvals from relevant agencies shall be submitted
to the township prior to final approval.
      15.   Excess concrete. The proposed recovery system for excess concrete
must be noted on the site plan and approved by the township . Storage of excess
concrete on the site shall not exceed the limits specified in the approved
recovery plan. Excess concrete from other locations shall not be brought onto
the site for recovery.
      16.   Impact assessment. An impact assessment shall be submitted,
pursuant to §
2.23.
      17.   Performance guarantee . Prior to issuance of a building permit, the
township may require submission of a performance guarantee , in accordance with
§
2.18.
   J.   Drive-in establishments.
      1.   General provisions. The following provisions shall apply to all
drive-in establishments:
         a.   Location of driveways . Driveways serving drive-in establishments
shall be located off of a minor or principal arterial. The nearest edge of any
entrance or exit drive shall be located no closer than 60 feet from any street
or road intersection (as measured from the nearest intersection right-of-way
line).
         b.   Screening. An obscuring wall shall be provided along all property
lines abutting property that is zoned for residential, commercial, or office
use, subject to the requirements in §
6.01.
      2.   Drive-in theaters . The following regulations shall apply to drive-
in theaters :
         a.   Lot size. The minimum lot size for a drive-in theater shall be 20
acres.
         b.   Setbacks. The face of the theater screen shall not be closer than
500 feet to any public road or highway  right-of-way , and shall be constructed
so it is not visible from any road , highway , or residentially-zoned district.
         c.   Frontage and road access. Such uses shall front onto a paved
principal arterial and the main means of access to the theater shall be via the
arterial. In no case shall access to a drive-in theater be off of a residential
street . The nearest edge of any entrance or exit drive shall be located no
closer than 250 feet from any street or road intersection (as measured from the
nearest intersection right-of-way line).
         d.   Access drive design. The access drive shall be designed with
separate entrance and exit lanes which shall be separated by a landscaped
median strip at least ten feet in width. There shall be a minimum of two
entrance and two exit lanes, and each lane shall be at least ten feet in width.
         e.   Stacking space. A minimum of 50 stacking spaces shall be provided
on the premises for vehicles waiting to enter the theater .
         f.   Screening. The entire drive-in theater site shall be screened in
accordance with §
5.02(E).
         g.   Number of movie screens. No more than one screen shall be
permitted per establishment.
   K.   Fast-food and drive-through restaurants . The following regulations
shall apply to fast-food and drive-through restaurants :
      1.   Minimum frontage. The site shall have a minimum of 200 feet of
frontage on a principal arterial road or highway .
      2.   Location of driveways . Ingress and egress points shall be located
at least 60 feet from the intersection of any two streets (measured from the
nearest right-of-way line). The use of secondary access drives in accordance
with §
2.10 is required.
      3.   Control of sound level. Devices for the transmission of voices shall
be so directed or muffled as to prevent sound from being audible beyond the
boundaries of the site.
   L.   Farms . The following provisions shall apply to farms as defined in §
1.03, to the extent the provisions are not in direct conflict with Generally
Accepted Agricultural and Management Practices (GAAMPs):
      1.   Location. Farms operated as commercial agricultural operations shall
not be located within a subdivision, proprietor or assessor’s plat. Feedlots
and commercial livestock operations shall not be located in a floodplain or
wetlands .
      2.   Minimum size. The minimum size for a farm shall be ten acres. In the
RR, RE, or AG-SF zoning district , farm animals may be kept on parcels that are
less than ten acres provided that:
         a.   In platted subdivisions or condominiums , farm animals may not be
kept on parcels less than five acres in size; and
         b.   Compliance with all other requirements set forth herein shall be
required (including animal density requirements).
      3.   Prohibited uses. Farms shall not be used for the disposal of
garbage, sewage, rubbish, offal from rendering plants, or for the slaughtering
of animals except where the animals have been raised on the premises for
consumption by residents on the premises.
      4.   Setbacks . Farms shall comply with the following setback
requirements:
         a.   Farm buildings shall comply with the minimum setbacks for the
district in which they are located, provided that they are located at least 200
feet from residences on other parcels .
         b.   Confined animal feeding operations shall be located at least one-
quarter of a mile from any residential subdivision or other development
consisting of ten or more homes or residential lots .
         c.   Confined animal feeding operations shall be located at least one-
quarter of a mile from any church , business, school, recreational area, or
public building .
         d.   Confined animal feeding operations shall be set back at least 100
feet from all road  rights-of-way .
         e.   Runoff from pasture feeding and watering areas shall be separated
from any surface water by vegetative buffer that is at least 66 feet in width.
      5.   Manure management. Manure shall be stored in a manner that conforms
to generally accepted agricultural and management practices so as to minimize
odors and runoff.
      6.   Pesticide management. Pesticides shall be used, stored, transferred,
and disposed of in conformity with generally accepted agricultural and
management practices .
      7.   Exceptions. The provisions of this subsection L shall not apply to
garden plots for single family residences, or to a collection of farm buildings
that is operated for educational, demonstration, or recreational purposes (such
as a “petting zoo” or “interpretive farm ”).
      8.   Animal density in RR, RE, and AG-SF Districts.
         a.   Overall density. The density of farm animals kept on any parcel
in the RR or RE District, or on parcels less than ten acres in area in the AG-
SF district, shall not exceed the following:
            Chickens: 50 birds per acre; or
            Turkeys, geese, ducks, or other fowl: 25 birds per acre; or
            Sheep or goats: 10 animals per acre; or
            Swine over 55 pounds: 2.5 animals per acre; or
            Cattle and similar livestock : 1 animal per acre; or
            Horses: 0.5 animals per acre (i.e., 2 acres per horse); or
            Other farm animals not specified above: 3 animals per acre or
equivalent combination.
         b.   Special approval for higher animal density. The Township Board
may permit a higher density of animals in the RR, RE, and AG-SF Districts,
subject to special land use review and following a recommendation from the
Planning Commission . Approval shall be based on the determination that the
higher density will not result in adverse impacts on adjacent properties in
terms of noise, odors, runoff, etc.
         c.   Total number of animals in the RR District. In the RR District,
no more than 49 animal unit equivalents shall be permitted on each farm .
   M.   Funeral homes and mortuaries . The following regulations shall apply to
funeral homes and mortuaries :
      1.   Assembly area. Adequate assembly area shall be provided off-street
for vehicles to be used in funeral processions.
      2.   Screening. Service, loading, and parking areas shall be screened
from adjacent residential areas in accordance with §
5.02, subsection E.
      3.   Caretaker’s residence. A caretaker’s residence may be provided
within the main building of the funeral home or part of an accessory building ,
subject to the provisions in §
2.04.
      4.   Loading requirements. One loading berth shall be provided per 5,000
square feet of gross floor area , and one additional berth shall be provided
for each additional 10,000 square feet of floor area. Each loading berth shall
measure at least 10 ft. x 25 ft.
   N.   Golf courses and country clubs , par-3 golf courses , and driving
ranges. The following regulations shall apply to golf courses , country clubs ,
driving ranges, and par-3 golf courses :
      1.   Lot size. Regulation length 18-hole golf courses shall have a
minimum lot size of 160 acres, of which a minimum of 110 acres of usable land
shall be allocated to fairways, roughs, and greens. Nine-hole courses with
regulation length fairways shall have a minimum lot size of 90 acres. Eighteen-
hole par-3 courses shall have a minimum lot size of 50 acres.
      2.   Setbacks and fairway width. The principal and accessory buildings
shall be set back at least 75 feet from all property lines . Fairways and
driving ranges shall have sufficient width and shall be oriented in such a
manner and set back a sufficient distance to prevent golf balls from being hit
outside the perimeter of the golf course . The minimum width for fairways shall
be 100 yards subject to review by the Planning Commission . Fairways shall be
designed so that existing or future dwelling units are located a minimum of 200
feet from the center of the fairway.
      3.   Access. Golf courses and country clubs shall have direct access onto
a paved public road .
      4.   Shelter buildings . At least one shelter building with toilet
facilities shall be provided per nine holes. The shelter shall meet all
requirements of the Ingham County Health Department and shall not be a
freestanding portable toilet (sometimes referred to as a “porta-potty” or
“porta-john”).
      5.   Impact on water supply. A hydrogeological study shall be completed
and submitted to document the impact of the golf course watering system on
groundwater supply. This study shall inventory and analyze well logs from
surrounding properties, giving consideration to the depth of the wells and
quality of water. The study shall further estimate the quantity of water that
will be used on a daily basis during the peak watering periods and shall
evaluate the impact of watering operations on surrounding wells. The proprietor
shall submit a plan to identify measures that will be taken to conserve water
on an ongoing basis and to control pesticides and herbicides from contaminating
the ground and surface waters.
      6.   Building  setbacks . Buildings shall be setback a minimum of 200
feet from any property line that abuts a residential district.
      7.   Turf maintenance plan. The proposed turf maintenance plan and
chemical application plan for the first year and for long-term turf maintenance
shall be submitted for review. Turf maintenance and chemical applications shall
use Best Management Practices.
      8.   Chemical storage. Detailed plans for chemical storage shall be
provided. Buildings in which chemicals are stored shall be designed to contain
spills and shall not have floor drains that discharge into a septic system or
other pathway to the groundwater. Plans for emergency containment and clean-up
shall also be provided.
      The following regulations shall apply to driving ranges:
      1.   Minimum dimensions and setbacks . Driving ranges shall have
sufficient width and length and shall be designed in such a manner as to
prevent golf balls from being hit outside the perimeter of the driving range.
The minimum length of the driving range shall be 300 yards , measured from the
tee to the end of the range. Tees shall be set back at least 25 yards from each
side property line , unless the applicant can demonstrate that golfers will be
oriented toward the center of the range so that golf balls will not be hit
beyond the side property lines .
      2.   Screening or slopes. The Planning Commission may require a
landscaped buffer or fencing along the perimeter to screen the driving range
from adjacent properties or to prevent balls from being hit outside of the
driving range. Screening shall comply with the standards in §
5.02, subsection E. The Planning Commission may also require that the sides of
the driving range slope upward and be rough mowed so as to intercept stray golf
balls.
      3.   Special land use requirements for outdoor recreation facilities.
Driving ranges shall comply with the requirements for Outdoor Recreation
Facilities in §
8.02, subsection W.
   O.   Hospitals . The following regulations shall apply to hospitals :
      1.   Lot area. The minimum lot size for hospitals shall be ten acres.
      2.   Frontage and access. Hospitals shall front onto a paved major
arterial or highway and the main means of access to the hospital for patients,
visitors, and employees shall be via the arterial or highway . In no case shall
access to a hospital be off of a residential street .
      3.   Setbacks . The principal building and all accessory buildings shall
be set back a minimum distance of 100 feet from all property lines . The
minimum setback shall be increased 20 feet for each story in excess of two
stories .
      4.   Screening. Ambulance and emergency entrance areas shall be screened
from view from adjacent residences by the building design or by a masonry wall
constructed in accordance with §
6.01.
      5.   State and federal regulations. Hospitals shall be constructed,
maintained, and operated in conformance with applicable state and federal laws,
including provisions of the Michigan Hospital Survey and Construction Act,
Public Act 299 of 1947, being M.C.L.A. §§ 331.501 through 331.516, as amended.
   P.   Kennels. The following regulations shall apply to kennels where three
or more dogs, cats, or other domestic animals six months or older are kept:
      1.   Non-commercial kennels . Non-commercial kennels to house only the
animals owned by the occupant of the dwelling unit located on the same parcel
shall be permitted subject to the following:
         a.   Lot size. The lot on which any such kennel is located shall be a
minimum of two acres in size.
         b.   Number of animals. No more than six animals over the age of six
months shall be housed in a non-commercial kennel .
         c.   Breeding. Breeding of animals shall be restricted to no more than
two litters per year.
         d.   Setbacks . Buildings in which animals are kept, animal runs, and
exercise areas shall not be located in any required front, side, or rear yard
 setback area, and shall be located at least 100 feet from any dwellings or
buildings used by the public on adjacent property.
         e.   Kennels prohibited in subdivisions. Regardless of lot size, non-
commercial kennels shall not be permitted in platted subdivisions.
      2.   Commercial boarding and/or breeding kennels . Commercial (boarding /
breeding ) kennels shall be permitted subject to the following:
         a.   Operation. Any such kennel shall be subject to all permit and
operational requirements established by county and state regulatory agencies.
         b.   Lot size. Boarding and/or breeding kennels shall comply with the
following lot size requirements:
 
Lot Size                              Number of Permitted Animals
5 acres or less                       5 animals
For each additional full acre above 5 5 additional animals
 
         c.   Maximum number of animals. No boarding or breeding kennel shall
house more than 30 animals.
         d.   Setbacks.
            (1)   The minimum setback for fully-enclosed kennel buildings shall
be 100 feet from any property line and 200 feet from any residential structure
on another parcel .
            (2)   The minimum setback for outdoor runs, animal yards , or any
other portion of the kennel where animals will be allowed outdoors shall be 150
feet from any property line and 300 feet from any residential structure on
another parcel .
            (3)   Animals shall not be kept in outdoor runs between the hours
of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
         e.   Sound control. All animals shall be contained in a building which
is fully soundproofed, using insulation, soundboards, and acoustic tile.
         f.   Odor control. Non-absorbent surfaces (such as sealed concrete or
ceramic tile) shall be used throughout the kennel. Dog waste shall be power
flushed or otherwise removed on a regular schedule, but no less than four times
daily.
         g.   Kennels prohibited in subdivisions and condominiums . Regardless
of lot size, commercial boarding and/or breeding kennels shall not be permitted
in platted subdivisions or condominiums .
   Q.   Mini-warehouses and portable storage units. The following regulations
shall apply to mini-warehouses and portable storage units (also known as PODS,
or Portable On-Demand Storage Units):
      1.   Lot Area. The minimum lot size for mini-warehouses and portable
storage units shall be three acres.
      2.   Permitted use . Mini-warehouse establishments shall provide for
storage only. All such storage must be contained within an enclosed building .
Use of semi-trailers for storage is prohibited. Portable storage units for
lease or rent shall not be used for storage on the rental site.
      3.   Site enclosure. The entire site, exclusive of access drives, shall
be enclosed with a six-foot high masonry wall or opaque fence , constructed in
accordance with §
6.01. In lieu of a masonry wall or fence , the Planning Commission may approve
a landscape screen, pursuant to §
5.02(E).
      4.   Exterior appearance. The exterior of any mini-warehouse shall be of
finished quality and design, compatible with the design of structures on
surrounding property.
      5.   Resident Manager. A resident manager may be permitted on the site
for the purposes of maintaining the operation of the facility in conformance
with the conditions of the approval. The manager’s residence shall conform with
the requirements in §
2.04.
      6.   On-site circulation and parking. 
         a.   All one-way driveways shall be designed with one ten-foot wide
loading/unloading lane and one 15-foot travel lane.
         b.   All two-way driveways shall be designed with one ten-foot wide
loading/unloading lane and two 12-foot travel lanes.
         c.   The parking lanes may be eliminated if the driveway does not
serve storage units. Signs and painted lines shall be used to indicate parking
and traffic direction throughout the site.
   R.   Motels. The following regulations shall apply to motels :
      1.   Design. Each unit shall contain at least a bedroom and bath and a
minimum gross floor area of 250 square feet.
      2.   Services. Motels shall provide customary motel services, such as
maid service, linen service, telephone and/or desk service, and the use of
furniture.
   S.   Nursing homes and assisted living . The following regulations shall
apply to nursing homes :
      1.   Lot area. The minimum lot size for such facilities shall be three
acres.
      2.   Frontage and access. Such uses shall front onto a paved arterial or
collector road and the main means of access for residents or patients,
visitors, and employees shall be via the paved road . In no case shall access
to a nursing home be off of a residential street .
      3.   Setbacks. The principal building and all accessory buildings shall
be set back a minimum distance of 75 feet from all property lines .
      4.   State and federal regulations. Nursing homes shall be constructed,
maintained, and operated in conformance with applicable state and federal laws.
   T.   Oil and gas processing facilities. The following regulations shall
apply to oil and gas processing or sweetening plants:
      1.   Setbacks.
         a.   Oil and gas processing plants shall be located a minimum of 1,300
feet from any existing residential, commercial, or industrial establishments,
wetlands , or surface water.
         b.   Oil and gas processing plants shall be located a minimum of 2,640
feet from population concentrations, such as subdivisions, apartment  buildings
, residential developments , or mobile home parks , and from uses whose
occupants would be difficult to evacuate, such as hospitals or nursing homes .
      2.   Density. There shall be no more than one oil and gas processing
facility in operation per square mile section of land. Such facilities shall be
designed to service all oil and gas wells that are expected to need such
service within a two-mile radius.
      3.   Screening. Oil and gas processing facilities shall be screened in
accordance with §
5.02, subsection E.
      4.   Air pollution control. Emissions from the plant shall meet or exceed
all applicable state and federal pollution standards, including state standards
in Michigan Public Act 451 of 1994, being M.C.L.A. §§ 324.101 through
324.90106, as amended, and the rules adopted pursuant to that Act. Monitors/
sensors shall be installed in at least four locations along the perimeter of
the site. In addition, monitors shall be installed in all process buildings .
These monitors shall be set to alarm and automatically cause the plant to be
shut down upon detection of excessive concentrations of hydrogen sulfide,
sulfur dioxide, methane, or other gases. The plant operator shall provide the
township with the instrument shut down set points, which shall be subject to
review and approval. All monitors shall be maintained in proper working order
at all times.
      5.   Fire detection. The fire detection and suppression system shall be
constructed and maintained in accordance with state and local fire and building
codes, and as approved by the Fire Chief. Fire eyes shall be installed in
storage tank areas and in process buildings .
      6.   Noise. Oil and gas processing plants shall comply with the noise
standards set forth in
Article 9.00.
      7.   Automatic alarm system. 
         In the event that instruments, sensors, or monitors detect a
malfunction of the system, including but not limited to the detection of gas
leaks, odors, fire, flare failure, or improper operation of the processing
equipment, an alarm system shall be set to automatically operate.
         The alarm system shall be operated through a bonded alarm company
approved by the township . The alarm company shall be instructed to contact the
Township Fire Department dispatcher and plant operating personnel.
      8.   Site security. The following security measures shall be maintained
on the site:
         a.   Fencing. The site shall be fully enclosed with a six-foot high
chain link fence with three strands of barbed wire along the top of the fence .
         b.   Locking of the facility. All building doors and fence gates shall
be kept closed and locked, except when personnel are at the site during the
daytime hours.
         c.   Signs. “Poisonous Gas” or other appropriate warning signs shall
be placed at 50-foot intervals along the fence surrounding the facility. The
warning signs shall have a reflective surface.
         d.   Lighting. The site shall be adequately lighted, in accordance
with §
2.12.
         e.   Telephone monitoring system. In the event of a break-in or other
lapse of security, the bonded alarm system shall automatically be put into
operation, and operating personnel and local law enforcement officials shall be
notified.
      9.   Preventative maintenance. The facility shall be maintained in proper
operating condition at all times. Manufacturer’s recommendations concerning
periodic maintenance shall be adhered to.
      10.   Site closure. In the event that operation of the facility is
terminated for a period exceeding six months, all equipment and surface piping
shall be removed and foundations shall be destroyed to a depth of 36 inches
below grade . The entire site shall be evenly graded and re-seeded.
      11.   Other approvals. The applicant shall submit proof of permits and
approvals from all state or county agencies having jurisdiction.
      12.   Performance guarantee. Prior to issuance of a building permit, the
township may require submission of a performance guarantee , in accordance with
§
2.18.
   U.   Open-air business. The following regulations shall apply to open-air
businesses , whether operated year round or on an intermittent basis:
      1.   Lot area. The minimum lot size for open-air businesses shall be
40,000 sq. ft.
      2.   Driveway location. The nearest edge of any driveway serving an open-
air business shall be located at least 60 feet from any street or road
intersection (as measured from the nearest intersection right-of-way ) and at
least 20 feet from any side property line (see the requirements for
unobstructed site distance in §
2.09(A)4.
      3.   Parking setback . Parking shall be setback a minimum of 15 feet from
any road  right-of-way line, unless otherwise noted. The area between the
parking and the road  right-of-way shall be landscaped in accordance with §
5.02(B).
      4.   Lot width . The minimum lot width for open-air businesses shall be
200 feet.
      5.   Loading and parking. All loading and parking areas for open-air
businesses shall be confined within the boundaries of the site, and shall not
be permitted to spill over onto adjacent roads .
      6.   Outdoor display of vehicles. The outdoor display of new or used
automobiles, boats, mobile homes , recreational vehicles , trailers , trucks,
or tractors which are for sale, rent, or lease shall comply with the
requirements in §
8.02, subsection C.
      7.   Plant material nursery . Nurseries which deal with plant materials
shall comply with the following:
         a.   Plant storage and display areas shall comply with the minimum
setback requirements for the district in which the nursery is located.
         b.   The storage of soil, fertilizer, and similar loosely packaged
materials shall be contained and covered to prevent it from blowing onto
adjacent properties.
      8.   Roadside stands . Roadside stands shall be subject to the
requirements in §
8.02, subsection Z.
   V.   Wireless communication facilities .
      1.   General requirements.
         a.   Standard A. Wireless communications equipment is a permitted use
of property and is not subject to special land use approval or any other
approval if all of the following requirements are met:
            (1)   The wireless communications equipment will be colocated on an
existing wireless communications support structure or in an existing equipment
compound.
            (2)   The existing wireless communications support structure or
existing equipment compound is in compliance with the Township Zoning Ordinance
or was approved by the Township Planning Commission .
            (3)   The proposed colocation will not do any of the following:
               i.   Increase the overall height of the wireless communications
support structure by more than 20 feet or 10% of its original height, whichever
is greater.
               ii.   Increase the width of wireless communications support
structure by more than the minimum necessary to permit colocation .
               iii.   Increase the area of the existing equipment compound to
greater than 2,500 sq. ft.
            (4)   The proposed colocation complies with the terms and
conditions of any previous final approval by the Planning Commission .
         b.   Standard B. Wireless communications equipment is subject to
special land use approval, in accordance with §
29.03 of the Zoning Ordinance, if the equipment does not meet requirements “
(3)” and “(4)” under Standard A, but the equipment meets all of the following
requirements:
            (1)   The wireless communications equipment will be colocated on an
existing wireless communications support structure or in an existing equipment
compound;
            (2)   The existing wireless communications support structure or
existing equipment compound is in compliance with the Township Zoning Ordinance
or was approved by the Township Planning Commission .
         c.   Standard C. Wireless communication equipment is subject to
special land use approval, in accordance with §
29.03 of the Zoning Ordinance if the proposal does not involve colocation
(e.g., a new facility).
      2.   Approval procedures. The following procedures have been established
to achieve approval of a proposed wireless communications facility:
         a.   Standard A. Standard A wireless communication equipment proposals
require no zoning approval. However, plans for Standard A improvements shall be
submitted to the township .
         b.   Standard B. Standard B wireless communication equipment proposals
require special land use approval. Accordingly, such proposals are subject to
the procedures in §
29.03 and the following special procedures.
Steps Action
Steps Action
1.    Applicant submits plan and $1,000 fee.
2.    Within 14 days township administration determines if application is
      complete.
3.    If application is incomplete, administration notifies applicant.
      If application is complete, administration initiates SLU review by
4.    scheduling special land use public hearing. Special land use review must
      be complete 60 days after the application is considered complete.
5.    Township Planner reviews plan, transmits letter to Planning Commission.
6.    Planning Commission reviews plan, makes recommendation to Township Board.
7.    Township Board approves or denies application.
 
         c.   Standard C. Standard C wireless communication equipment proposals
require special land use approval. Accordingly, such proposals are subject to
the procedures outlined for Standard B, except that in Step 4 the special land
use review must be complete not more than 90 days after the application is
considered complete.
      3.   Standards and conditions. All applications for wireless
communication facilities that require special land use approval shall be
reviewed in accordance with the following standards and conditions. If
approved, such facilities shall be constructed and maintained in accordance
with such standards and conditions and any additional conditions imposed by the
Planning Commission and Township Board .
         (1)   Public health and safety. Facilities and/or support structures
shall not be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare.
         (2)   Harmony with surroundings. To the extent feasible, facilities
shall be designed to be harmonious with the surrounding areas.
         (3)   Compliance with federal, state and local standards. Wireless
communication facilities shall comply with applicable federal and state
standards, including requirements promulgated by the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA), Federal Communication Commission (FCC), and Michigan
Aeronautics Commission. Wireless communication support structures shall comply
with all applicable building codes.
         (4)   Maximum height. Applicants shall demonstrate a justification for
the proposed height of the structures and an evaluation of alternative designs
which might result in lower heights. The maximum height of a new or modified
support structure and antenna shall be the minimum height demonstrated to be
necessary for reasonable communication by the applicant (and by other entities
to colocate on the structure ), but shall not exceed 120 feet. Higher towers
may be permitted, however, if necessary to achieve colocation . The buildings ,
cabinets, and other accessory structures shall not exceed the maximum height
for accessory structures in the zoning district in which the facility is
located.
         (5)   Minimum setbacks . 
            The setback of a new or modified support structure from any
residential-zoned district or existing or proposed right-of-way or other
publicly traveled road shall be no less than the total height of the structure
and attachments thereto.
            Where the proposed new or modified support structure abuts a parcel
of land zoned for a use other than residential, the support structure shall
comply with the required setbacks for principal buildings specified in the
Schedule of Regulations for the zoning district in which the facility is
located.
            Buildings and facilities accessory to the wireless communication
facility (other than the support structure ) shall comply with the required
setbacks for principal buildings specified in the Schedule of Regulations for
the zoning district in which the facility is located.
         (6)   Access. Unobstructed permanent access to the support structure
shall be provided for operation, maintenance, repair, and inspection purposes,
which may be provided through or over an easement . The permitted type of
surfacing, dimensions, and location of such access route shall be subject to
approval by the Planning Commission , based on evaluation of the location of
adjacent roads , layout of buildings and equipment on the site, utilities
needed to service the facility, proximity to residential districts, disturbance
to the natural landscape, and the type of vehicles and equipment that will
visit the site.
         (7)   Division of property. The division of property for the purpose
of locating a wireless communication facility shall be permitted only if all
zoning requirements, including lot size and lot width requirements are met.
         (8)   Equipment enclosure. If an equipment enclosure is proposed as a
building or ground-mounted structure , it shall comply with the required
setbacks and other requirements specified for principal buildings in the
Schedule of Regulations for the zoning district in which the facility is
located. If an equipment enclosure is proposed as a roof appliance on a
building , it shall be designed, constructed, and maintained to be
architecturally compatible with the principal building .
         (9)   Design objectives. The support structure and all accessory
buildings shall be designed to minimize distraction, reduce visibility,
maximize aesthetic appearance, and ensure compatibility with surroundings.
Accordingly, support structures shall be grey or white (or another color that
is found to be more harmonious with surroundings) and shall not have lights
unless required otherwise by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).
Equipment buildings shall have a brick exterior. No signs or logos visible from
off-site shall be permitted on a support structure .
         (10)   Fencing. Wireless communication facilities shall be enclosed by
an open weave, green or black vinyl-coated, chain link fence having a maximum
height of six feet. Barbed wire may be permitted.
         (11)   Structural integrity. Wireless communication facilities and
support structures shall be constructed and maintained in structurally sound
condition, using the best available technology, to minimize any threat to
public safety.
         (12)   Maintenance. A plan for the long term, continuous maintenance
of the facility shall be submitted. The plan shall identify who will be
responsible for maintenance, and shall include a method of notifying the
township if maintenance responsibilities change.
      4.   Removal of unused or obsolete facilities.
         a.   A condition of every approval of a wireless communication
facility shall be adequate provision for removal of all or part of the facility
by users and owners upon the occurrence of one or more of the following events:
            (a)   When the facility has not been used for 180 days or more. For
purposes of this section, the removal of antennas or other equipment from the
facility, or the cessation of operations (transmission and/or reception of
radio signals) shall be considered as the beginning of a period of no use.
            (b)   Six months after new technology is available at reasonable
cost, as determined by the Township Board , which permits the operation of the
communication system without the requirement of the support structure .
         b.   The situations in which removal of a facility is required, as set
forth in subsection 4. a. above, may be applied and limited to portions of a
facility.
         c.   Upon the occurrence of one or more of the events requiring
removal, the property owner or persons who had used the facility shall
immediately apply for any required demolition or removal permits, and
immediately proceed with and complete the demolition, removal, and site
restoration.
         d.   If the required removal of a facility or a portion thereof has
not been lawfully completed within 60 days of the applicable deadline, and
after at least 30 days written notice, the township may remove or secure the
removal of the facility or required portions thereof, with its actual cost and
reasonable administrative charge to be drawn or collected and/or enforced from
or under the security posted at the time application was made for establishing
the facility.
      5.   Application requirements. 
         a.   Site plan and special land use review. A site plan prepared in
accordance with §
29.02 shall be submitted, showing the location, size, screening, and design of
all buildings , outdoor equipment, and structures . Where the wireless
communication facility is subject to special land use approval the procedures
and standards in §
29.03 shall be followed.
         b.   Landscape plan. A detailed landscaping plan shall be submitted
illustrating the number, species, location, and size at the time of planting of
all proposed trees and shrubs. The purpose of landscaping is to provide
screening and aesthetic enhancement for the structure base, accessory buildings
, and enclosure.
         c.   Structural specifications. Structural specifications for the
support structure and foundation shall be submitted for review. The structural
specifications shall state the number of various types of antennae capable of
being supported on the structure . A soils report prepared by a geotechnical
engineer licensed in the State of Michigan shall also be submitted confirming
that the soils on the site will support the structure . Structural plans shall
be subject to review and approval by the Township Engineer .
         d.   Security. The application shall include a description of security
to be posted immediately upon issuance of a building permit for the facility to
ensure removal of the facility when it has been abandoned or is no longer
needed, as previously noted. In this regard, the security shall, at the
election of the applicant, be in the form of:
            (1)   Cash;
            (2)   Surety bond;
            (3)   Letter of credit; or,
            (4)   An agreement in a form approved by the Township Attorney and
recordable at the office of the Register of Deeds, establishing a promise of
the applicant and owner of the property to remove the facility in a timely
manner as required herein, with the further provision that the applicant and
owner shall be responsible for the payment of any costs and attorney’s fees
incurred by the township in securing removal.
         e.   Contact person. The application shall include the name, address,
and phone number of the person to contact for engineering, maintenance, and
other notice purposes. This information shall be continuously updated during
all times the facility is on the premises.
   W.   Recreation facilities.
      1.   Outdoor recreation facilities. Outdoor recreation facilities, such
as, but not limited to, ski facilities, courses for off road vehicles and
snowmobiles, campgrounds, baseball facilities, and swimming pools , shall
comply with state and federal regulations and the following regulations:
         a.   General requirements.
            (1)   Setbacks. Principal and accessory buildings shall be set back
at least 75 feet from all property lines , unless otherwise specified herein.
            (2)   Access. Outdoor recreation uses shall have direct access onto
a principal arterial.
            (3)   Impact on surrounding properties. The location, layout,
design, or operation of outdoor recreation facilities shall not impair the
continued enjoyment, use, and future orderly development of adjacent and nearby
properties. The Planning Commission may specify the hours of operation in order
to assure compatibility with adjacent uses.
            (4)   Nuisance impacts. Outdoor recreation uses shall not generate
excessive noise, odors, dust, or other impacts, such that the continued use and
enjoyment of adjacent properties would be impaired.
            (5)   Parking. All parking for outdoor recreation uses shall be
provided in off-street parking lots , designed in accordance with §
4.01, and set back a minimum of 40 feet from any residential district.
            (6)   Screening. Outdoor recreation uses shall be screened from
view from adjacent property zoned or used for residential purposes, in
accordance with §
5.02, subsection E.
            (7)   Accessory retail facilities. Accessory retail or commercial
facilities, such as food and beverage facilities or equipment shops, shall be
designed to serve only the patrons of the outdoor recreation facility, unless
otherwise listed as a permitted use in the district in which the facility is
located.
         b.   Off-road vehicle and snowmobile trails, gun ranges. Courses or
trails for off-road vehicles, snowmobiles, or similar use, and gun ranges,
shall comply with the following regulations:
            (1)   Minimum parcel size. A minimum of 80 acres shall be required
for such uses.
            (2)   Location. The site shall be located in a predominantly
undeveloped area so as to minimize adverse impact on adjacent uses.
            (3)   Operations plan. The applicant shall provide a detailed
operations plan clearly outlining the types, locations, and characteristics of
uses proposed, including proposed hours of operation. The township may regulate
the operation and hours of activity to minimize adverse impacts on nearby
properties.
            (4)   Other regulations. All such uses shall comply with applicable
state and federal laws and regulations.
         c.   Campgrounds. Campgrounds for travel trailers , tents, tent-
campers, and motor homes shall comply with the following requirements:
            (1)   Setbacks. Buildings , structures , and areas designated for
camping shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from all property lines . The
storage of vehicles not set up for occupancy shall be located a minimum of 200
feet from all property lines , and shall be screened in accordance with §
5.02, subsection E.
            (2)   Minimum campsite size. Each campsite shall be at least 1,500
square feet in size for campsites designed to serve motorhomes, trailers , etc.
Campsites designed for tent camping shall be at least 600 square feet in size.
            (3)   Utilities. Each campsite shall either be provided with
individual water and sewer hookups approved by the Ingham County Health
Department, or shall have convenient access to approved service buildings .
            (4)   Fencing. The entire campground shall be enclosed by a six-
foot high fence , subject to the requirements in
Article 6.00. The fence may be located on the side and rear property lines ,
but shall be setback a minimum of 50 feet from any road  right-of-way line.
            (5)   Temporary residency. Campgrounds shall be for seasonal
recreation use only. This provision shall not apply to the manager or
caretaker.
         d.   Swimming pools  clubs .
            (1)   Enclosure. Outdoor swimming pools in single-family districts
shall be enclosed within a six-foot high fence . All fences shall be subject to
the requirements in
Article 6.00. Entry shall be by means of a self-closing, self-latching gate.
The latch shall be on the inside so that it is not readily available for
children to open. Gates shall be securely locked when the pool is not in use.
            (2)   Setbacks. Swimming pools in single-family districts shall be
set back at least 100 feet from any property line that abuts a residential
district. In all other districts swimming pools shall be set back a minimum
distance of 60 feet from all property lines . In no case shall a swimming pool
be located in an easement or right-of-way .
            (3)   Swimming pool  clubs. Swimming pool  clubs in residential
districts shall be incorporated as non-profit organizations, and shall be
maintained and operated for the exclusive use of members and their guests.
Membership shall be limited by subdivision or another clearly-defined
geographic area as specified in the club ’s articles of incorporation.
         e.   Private swimming pools .
            (1)   Location. Private swimming pools shall be permitted as an
accessory structure to the rear or side of the principal structure in
residential districts, and also in front of the principal residential structure
in RR, RE, AG-SF, and AG-C Districts, provided that pools in front shall be
screened with landscaping or natural vegetation such that they cannot be seen
from the road . Pools shall not be located in any road or utility right-of-way
or easement . (revised 3/6/01)
            (2)   Setbacks. Private swimming pools shall be located no closer
than ten feet to any side or rear property line and no closer than ten feet to
any building on the same parcel . Pools shall comply with the front yard
 setback for the district in which they are located, except that in no case
shall a pool be located closer than 35 feet to a road  right-of-way line.
            (3)   Fencing. Private swimming pools shall be enclosed within a
minimum four-foot high fence . All fences shall be subject to the requirements
in
Article 6.00. Entry shall be by means of a self-closing, self-latching gate.
The latch shall be on the pool side of the gate so that it is not readily
available to children to open. Gates shall be securely locked when the pool is
not in use. A fence shall not be required for pools that are wholly or
partially above ground, provided that the wall of the pool is at least four
feet in height and that no ladder, deck , or other structure provides access to
the pool while it is unattended. However, an automatic pool cover may be
utilized in place of a fence in residential areas, per Michigan Building Code,
except in the R-1 and R-1S Districts, high density developments, or where the
pool would be within 100 feet of another property line . The automatic pool
cover would need to be UL listed/approved and meet ASTM F 1346-91 standards.
            (4)   All swimming pools shall be subject to the requirements in
the Michigan Building Code.
      2.   Indoor recreation facilities. Indoor recreation facilities, such as,
but not limited to, bowling establishments, billiard halls, indoor archery and
shooting ranges, indoor tennis courts, indoor skating rinks, arcades, indoor
driving ranges, and similar indoor recreation uses shall comply with the
following regulations:
         a.   Setbacks. Indoor recreation uses shall be set back a minimum of
75 feet from any property line which abuts a residential district.
         b.   Adverse impacts. The location, design, and operation of an indoor
recreation use shall not adversely affect the continued use, enjoyment, and
development of adjacent properties. In considering this requirement, particular
attention shall be focused on the adverse impact resulting from noise generated
by the use and loitering on the premises.
         c.   Access. Indoor recreation uses shall have direct access onto a
principal arterial road .
         d.   Arcades and video gaming devices as accessory uses . Where
permitted as an accessory use , arcades shall comply with the following
requirements:
            (1)   The arcade facilities shall be clearly incidental to the
principal use on the site.
            (2)   The arcade facilities shall be accessible only from within
the building which contains the principal use . The arcade shall have no direct
means of access to the exterior of the building .
            (3)   The arcade shall operate only during the hours when the
principal use is open for business.
            (4)   Sufficient additional off-street parking shall be provided to
serve the arcade facilities.
            (5)   Where arcades are permitted as an accessory use to an eating
or drinking establishment or private club or lodge, there shall be no more than
one arcade device for each 30 persons permitted at one time, based on the
occupancy load established by local code.
         e.   Approvals. Indoor recreations facilities shall comply with
applicable state and federal regulations.
   X.   Religious institutions . The following regulations shall apply to all
religious institutions , including churches , synagogues, temples, etc.:
      1.   Lot width . The minimum lot width for religious institutions shall
be 150 feet, unless a greater width is specified in the Schedule of Regulations
for the district in which the institution is located.
      2.   Lot area. The minimum lot area for religious institutions shall be
two acres, unless a greater lot area is specified in the Schedule of
Regulations for the district in which the institution is located.
      3.   Parking setback . Off-street parking shall be prohibited in the
front setback area and within 15 feet of the rear or side property line .
      4.   Building  setback . Religious institutions shall comply with the
following building  setback requirements, unless larger setbacks are specified
in the Schedule of Regulations for the district in which the institution is
located.
         a.   Front yard : 50 feet.
         b.   Side yards : 25 feet.
         c.   Rear yard : 50 feet.
      5.   Frontage and access. Religious institutions shall be located on a
paved collector or arterial road .
      6.   Landscaping . Religious institutions shall comply with the
landscaping requirements set forth in §
5.03.
      7.   Maximum height. Churches may exceed the maximum height standard for
the districts in which they are located provided that the front, side, and rear
setbacks are increased by one foot for every foot by which the building exceeds
the maximum permitted height.
   Y.   Group child day care home. 
      Pursuant to Public Act 110 of 2006, as amended, a group child care home
(as defined in §
1.03) shall be issued a special use permit  if the facility meets of the
following standards:
      a.   The group child care home is located not closer than 1,500 feet to
any of the following:
         (i)   Another licensed group child care home.
         (ii)   An adult foster care small group home or large group home
licensed under the adult foster care facility  licensing act, Michigan Public
Act 218 of 1979, as amended.
         (iii)   A facility offering substance abuse treatment and
rehabilitation service to seven or more people licensed under Article 6 of the
public health code, Michigan Public Act 218 of 1979, as amended.
         (iv)   A community correction center, resident home, halfway house, or
other similar facility that houses an inmate population under the jurisdiction
of the Department of Corrections.
      b.   For the safety of the children, the play yard shall be enclosed with
a four-foot high fence , which shall comply with the requirements in
Article 6.00 of the Zoning Ordinance.
      c.   The property shall be maintained in a manner that is consistent with
the characteristics of the neighborhood, and in compliance with the adopted
Property Maintenance Code.
      d.   The facility shall not exceed 16 hours of operation during a 24-hour
period.
      e.   Signs shall comply with
Article 7.00 of the Zoning Ordinance.
      f.   Parking shall comply with
Article 4.00 of the Zoning Ordinance.
      g.   All such facilities shall be licensed by the Department of Human
Services or successor agency and shall comply with the minimum standards
outlined by the Department for such facilities.
   Z.   Roadside stands . The following regulations shall apply to all roadside
stands , as defined in §
1.03:
      1.   Building size. Any building containing a roadside stand shall not be
greater than 250 square feet in size.
      2.   Site maintenance. Suitable trash containers shall be placed on the
premises for public use. Adequate provisions shall be made for waste collection
and removal. Plant and vegetable waste shall be removed daily so that it does
not rot or cause odors. Litter shall be picked up and disposed of daily. Crates
and equipment shall be stored out-of-view.
      3.   Building  setbacks. Any building containing a roadside stand shall
be located no closer than 45 feet to the nearest edge of the paved surface of
any paved public road , and no closer than 45 feet to the improved gravel
surface of any unpaved public road .
      4.   Parking. Off-street parking may be provided in the required front
yard  setback area. Parking shall conform to the regulations in
Article 4.00, except that hard-surfacing shall not be required.
   AA.   Stables and riding arenas .
      1.   Private stables. Private stables, as defined in §
1.03 of this Ordinance, are intended for the keeping of horses or other large
animals for the non-commercial use of the residents of the principal
residential use on the site. Private stables shall comply with the following
requirements:
         a.   Location.  Private stables shall not be located on land that is a
part of a recorded plat unless the subdivision was designed to accommodate
stables and equestrian activity.
         b.   Minimum size. Private stables shall have a minimum of two acres
per animal but in no event shall there be less than five acres.
         c.   Setbacks . All buildings in which animals are kept and paddocks
shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any property line , any occupied
 dwelling or any other building used by the public. Horses may be pastured to
the side or rear property line and to the front property line in the RE, AG-SF,
RR, and AG-C Districts.
         d.   Maintenance. All stables shall be constructed and maintained so
that odor, dust, noise, and drainage shall not create a nuisance or hazard to
adjoining properties. All manure shall be stored at least 70 feet from any
property line and shall be managed in accordance with generally accepted
agricultural and management practices .
      2.   Public stables. Public stables, as defined in this Ordinance, shall
comply with the following:
         a.   Location. Public stables shall not be located on land that is a
part of a recorded plat.
         b.   Minimum size. Public stables shall have a minimum of two acres
per animal but in no event shall there be less than 40 acres.
         c.   Setbacks . All buildings in which animals are kept and paddocks
shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from any property line and a minimum of
50 feet from any occupied  dwelling and any other building used by the public.
However, horses may be pastured to the front property line .
         d.   Maintenance. All stables shall be constructed and maintained so
that odor, dust, noise, and drainage shall not create a nuisance or hazard to
adjoining properties. All manure shall be stored at least 70 feet from any
property line and shall be managed in accordance with generally accepted
agricultural and management practices .
         e.   Supervision. Persons renting horses shall be properly supervised
so as to avoid conflict with other nearby property owners.
      3.   Riding arenas . Riding arenas may be permitted as an accessory
building or use , subject to the following requirements:
         a.   Location. Riding arenas shall not be located on land that is a
part of a recorded plat.
         b.   Permitted use . Riding arenas , whether located inside or outside
of a building , are permitted principally for the use and enjoyment of the
residents or owners of the parcel on which the arenas are located. The
principal use of riding arena facilities is intended to be for riding,
exercising, and training horses by residents or owners of the parcel . However,
broader uses of arenas are permitted on a limited basis subject to the
regulations herein, where such uses are consistent with the goals of the
township to promote continued rural land use. Additional permitted uses
include, by way of example, horse competition events, training clinics and
classes, and riding lessons. Such additional uses and events shall not be open
to the general public as spectators; hence, grandstands and other public
facilities for spectators are not permitted. However, observation platforms or
similar viewing facilities for participants are permitted. Riding arenas may
contain stables.
         c.   Setbacks . Riding arenas and outdoor practice tracks shall comply
with the setback requirements specified in the Schedule of Regulations for the
district in which they are located, except as follows:
            (1)   Such facilities shall be located at least 50 feet from any
property line in the RR, RE, or AG-SF District.
            (2)   Such facilities shall be located at least 200 feet from any
residential subdivision, condominium  development , or multiple-family
residential development of record, as measured from the nearest edge of the
facility to the nearest boundary line of the residential development .
            (3)   Buildings in which animals are kept shall comply with the
applicable setback requirements for stables.
            (4)   Horses may be pastured to all property lines , including the
front property line /road  right-of-way line, provided that an 18- inch setback
is provided for an electric fence , pursuant to §
6.02, subsection B.3.
         d.   Floor area. Notwithstanding limitations in §
2.03 on accessory building size, the gross floor area of any riding arena
 building shall not exceed 15,000 square feet.
         e.   Maximum height. Riding arenas shall comply with the height
requirements for the district in which they are located.
         f.   Maintenance. Riding arenas shall be constructed and maintained so
that odor, dust, noise, and drainage shall not create a nuisance or hazard to
adjoining properties. All manure shall be stored at least 70 feet from any
property line and shall be managed in accordance with generally accepted
agricultural and management practices .
         g.   Restrictions on horse competitions and similar events. Although
horse competitions and similar events may further the rural use of land, it is
intended that such events not become commercial operations and that they be
located, laid out, and operated in a manner that does not impair the continued
enjoyment, use, and future development of nearby properties. Consequently, such
events shall adhere to the following restrictions:
            (1)   Events at which horses or other animals must be trailered in
shall occur no more frequently than twice per month. Such event shall last one
day only, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
            (2)   No more than 30 trailers shall be brought onto the property
at one time. Trailer and other vehicles shall be parked no closer than 40 feet
to any property that is zoned or used for residential purposes. In
consideration of the frequency of events, paving of parking and driveways shall
not be required, provided that dust control is implemented when needed.
            (3)   Accessory food concession and restroom facilities are
permitted, subject to the following:
               i.   Accessory facilities shall be contained within the riding
arena  building or other building .
               ii.   Accessory facilities shall be designed to serve the
participants in the events, and shall not be open to the general public.
               iii.   Sales of merchandise shall not be permitted.
               iv.   Permanent restrooms in the arena building or another
building are required; portable toilet facilities are not permitted.
            (4)   Overnight outdoor camping and overnight lodging within a
building are not permitted.
            (5)   Signs shall comply with the requirements for signs for
nonresidential uses (§
7.07, subsection E).
            (6)   Exterior lighting shall comply with §
2.12. Arena lighting to facilitate outdoor events after dark is prohibited.
            (7)   Loudspeaker outside of the arena building are prohibited,
unless the applicant can demonstrate to the satisfaction of those who have
review authority at the township that the loudspeakers will not disrupt the use
and enjoyment of adjacent land.
            (8)   Horse competitions or similar events proposed in conjunction
with a new arena or addition to an existing one shall be reviewed following the
normal site plan review process. Where there is no new construction, such
proposals shall be subject to review and approval by the Township Board .
         h.   Outdoor tracks. Outdoor tracks shall be permitted, provided they
are setback at least 50 feet from any property line , and subject to review by
the Township Engineer so as to minimize impact on drainage patterns in the
area.
         i.   Written agreement. All required conditions and limitations on the
use of a riding arena shall be set forth in a written document, prepared in a
recordable form. Upon approval the site plan and prior to issuance of a
building permit, the agreement shall be recorded by the township in the Ingham
County Office of the Register of Deeds, unless otherwise agreed to by the
Township Board .
         j.   Approval criteria. The Planning Commission shall determine that
all of the following criteria will be met prior to approving the plans for a
riding arena :
            (1)   All requirements set forth in this subsection will be
complied with.
            (2)   No living quarters will be located in the arena building .
            (3)   The arena will be compatible in terms of appearance and
function with surrounding land uses.
            (4)   The arena is not likely to negatively affect the value of
other property in the area in which it is located.
      4.   Stables for breeding and training horses. Stables which are used
solely for breeding and training horses and which do not satisfy the definition
of “private or public stable ” or “riding arena ” shall be considered farms ,
as defined in §
1.03, and shall be subject to the regulations applicable to farms .
   BB.   Stamping plants, punch presses, press brakes, and other machines. The
following regulations shall apply to stamping machines, punch presses, press
brakes, and other machines:
      1.   General requirements. All such machines shall have shock absorbing
mountings and be placed on a suitable reinforced concrete footing. No machine
shall be loaded beyond the capacity prescribed by the manufacturer. All such
machines shall comply with the noise and vibration standards in
Article 9.00.
      2.   Automatic screw machines. Automatic screw machines shall be equipped
with noise silencers, and shall not be located closer than 300 feet from any
property zoned or used for residential purposes.
      3.   Setbacks . Punch and stamp presses, other than hydraulic presses
shall comply with the following capacity standards:
 
Maximum Capacity (Tons) Distance from Nearest Residential District (feet)
50                      250
100                     300
150                     500
 
         Hydraulic presses shall comply with the following capacity standards:
 
Maximum Capacity (Tons) Distance from Nearest Residential District (feet)
50                      250
750                     300
1000                    500
 
      4.   Press brakes. Press brakes shall be set back at least 300 feet from
any property line zoned for residential use.
   CC.   Utility structures and substations. Utility structures , substations,
and similar uses shall comply with the following regulations:
      1.   Location. Where feasible, utility structures and public service
buildings shall be located so as to not hinder the development of the area or
detract from the value of adjoining development .
      2.   Design. All such uses shall be contained in buildings that are
architecturally compatible with buildings in the vicinity and shall be screened
in accordance with §
5.02, subsection E.
      3.   Off-site impact. Such uses shall not create a health or safety
hazard, a nuisance , or have deleterious impact on the surrounding area either
due to appearance or operation.
      4.   Security fencing. Security fencing may be permitted, subject to the
requirements in
Article 6.00.
   D.   Veterinary clinics . Veterinary clinics shall comply with the following
requirements:
      1.   Small animal clinics.
         a.   Enclosure. All activities shall be conducted within a completely
enclosed building .
         b.   Setbacks . All buildings shall be set back at least 200 feet from
abutting land that is zoned for residential use.
         c.   Kennels. Kennels associated with veterinary clinics shall comply
with the following setback requirements:
            (1)   Minimum setback for fully-enclosed kennel buildings : 200
feet from any residential structure on another parcel .
            (2)   Minimum setback for outdoor runs, animal yards , or any other
portion of the kennel where animals will be allowed outdoors: 300 feet from any
residential structure on another parcel .
            (3)   Animals shall not be kept in outdoor runs between the hours
of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
      2.   Large animal clinics.
         a.   Range of services. The veterinary clinic shall cater to horses,
livestock , and other farm animals . A small animal clinic may be an accessory
use .
         b.   Access. The veterinary clinic shall front on or have direct
access to a hard-surfaced road .
         c.   Accessory office uses. Any office area shall be an accessory use
to the clinic and shall be attached to the treatment or surgical facilities.
         d.   Setbacks . No building other than a stable shall be located
closer than 50 feet to any dwelling on the premise and 75 feet to any adjacent
property line .
         e.   Kennels. Kennels associated with veterinary clinics shall comply
with the following setback requirements:
            (1)   Minimum setback for fully-enclosed kennel buildings : 200
feet from any residential structure on another parcel .
            (2)   Minimum setback for outdoor runs, animal yards , or any other
portion of the kennel where animals will be allowed outdoors: 300 feet from any
residential structure on another parcel .
         f.   Maintenance. All stables and treatment areas shall be constructed
and maintained so that odor, dust, noise, and drainage shall not create a
nuisance or hazard to adjoining properties. All manure shall be removed from
the premises or spread and cultivated at least once per week so as to control
odors and flies.
         g.   Setback of stable or paddock. No stable or confined paddock area
shall be located nearer than 50 feet to any property line . Horses and
livestock may, however, be pastured to the property line provided the pasture
is properly fenced.
         h.   Minimum lot size. Veterinary clinics shall have a minimum lot
area of five acres.
         i.   Signs . The veterinary clinic shall be permitted one
identification sign with a maximum size of 20 square feet, in accordance with
Article 7.00.
         j.   Parking. The veterinary clinic shall provide parking at the ratio
of one space per 400 square feet of usable floor area in the clinic, plus one
space per employee on the largest working shift. Parking shall comply with the
requirements in
Article 4.00.
   EE.    Retreat centers .
      1.   Minimum lot area. Retreat centers shall be located on parcels having
a minimum size of ten acres.
      2.   Access. Retreat centers shall have direct access to an existing
paved public road .
      3.   Maximum floor area. The usable floor area of retreat centers shall
not exceed 3,000 sq. ft.
      4.   Health Department approval. Approval from the Health Department for
the septic system, water supply well, and kitchen facilities shall be submitted
prior to final township approval.
      5.   Fire Department approval. Fire Department inspection and approval
shall be required prior to final township approval. The Fire Department shall
be requested to establish a maximum occupancy load for the facility.
      6.   Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided in the following
amounts: One space per person, based on the occupancy load of the building ,
plus one space per employee. Parking areas shall be properly drained and
surfaced with gravel but need not be paved.
      7.   Overnight use. Overnight accommodations are prohibited.
      8.   Screening and landscaping . Retreat centers shall comply with the
screening and landscaping requirements for nonresidential uses in a residential
or agricultural district [§
5.03 (C)].
      9.   Building Inspector approval. Building Inspector review of the site
plan shall be required prior to final action by the Planning Commission and
Township Board . This review shall not be considered a substitute for the
normal review of construction plans prior to issuance of a building permit.
      10.   Setbacks . Retreat centers shall comply with the setback
requirements for principal uses in the AG-SF district.
   FF.   Landscape contractors’ operations. Landscape contractors operations
shall comply with the following requirements:
      1.   All vehicles and equipment shall be stored in a fully-enclosed
building .
      2.   Front loaders and similar equipment used on the site shall be
limited to a one yard bucket.
      3.   There shall be no outside storage or stock piling of materials or
debris, other than peat, bark, stone, and similar raw materials normally used
in the nursery /landscaping business. Such materials shall be screened so they
are not visible from any property line .
      4.   Building contractors, road contractors, and similar operations are
prohibited.
      5.   No more than 10% of the total site area shall be occupied by
buildings , storage, parking, or other facilities associated with the
landscaping contractor’s operations .
      6.   The Planning Commission shall have the authority to establish hours
of operation so as to minimize the impact of the facility on nearby residential
uses.
      7.   Landscape contractors’ operations, including buildings , storage
areas, stockpiles, and vehicle and equipment parking, shall comply with the
following minimum setback requirements: front: 50 feet, sides: 30 feet, and
rear: 40 ft.
   GG.   Outdoor events.
      1.   Outdoor events. For the purposes of this section, the words OUTDOOR
EVENTS shall mean any musical concert, festival, fair, carnival, show, or
similar gathering at which music or entertainment is provided by performers or
prerecorded means, at which members of the public are invited or admitted for a
charge or for free. The regulations in this section are not intended to apply
to regular season baseball, soccer, football, or other sports league games;
sports or athletic activities or games organized and managed by the school
district or township ; or, family gatherings of residents, such as reunions,
where members of the general public are not invited. Applications for outdoor
event permits shall initially be screened by the Planning Coordinator and
Building Inspector, who shall make a determination whether a proposed event
requires full review and approval pursuant to these regulations. The Planning
Coordinator and Building Inspector may waive these requirements upon finding
that a proposed event will be attended by less than 100 persons, provided that
such a finding is based on written evidence in the form of a signed guest list,
copies of written invitations, etc.
      2.   Application. In addition to information required by the standard
special land use application by the township , the following information shall
be provided on any application for a permit to operate an outdoor event:
         a.   The names, residence, and mailing addresses, and telephone
numbers of the person responsible for the outdoor event and the owner of the
property where the outdoor event is proposed to occur. If the applicant is an
organization or business, then the name, address, and telephone number of a
contact person shall be provided.
         b.   A description of the proposed outdoor event.
         c.   The date or dates, location, and proposed hours of operation of
the outdoor event.
         d.   If the applicant is not the owner of the property on which the
outdoor event is proposed, then evidence of the applicant’s right to use the
premises for the outdoor event shall be submitted.
         e.   A statement of the number of people expected to attend the
outdoor event for each date it is conducted, and an explanation of the evidence
of admission which will be used.
         f.   An indemnification agreement to save and keep the township free
and harmless from any and all loss or damages or claims for damages, including
attorneys’ fees and litigation costs, arising from or out of the outdoor event.
The indemnification agreement shall be subject to approval of the Township
Attorney.
         g.   A plan and schedule for complete clean-up of the site following
the outdoor event.
         h.   Other information necessary to demonstrate compliance with all of
the regulations and standards set forth herein.
      3.   Site plan. An application for a permit for an outdoor event shall be
accompanied by a site plan, drawn to scale, showing the location and plan to
supply or maintain the following systems and services:
         a.   Police and fire protection facilities and services.
         b.   Water supply and facilities.
         c.   Food supplies and facilities.
         d.   Sanitation facilities.
         e.   Medical and first-aid facilities.
         f.   Vehicle ingress and egress and parking facilities, including
means of access for emergency vehicles.
         g.   The areas and facilities to be used for performances.
         h.   The areas and facilities to be used for seating, showing the
locations of all aisles.
         i.   The location and type of temporary lighting, sound, and public
address facilities.
         j.   The nature and locations of signs and markings to be used to
direct people and delineate various areas and facilities.
         k.   All physical facilities to be constructed or placed on the
premises, including, but not limited to, fences , ticket booths, grandstands,
stages, concession facilities, and offices.
         l.   All other applicable site plan requirements specified in §
29.02.
      4.   Minimum requirements. No outdoor event shall be conducted or
permitted unless all of the following requirements are met:
         a.   Parcel size. Outdoor events shall be permitted only on parcels
that are 40 acres or larger.
         b.   Hours of operation. Outdoor events shall not begin before 10:00
a.m. nor extend later than 10:00 p.m., unless otherwise permitted by the
township upon finding that longer hours will have no impact on use of
surrounding property.
         c.   Fencing. The premises shall be completely enclosed by a fence of
sufficient height and strength to preclude persons in excess of the maximum
permissible from gaining access and to aid in crowd control. Sufficient gates
shall be provided to allow safe ingress and egress .
         d.   Parking. Adequate parking spaces shall be provided for persons
attending the outdoor event by motor vehicle. At minimum, one off-street
parking space shall be provided for every three persons expected to attend or
be employed at an outdoor event. Parking along the shoulder of any road shall
be prohibited. Properly-marked barrier-free spaces shall be provided in
accordance with the schedule in §
4.01, subsection C.5. A plan illustrating the proposed parking layout,
including method of delineating spaces and drive aisles, shall be submitted for
approval. The parking layout shall comply with the dimensional and other
applicable requirements in
Article 4.00 of the Zoning Ordinance, although paving shall not be required for
a temporary outdoor event.
         e.   Traffic circulation and control. A plan for traffic circulation
and control shall be submitted for review. The plan shall include provisions
for emergency vehicle access at all times. Provisions shall be made for an
adequate number of traffic control officers to provide for the safe, orderly,
and expeditious movement of traffic, prior to, during, and after the outdoor
event. The adequacy of the plan shall be subject to approval by the Meridian
Township Police Department and Northeast Ingham Emergency Services Authority
(NIESA). The sponsors of the outdoor event shall pay for the cost of such
traffic control.
         f.   Security guards. A minimum of two security guards shall be
provided. One additional security guard shall be provided for each 200 people
(or fraction thereof) expected to be in attendance above the initial 200
people, unless the Meridian Township Police Department determines that greater
or fewer guards are needed to preserve order and protection property on and
around the site of the outdoor event.
         g.   Potable water. Potable water shall be available in sufficient
quantity and pressure for drinking and sanitation purposes for the entire
outdoor event, including under conditions of peak demand. The water supply
shall comply with applicable county and state laws and regulations.
         h.   Toilet facilities. A minimum of ten toilet facilities shall be
provided per 500 people anticipated to attend the outdoor event. In addition,
two toilet facilities shall be provided for each additional 250 people. Public
or common use toilets shall comply with Federal Americans with Disability (ADA)
guidelines, which require that 5% of the total number, and not less than one
toilet facility per cluster of toilet facilities, shall be barrier-free. All
toilet facilities shall be provided with soap and paper towels and shall comply
with applicable county and state laws and regulations.
         i.   Liquid waste disposal. Proper liquid waste disposal from the
premises shall be provided so as to prevent a nuisance or menace to public
health. If liquid waste retention and disposal is dependent upon pumpers and
haulers, they shall be licensed in accordance with county and state laws and
regulations.
         j.   Solid waste disposal. Proper solid waste storage and removal
shall be provided so as to prevent a nuisance or menace to public health.
Storage shall be in covered containers having a minimum capacity of 36 gallons,
provided at a rate of one container per 100 persons expected to attend the
outdoor event. The sponsor of the outdoor event shall provide the township with
a true copy of an executed agreement with a licensed solid waste disposal firm,
which agreement shall provide for proper removal of solid waste from the
premises within 24 hours following the outdoor event. For multiple day events,
solid waste shall be removed from the premises every day.
         k.   Electrical service. A plan for providing electrical service to
the site shall be submitted, which plan shall be subject to approval by the
Building Official . All electrical wiring shall be installed in compliance with
the Michigan Building Code.
         l.   Noise control. Sound or noise resulting from the outdoor event,
when measured at the property line , shall not exceed the normal ambient sound
level on adjacent property between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. At
all other times, the sound or noise level produced by the outdoor event shall
not exceed normal ambient sound level on adjacent property by more than five
decibels. Furthermore, no sound or noise shall be produced that causes
annoyance to or a threat to the health and safety of the occupants of the
adjacent property.
         m.   Illumination. Electrical illumination shall be provided to all
areas that are intended to be occupied after dark. A lighting plan shall be
submitted showing the location and types of lighting fixtures and level of
illumination for open areas reserved for spectators, stage areas, parking
areas, and restroom and concession areas.
         n.   Communications facilities. An emergency communication system
shall be provided and maintained for the duration of the outdoor event, which
system shall be subject to approval by the Meridian Township Police Department
and the Chief of the Northeast Ingham Emergency Services Authority (NIESA).
         o.   Overnight facilities. Those who attend an outdoor event shall not
be allowed to remain on the premises overnight. Overnight use of the premises
by performers or employees of the outdoor event may be permitted, however,
subject to review of detailed plans for the accommodations for overnight use,
such as camper or trailer parking, sanitation facilities, and bathing
facilities.
         p.   Signs. Signs shall comply with the standards for “community
special event  signs ” in §
7.05, subsection C.
         q.   Food service. If food service is made available, it shall be
delivered only through concessions licensed and operated in accordance with
state and county laws and regulations.
         r.   Medical facilities. If the outdoor event is expected to be
attended by 2,000 or more people, emergency medical facilities shall be
provided on the premises for the duration of the event.
         s.   Prohibited activities. It shall be unlawful to conduct or permit
any obscene display or entertainment; to cause or create a disturbance by
obscene or disorderly conduct; to permit consumption or use of or make
available liquor, narcotics, or narcotic drugs.
         t.   Fire protection. Adequate fire protection shall be provided in
accordance with guidelines provided by the Township Fire Board. Flammable
vegetation and other fire hazards shall be removed from the site of the outdoor
event. Equipment to extinguish fires, as required by the Northeast Ingham
Emergency Services Authority (NIESA), shall be provided. Open fires are
prohibited.
         u.   Performance guarantee. A performance guarantee meeting the
requirements of §
2.18 shall be deposited with the township to assure proper clean-up of the site
in accordance with the clean-up plan that is required with the application.
         v.   Insurance. The applicant shall acquire and maintain, at its sole
expense, public liability insurance, naming the township as an additional
insured. The insurance shall be purchased from companies approved by the
Commissioner of Insurance of the State of Michigan, and shall cover bodily
injury, property damage, and personal injury in amounts specified by the
Township Supervisor. The applicant shall furnish and deliver certificates of
insurance demonstrating the existence of the insurance in the minimum amounts
required by the township . Each certificate shall provide that the township
shall receive not less than 30 days written notice of cancellation, expiration,
or termination.
      5.   Standards for approval. The Township Board may approve an outdoor
event special land use proposal upon receiving a recommendation from the
Planning Commission and making the following findings:
         a.   The outdoor event will be held at a location which complies with
and meets all township , county, and state health, zoning, fire, and safety
ordinances, laws, and requirements.
         b.   All application and site plan information required by the Zoning
Ordinance has been provided.
         c.   The outdoor event will be conducted in full accord with all
requirements of the Zoning Ordinance and this section, in particular.
         d.   The outdoor event will be conducted in a manner that will not
create a threat to health, safety, and welfare, or adversely affect nearby
residents’ use and enjoyment of their properties.
         e.   All facilities and services required by this section will be
furnished and that all prior approvals from state and county agencies have been
obtained.
         f.   The outdoor event will not adversely affect the ability to
furnish the remainder of township with adequate police and fire protection.
   HH.   Nature centers , demonstration farms . Nature centers , demonstration
farms , and similar uses shall comply with the following regulations:
      1.   Setbacks. Principal and accessory buildings shall be set back at
least 75 feet from all property lines .
      2.   Parcel size. The parcel on which such a facility is located shall be
least ten acres in size.
      3.   Impact on surrounding properties. The location, layout, design, and
operation of such a facility shall not impair the continued enjoyment, use, and
future development of adjacent and nearby properties. The Planning Commission
may specify the hours of operation to assure compatibility with adjacent uses.
      4.   Parking. All parking for such facilities shall be provided in off-
street parking lots , designed in accordance with §
4.01, except as follows:
         a.   Off-street parking shall be set back a minimum of 40 feet from
any property that is zoned or used for residential purposes.
         b.   The number of spaces required shall be determined on a case-by-
case basis, upon consideration of the character of the specific use being
proposed.
         c.   The Planning Commission may waive the paving requirements in §
4.01(D)(4) for parking and driveways , upon making the determination that
another type of surface will be adequate to handle the anticipated level of
traffic. In making a determination regarding paving, the Planning Commission
shall consider the types of vehicles anticipated (e.g., volume of bus traffic,
size and weight of vehicles, etc.). The Planning Commission may seek the advice
of the Building Inspector and/or Township Engineer . If paving is not required,
then the site plan shall include a commitment to provide dust control in
parking areas and on driveways .
         d.   The Planning Commission may waive parking lot lighting
requirements upon making the determination that the facility will be used only
during daylight hours.
         e.   The Planning Commission may waive parking lot landscaping
requirements upon making the determination that existing vegetation to be
retained on site satisfies the objectives of the Ordinance, as well as the
intent to maintain the rural, non-commercial character of the site.
      5.   Accessory facilities. Accessory retail, food concession, and
restroom facilities may be permitted, subject to the following:
         a.   Accessory facilities shall be contained within the nature center
 building or other principal building .
         b.   Accessory facilities shall be designed only to serve the patrons
of the nature center or demonstration farm .
         c.   Permanent restrooms in the nature center  building or other
principal building shall be required; portable toilet facilities shall not be
permitted.
         d.   Overnight camping is not permitted. Overnight lodging within a
building may be permitted, but only where such activity is incidental to the
educational program being offered. Accommodations for overnight lodging shall
be illustrated on the approved site plan.
      6.   Permits. Copies of all county, state, and federal permits required
to operate the facility shall be submitted to the township .
      7.   Identification of species. The site plan application shall identify
in writing any living species of flora or fauna that will be kept at the
facility that does not occur naturally in Williamstown Township. Methods to
prevent the release of these species into the township environment shall be
specified, where appropriate.
      8.   Manure management. If animals are to be kept at a such a facility,
then the site plan application package shall include a manure management plan,
which shall describe where and how often the manure will be spread or otherwise
disposed.
      9.   Signs. Signs shall comply with the requirements for signs for
nonresidential uses in §
7.07, subsection E.
      10.   Hunting. Hunting shall not be permitted on a nature center or
demonstration farm site.
      11.   Single-family dwelling. One single-family dwelling shall be
permitted, to serve as the principal residence of the owner or operator of the
facility.
      12.   Trail use. Trails shall be designed and used principally for
pedestrian use. Motorized tours of the facility shall not be permitted.
   II.   Automobile body, frame, and fender straightening shops, and automobile
collision repair establishments. The following regulations apply to automobile
body, frame, and fender straightening shops, and automobile collision repair
establishments:
      1.   Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area required for such uses shall
be 40,000 sq. ft.
      2.   Minimum lot width . The minimum lot width required for such uses
shall be 200 ft.
      3.   Minimum setbacks . All such establishments shall comply with the
setback requirements for the district in which the use is located. However, a
minimum setback of 40 feet shall be maintained on all sides which abut property
that is zoned or used for residential purposes.
      4.   Layout. All equipment related to the use shall be enclosed entirely
within a building . Service bay doors and windows shall be oriented so they
face away from public streets and roads and abutting residentially zoned or
used property.
      5.   Services. All such uses shall take place within enclosed building .
Overhead doors shall be kept closed except to bring vehicles, supplies, and
equipment in or out.
      6.   Performance standards/use of best available technology. All
activities related to such uses must comply with the performance standards in
Article 9.00, and the following additional requirements:
         a.   All building walls and roof shall be double insulated with at
least seven inches of standard building insulation, to assure compliance with
township noise standards unless the applicant can demonstrate that another
building design would be effective in controlling sound emissions.
         b.   The applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
Planning Commission and Township Board that the facility will provide state of
the art equipment and features, using the best available technology, so as to
fully control emission of paint odors and air contaminants from the facility.
Manufacturer’s specifications on equipment and paint should be submitted to
demonstrate compliance with this requirement.
      7.   Outside storage. Inoperable, wrecked, or partially dismantled
vehicles may be stored or parked outside for up to seven days, during which
time the vehicles must be stored in the rear yard within a six-foot high
masonry screening wall or wood fence , constructed in accordance with §
6.01. The Planning Commission may require landscaping outside of the required
wall or fence .
      8.   Vehicle sales and storage. The storage, sale, or rental of new or
used cars, trucks, trailers , and any other vehicles on the premises is
prohibited, unless included as part of an approved site plan.
      9.   Land use compatibility. When considering whether such a use should
be permitted on a particular site, the Planning Commission and Township Board
shall consider the nature of surrounding existing land use and the character of
new development in the surrounding neighborhood. The Planning Commission and
Township Board may require landscaping and screening above and beyond the
specific standards set forth in this Ordinance where necessary to achieve
compatibility with existing or planned land use; or, the Planning Commission
may recommend denial and/or the Township Board may deny special land use
approval is land use compatibility cannot be achieved.
   JJ.   Small wine makers and hard cider producers. It is the intent of the
regulations in this subsection to permit small winemakers and hard cider
producers in the interest of providing jobs, promoting agritourism and
enhancing rural character. It is further the intent of these regulations to
prevent development  of small winemakers and hard cider producers that are out
of scale or out of character with surrounding land use. Accordingly, small
winemakers and hard cider producers, as defined in §
1.03  of the Zoning Ordinance, shall comply with the following regulations:
      1.   Setbacks. Principal and accessory buildings shall comply with the
setback requirements for the district in which they are located.
      2.   Location.
         a.   Small wine makers and hard cider producers shall not be located
on land that is part of a recorded residential plat or residential condominium.
         b.   Small wine makers and hard cider producers located in the Rural
Residential District or Rural Estates District shall be located within 300 feet
of an existing commercial establishment or Commercial-Agricultural District.
      3.   Impact on surrounding properties. The location, layout, design,
operation, and size of such a facility shall not impair the continued
enjoyment, use, and future development of adjacent and nearby properties. The
Planning Commission may specify the hours of operation to assure compatibility
with adjacent uses.
      4.   Performance standards. Small wine makers and hard cider producers
shall comply with the Performance Standards specified in Article
9.00.
      5.   Parking. All parking shall be provided in off-street parking lots ,
designed in accordance with §
4.01, except as follows:
         a.   Off-street parking shall be set back a minimum of 30 feet from
any property that is zoned or used for residential purposes.
         b.   The number of spaces required shall be determined on a case-by-
case basis, based on consideration of the types and sizes of facilities
proposed.
         c.   The Planning Commission may waive the paving requirements in §
4.01(D)(4) for parking and driveways , upon making the determination that
another type of surface will be adequate to handle the anticipated level of
traffic, and in consideration of the desire to maintain the rural, non-
commercial character of the site through use of a pervious surface . In making
a determination regarding paving, the Planning Commission shall consider the
types of vehicles anticipated (for example, whether there will be bus traffic).
If paving is not required, then the site plan shall include a commitment to
provide dust control in parking areas and on driveways .
         d.   The Planning Commission may waive parking lot lighting
requirements, in the interest of preserving the rural residential character,
and upon making the determination that the facility will be used only during
daylight hours.
         e.   The Planning Commission may waive parking lot landscaping
requirements upon making the determination that existing vegetation to be
retained on site satisfies the objectives of the Ordinance.
      6.   Accessory retail facilities. Accessory retail facilities, such as a
wine- or hard cider-tasting room , a gift shop limited to merchandise related
to the wine or hard cider business, or retail sales of wine or cider, may be
permitted, subject to the following:
         a.   Accessory retail facilities shall be clearly incidental to the
principal small wine maker or hard cider producer use, and shall be designed to
serve only the patrons of the small wine maker or hard cider producer use.
Retail facilities shall occupy no more than 25% of the floor space in the
accessory building .
         b.   Accessory retail facilities shall be fully contained within a
building .
         c.   All such accessory retail facilities shall be clearly demarcated
on the site plan.
         d.   Permanent restroom facilities shall be required; portable toilet
facilities shall not be permitted.
         e.   Accessory buildings shall comply with the dimensional
requirements of the district in which they are located.
      7.   Permits and licenses. Copies of all state and federal permits and
licenses required to operate the facility shall be submitted to the township .
      8.   Signs . In the RR, RE, AG-SF, and AG-C Districts, signs shall comply
with the requirements for signs for nonresidential uses in §
7.07, subsection E. In the B-1, B-2, and I-1 Districts, signs shall comply with
the requirements for nonresidential district signs in §
7.08.
      9.   Single-family dwelling. In the RR, RE, AG-SF, and AG-C Districts,
one single-family dwelling  shall be permitted, to serve as the principal
residence of the owner or operator of the facility.
      10.   Special outdoor events. A special outdoor event, which may include
music, food, wine tasting, and the like, if the proposed event will be attended
by 50 or more persons at one time, shall require a temporary use  permit issued
by the Building Official pursuant to §
2.07.
      11.   Production limits. Small wine makers and hard cider producers in
the RR, RE, and AG-SF Districts shall manufacture or bottle no more than 25,000
gallons in one calendar year. Small wine makers and hard cider producers in the
AG-C, B-1, B-2, and I-1 Districts shall manufacture or bottle no more than
50,000 gallons in one calendar year.
   KK.   Wind energy systems . Recognizing the potential for future growth in
locally-sited wind energy systems , the township intends to permit such uses
subject to the requirements below and subject to maintaining the rural
character of the township .
      1.   General standards
         a.   Permits required
            (1)   All wind energy systems must comply with local and state
electrical and construction codes. A building permit shall be obtained after
site plan approval and before construction may begin.
            (2)   Any wind energy system within one and one-half miles of an
airport may require approvals from the Federal Aviation Administration (Form
7460-1) and the Michigan Aeronautics Commission. All towers shall comply with
the Michigan Airport Zoning Act (1950 PA 23, being M.C.L.A. §§ 259.431 through
259.464, as amended) and the Michigan Tall Structures Act (1959 PA 259, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 259.481 through 259.493, as amended).
         b.   Sound level.
            (1)   Wind energy systems shall not exceed 55 db(A) at the property
line closest to the wind energy system .
            (2)   The maximum permitted sound level may be exceeded during
short-term events such as utility outages and/or severe wind storms.
            (3)   If the ambient sound level exceeds 55 db(A), the maximum
permitted sound level shall be the ambient level plus 5 db(A).
      2.   On-site wind energy systems . For wind energy systems intended to
primarily provide electrical power to the owner, the following standards shall
apply:
         a.   A site plan shall be required for all wind energy systems and
anemometer towers. A special use permit shall be required for any wind energy
system or anemometer tower located on a parcel less than ten acres in area.
         b.   No more than one tower or turbine shall be permitted per parcel ,
except that up to three anemometer towers may be permitted on a temporary
basis, subject to all other regulations of this section.
         c.   The maximum turbine size that may be permitted by site plan
review is 100 kilowatts. Turbines up to 500 kilowatts may be permitted by
special use permit .
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/71d151aa824b5086a107ad3293684d8be35e4585/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1911.jpg]
         d.   Maximum height: 130 feet, measured from the existing ground level
at the base of the tower to the center of the hub for a horizontal-axis wind
turbine or to the highest point of a vertical-axis wind turbine.
         e.   Minimum clearance between the ground and the tip of any blade: 20
feet.
         f.   Minimum setback from property lines or inhabited structures :
100% of total system height, measured to the top of the blade in its full
vertical position.
         g.   Interconnection with utility grid. The standards in this section
shall not be construed to prevent the owner of an on-site wind energy system
from sending excess electricity back to the utility grid. Any wind energy
system connected to the utility grid shall comply with applicable state and
federal standards, including but not limited to the regulations of the Michigan
Public Service Commission and the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission.
      3.   Utility grid wind energy systems. Any wind energy system larger than
500 kilowatts and designed to primarily provide electricity to the larger
utility grid shall only be permitted by special use permit on parcels of 40
acres or more in the AG-C district. In hearing a request for a special use
permit for a wind energy system , the township shall consider the impacts of
the proposed land use with regard to noise levels, shadow flicker, natural
environment (including birds and wildlife), potential ice shedding,
electromagnetic interference, airports /airfields, and impacts on the visual
character of the township .
   LL.   Auctions . Auctions shall comply with the following regulations:
      1.   Application and review requirements. Auction types that are
permitted by special land use shall comply with the requirements of §§
29.02 and 29.03 of the Zoning Ordinance. Accordingly, site plan review and
special land use applications shall be completed and submitted, along with a
site plan that contains all of the information required in §
29.02(E). The requirements in this subsection shall not apply to auctions that
are principal permitted uses ; site plan review is not required for such
auctions .
      2.   Noise. Outside permanently affixed public address systems are
prohibited. Portable address systems are permitted for use during the auction
only. Auctions shall comply with the noise standards in §
9.02, subsection A.
      3.   Parking. Permanent live auctions that are permitted by special land
use shall provide off-street parking at the rate of one space per 125 square
feet of gross floor area . Permanent on-line auctions shall provide off-street
parking at the rate of one space per 200 square feet of gross floor area . The
applicant may provide data to justify need for fewer parking spaces for
consideration by the Planning Commission and Township Board . Parking for
permanent auctions shall be paved, pursuant to §
4.01, subsection E.4.
      4.   Hours of operation. Auctions shall not begin earlier than 8:00 a.m.
and shall not continue beyond 10:00 p.m. The proposed hours of operation
shall be specified in the application, which shall be subject to approval by
the township .
      5.   Retail operations. Retail operations shall not be conducted at an
auction facility, unless the facility is located in a district that provides
for retail use and site plan approval has been obtained.
      6.   Storage. Auction facilities shall not be used for long-term storage.
Storage of goods shall be limited to those that will be sold in the next
scheduled auction or within six months, as appropriate. Outside storage shall
be screened in accordance with §
5.02(E).
      7.   Signs. Auction facilities shall comply with the sign requirements
for the districts in which they are located.
      8.   Minimum size. The parcel size for permanent agricultural auctions
shall be a minimum of 20 acres.
   MM.   Medical marijuana facilities . A registered primary caregiver may be
permitted, in compliance with the General Rules of the Michigan Department of
Community Health, the Michigan Medical Marijuana Act, M.C.L.A. § 333.26421 (the
"Act") and the requirements of this section in the zoning districts specified
herein. Nothing in this section or Ordinance is intended to grant, nor shall
they be construed as granting, immunity from criminal prosecution for growing,
sale, consumption, use, distribution, or possession of marijuana not in strict
compliance with the Act and the General Rules. The following requirements for a
registered primary caregiver shall apply:
      1.   General Rules of the MDCH. The medical use of marijuana shall comply
at all times and in all circumstances with the Michigan Medical Marijuana Act
and the General Rules of the Michigan Department of Community Health, as they
may be amended from time to time.
      2.   Drug free zone. A parcel of land occupied by a registered primary
caregiver shall not be closer than 1,000 feet to a parcel of land occupied by a
school park or a state licensed facility for child day care .
      3.   Number of caregivers per parcel . Not more than one primary
caregiver shall be permitted per parcel . The caregiver shall service no more
than five qualifying patients on the parcel . The caregiver may be an
additional qualifying patient .
      4.   Containment. All medical marijuana  shall be contained within the
structure in an enclosed facility equipped with locks or other security devices
that permit access only by the registered primary caregiver or qualifying
patient . Containment facilities shall be subject to inspection by the Township
Building Inspector. Routine inspection by local law enforcement may be
appropriate.
      5.   Permits. Where required, building, electrical, plumbing and
mechanical permits shall be obtained for any portion of the building in which
electrical wiring, lighting, and/or watering devices that support the
cultivation, growing or harvesting of marijuana are used.
      6.   Inspections. That portion of the structure occupied as a grow room,
and the storage of any chemical, such as herbicides, pesticides, and
fertilizers, shall be subject to inspection and approval by the Northeast
Ingham Emergency Services Authority (NIESA) to ensure compliance with the
Michigan Fire Protection Code and other applicable codes and ordinances.
      7.   License. The caregiver shall provide the township with a copy of the
license initially issued to him/her by the State of Michigan, as well as
subsequent renewals that authorize him/her to be a primary caregiver .
      8.   Consumption on the premises. There shall be no consumption or use of
marijuana on the premises in the B-1, B-2 or I-1 districts; however, the
caregiver may use marijuana on the premises if he/she is a qualified patient in
the R-1, R-1-s, RR, RE, AG-SF, RM-1 and AG-C districts
      9.   Individual use of medical marijuana . Nothing in this Ordinance
shall be construed to prohibit a qualifying patient from growing, possessing,
and using medical marijuana  in one's own home for one's own use, pursuant to
the Michigan Medical Marijuana Act.
      10.   Caregiver occupancy. In the R-1, R-1-S, RR, RE, AG-SF, RM-1 and AG-
C districts the caregiver must be an owner occupant of the property.
   NN.   Brewpub s and microbreweries .
      1.   The following regulations shall apply to brewpub s, as defined in §
1.03:
         a.   Brewery production shall not exceed 5,000 barrels per year.
         b.   The sale of alcoholic liquor by a brewpub is subject to the
license obtained pursuant to the Michigan Liquor Control Act, as amended.
         c.   A brewpub may not sell its beer to other retailers or
wholesalers.
         d.   Storage of hops, barley, wheat or other grain used in the brewing
process may be stored in a detached, separate structure, such as a silo,
provided that any such accessory structure complies with the setback
requirements for the district in which it is located. No open storage of
bottles, pallets, or other containers shall be permitted. Storage in tractor
trailers shall be permitted for periods not longer than 24 hours.
         e.   Brewpub s shall comply with the Performance Standards specified
in
Article 9.00.
         f.   Brewpub s shall include a taproom or restaurant that provides
full meal service for consumption by patrons while seated on the premises.
Twenty-five percent of the gross sales of the restaurant shall be derived from
the sale of food and nonalcoholic beverages. Note: The provision regarding "25%
of the gross sales" is a State of Michigan requirement and would not be subject
to local enforcement.
         g.   No more than 50% of the total gross floor space of the
establishment shall be used for the brewery function, such as the brewhouse,
fermentation tanks, conditioning tanks, bright beer tanks/filter, bottling and
kegging lines, malt milling and storage, serving tanks and boiler and water
treatment areas.
         h.   No outside beer tent shall be permitted in any off-street parking
lot or off-street loading/unloading area except as may be permitted as a
temporary use pursuant to §
2.07, subsection A.5. Outside table service may be permitted in areas not
designated for parking or loading/unloading.
         i.   Off-street parking shall be provided at the rate of one space per
50 square feet of usable floor area (UFA) or 0.5 spaces per seat, whichever is
greater. For the purposes of this requirement, areas dedicated to brewery
production shall not be counted as UFA. In addition, brewpub s shall provide
employee parking at the rate of one parking space per employee on the largest
working shift. Off-street parking shall comply with the requirements in
Article 4.00.
         j.   A brewpub 's taproom or restaurant shall comply with State of
Michigan regulations with respect to hours of operation.
      2.   The following regulations shall apply to microbreweries, as defined
in §
1.03:
         a.   Microbrewery production shall not exceed 30,000 barrels of beer
per year.
         b.   A microbrewery may sell beer it manufactures to a licensed
wholesaler who may resell the beer to licensed retailers. Direct sales to
licensed retailers are prohibited.
         c.   Storage of hops, barley, wheat or other grain used in the brewing
process may be stored in a detached, separate structure, such as a silo,
provided that any such accessory structure complies with the setback
requirements for the district in which it is located. No open storage of
bottles, pallets, or other containers shall be permitted. Storage in tractor
trailers shall be permitted for periods not longer than 24 hours.
         d.   Microbreweries shall comply with the Performance Standards
specified in
Article 9.00.
         e.   Microbreweries shall include a restaurant that provides full meal
service for consumption by patrons while seated on the premises.
         f.   No more than 65% of the total gross floor space of the
establishment shall be used for the brewery function, such as the brewhouse,
fermentation tanks, conditioning tanks, bright beer tanks/filter, bottling and
kegging lines, malt milling and storage, serving tanks and boiler and water
treatment areas.
         g.   No outside beer tent shall be permitted in any off-street parking
lot or off-street loading/unloading area except as may be permitted as a
temporary use pursuant to §
2.07, subsection A.5. Outside table service may be permitted in areas not
designated for parking or loading/unloading.
         h.   Off-street parking shall be provided at the rate of one space per
50 square feet of usable floor area (UFA) or 0.5 spaces per seat, whichever is
greater. For the purposes of this requirement, areas dedicated to brewery
production shall not be counted as UFA. In addition, microbreweries shall
provide employee parking at the rate of one parking space per employee on the
largest working shift. Off-street parking shall comply with the requirements in
Article 4.00.
   OO.   Agricultural tourism . The following provisions shall apply to
agricultural tourism operations, as defined in §
1.03 :
      1.   Buildings . More than one building may be permitted per parcel .
Unless a building is exempt because it is an agricultural structure, all
buildings shall be subject to inspection under the Single State Construction
Code Act and Property Maintenance Code.
      2.   Trash containers. A sufficient number of trash containers shall be
placed on the premises for public use, based on evaluation of the following
features: type of event, anticipated number of attendees, duration of event,
geographic size of the event, and use of disposable beverage or food
containers.
      3.   Restrooms. A sufficient number of restrooms shall be available for
public use, based on evaluation of the following features: type of event,
number of attendees, duration of event, availability of food and beverages, and
special needs of attendees (e.g., families with children, people with
disability needs, etc.).
      4.   Building  setbacks . Buildings shall comply with the setbacks  for
the district in which they are located.
      5.   Building height . Buildings related to agricultural tourism shall
not exceed 35 feet in height.
      6.   Parking. All parking shall be provided in off-street parking lots ,
designed in accordance with the regulations in §
4.01, except as follows:
         a.     Off-street parking shall be set back a minimum of 40 feet from
any property that is zoned or used for residential purposes.
         b.   The number of parking spaces shall be determined on a case-by-
case basis, upon consideration of the character of the specific agricultural
tourism use being proposed.
         c.   The Planning Commission may waive the requirement for parking lot
paving, upon making the determination that a grass or gravel surface will be
adequate to handle the anticipated level of traffic, in making a determination
regarding paving the Planning Commission shall consider the types of vehicles
anticipated (e.g., volume of bus traffic, size and weight of vehicles, etc.).
If paving is not required, then the site plan shall include a commitment to
provide dust control.
         d.   The Planning Commission may waive parking lot lighting
requirements upon making the determination that the facility will be used only
during daylight hours.
         e.   The Planning Commission may waive parking lot landscaping
requirements upon making the determination that existing vegetation to be
retained on the site satisfies the objectives of the Ordinance and maintains
the rural, noncommercial character of the site.
      7.   Signs. Agricultural tourism uses shall comply with the requirements
for wall signs and freestanding signs in §
7.08, subsections D. and E.
      8.   Exterior lighting. Parking lot and pedestrian route lighting shall
be required for any agricultural tourism use that operates after dusk or before
dawn, subject to §
2.12. Adequate lighting shall be provided to assure the safety of pedestrians
and drivers.
      9.   Overnight accommodations. Overnight accommodations related to an
agricultural tourism operation shall comply with the regulations for bed-and-
breakfast establishments in §
8.02, subsection F.
      10.   Hours of operation. Exterior uses related to minor agricultural
tourism shall open no earlier than 9:00 a.m. and close no later than 8:00 p.m.
each day. The Planning Commission shall establish the hours of operation for
major uses to assure compatibility with nearby uses.
      11.   Size. For the purposes of determining whether an agricultural
tourism use should be a principal permitted use or special land use, such
operations are classified "Minor" or "Major" based on the following
characteristics:
 
                    Minor Operations1, 2           Major Operations2
Time Span3          Less than or equal to 3 weeks/ More than 3 weeks/event
                    event
Event Acreage4      Less than or equal to 5 acres  More than 5 acres
Number of Events    One or two per calendar year   Three or more per calendar
                                                   year
Number of Attendees Less than or equal to 50 at    More than 50 at any one time
                    any one time
Footnotes:
1   Agricultural tourism operations must satisfy all four criteria to be
considered Minor.
2   Minor and major operations require site plan approval. Major operations
also require special land use approval.
3   By way of example, a minor tourism operation could include one that is open
for business 21 consecutive days or one that is open 3 weekends within a 3-week
period.
4   Event acreage includes the land occupied by the event plus ancillary
facilities (such as parking), and not necessarily the total acreage of the
parcel on which the event is located.
 
      12.   Exclusions. The provisions in this subsection (OO) do not apply to
the following uses:
         a.   Nature center s or demonstration farms, to the extent that they
are regulated by §
8.02, subsection HH.
         b.   Recreation facilities , which are regulated by §
8.02, subsection W.
         c.   Outdoor events, which are regulated by §
8.02, subsection GG.
         d.   Roadside stands , which are regulated by §
8.02, subsection Z.
         e.   Wineries , to the extent that such uses are regulated by §
8.02, subsection JJ.
         f.   Distilleries.
         g.   Bed-and-breakfast establishments , which are regulated by §
8.02, subsection F.
         h.   Brewpubs and microbreweries , which are regulated by §
8.02, subsection NN.
         i.   Riding stables, which are regulated by §
8.02, subsection AA.
         j.   Any use for which zoning regulations are superseded by Generally
Accepted Agricultural and Management Practices (GAAMPS), such as farm markets.
      13.   Examples. In combination with a conventional farm, the following
activities may constitute an agricultural tourism event: bakery, bonfires,
carnival rides, cider mill, cooking demonstrations, corn mazes, fishing pond,
food service, haunted barn/trails, petting farms, and playscapes. This list is
not intended to be all inclusive of activities that may be considered
agricultural tourism .
      14.   Impact on surrounding properties. The location, layout, design and
operation of such a facility shall not impair the continued enjoyment, use, and
future development of adjacent and nearby properties.
   PP.   Small distillers. The following regulations shall apply to small
distillers, as defined in §
1.03:
      1.   Setbacks. Principal and accessory buildings shall comply with the
setback requirements for the district in which they are located.
      2.   Location. Small distillers are permitted by special land use
approval in the RR, RE, AG-SF, and AG-C Districts. In the B-1, B-2, and I-
1 Districts, small distillers are principal permitted uses . Small distillers
shall be subject to the following additional locational requirements:
         a.   Small distillers shall not be located on land that is part of a
recorded residential plat or residential condominium .
         b.   Small distillers located in the Rural Residential District or
Rural Estates District shall be located within 300 feet of an existing
commercial establishment or Commercial-Agricultural District.
      3.   Impact on surrounding properties. The location, layout, design,
operation and size of such a facility shall not impair the continued enjoyment,
use and future development of adjacent and nearby properties. The Planning
Commission may specify the hours of operation to assure compatibility with
adjacent uses .
      4.   Storage. All operations of the small distillery shall be contained
within a fully enclosed building . There shall be no open storage of bottles,
pallets, containers, or other material.
      5.   Performance Standards. Small distillers shall comply with the
Performance Standards in Article
9.00.
      6.   Parking. All parking shall be provided in off-street parking lots ,
designed in accordance with §
4.01, except as follows:
         a.   Off-street parking shall be set back a minimum of 30 feet from
any property that is zoned or used for residential purposes.
         b.   The number of spaces required shall be determined on a case-by-
case basis, based on consideration of the types and sizes of facilities
proposed.
         c.   The Planning Commission may waive the paving requirements in §
4.01(D)(4) for parking and driveways, upon making the determination that
another type of surface will be adequate to handle the anticipated level of
traffic, and in consideration of the desire to maintain the rural, non-
commercial character of the site through use of a pervious surface. In making a
determination regarding paving, the Planning Commission shall consider the
types of vehicles anticipated (for example, whether there will be bus traffic).
If paving is not required, then the site plan shall include a commitment to
provide dust control in parking areas and on driveways .
         d.   The Planning Commission may waive parking lot lighting
requirements, in the interest of preserving the rural residential character,
and upon making the determination that the facility will be used only during
daylight hours.
         e.   The Planning Commission may waive parking lot landscaping
requirements upon making the determination that existing vegetation to be
retained on site satisfies the objectives of the Ordinance.
      7.   Accessory facilities . Accessory facilities , such as a sampling
room or a place to sell spirits to consumers for onpremises or off-premises
consumption, may be permitted, subject to the following:
         a.   Limited to the AG-C, B-1, B-2, and I-1 Districts.
         b.   All such accessory facilities shall be clearly incidental to the
principal small distillery, and shall be designed to serve only the patrons of
the small distillery. Accessory facilities shall occupy no more than 25% of the
gross floor space .
         c.   Accessory retail facilities shall be fully contained within a
building .
         d.   All such accessory retail facilities shall be clearly demarcated
on the site plan.
         e.   Permanent restroom facilities shall be required; portable toilet
facilities shall not be permitted.
         f.   Accessory buildings shall comply with the dimensional
requirements of the district in which they are located.
      8.   Permits and licenses. Copies of all state and federal permits and
licenses required to operate the facility shall be submitted to the township .
      9.   Signs . In the RR, RE, AG-SF, and AG-C Districts, signs shall comply
with the requirements for signs for nonresidential uses in §
7.07, subsection E. In the B-1, B-2, and I-1 Districts, signs shall comply with
the requirements for nonresidential district signs in §
7.08.
      10.   Single-family dwelling. In the RR, RE, AG-SF, and AG-C Districts,
one single-family dwelling shall be permitted, to serve as the principal
residence of the owner or operator of the facility.
      11.   Special outdoor events. A special outdoor event, which may include
music, food, liquor tasting, and the like, if the proposed event will be
attended by 50 or more persons at one time, shall require a temporary use
permit issued by the Building Official pursuant to §
2.07.
      12.   Production limits. Small distillers in the RR, RE, and AG-SF
Districts shall manufacture or bottle no more than 25,000 gallons annually.
Small distillers in the AG-C, B-1, B-2, and I-1 Districts shall manufacture or
bottle no more than 60,000 gallons annually.
   QQ.   Solar energy systems.
      1.   Purpose. It is the purpose of this subsection to promote the safe,
effective and efficient use of solar energy systems to generate electricity.
Further, it is the purpose of this subsection to standardize and streamline the
review and permitting process for solar energy systems.
      2.   Findings. The Township has found that solar energy is an abundant,
renewable and nonpolluting energy resource of which some residents and utility
companies would like to make use. Generation of electricity by solar energy
systems will reduce dependence on non-renewable energy resources and decrease
air and water pollution that results from the use of conventional fossil fuels.
Solar energy system s will also enhance the reliability and quality of the
power grid, reduce peak power demands, and help diversify the township's energy
supply.
      3.   Definitions. For the purposes of this subsection, the following
definitions shall apply.
         COMMUNITY SOLAR or SHARED SOLAR. Defined by the U. S. Department of
Energy’s National Renewable Energy Laboratory as “a solar-electric system that
provides power and/or financial benefit to multiple community members.”
Customers of a community solar program subscribe to a portion of a shared
renewable energy facility located elsewhere in the community, and the power
generated results in each subscriber receiving their portion of the benefit
based on their investment.
         SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM or SES. The components and subsystems that, in
combination, convert solar energy into electric or thermal energy suitable for
use by consumers. Photovoltaic power systems, solar thermal systems, and solar
hot water systems are types of solar energy systems.
      4.   Solar energy systems serving a single residence or business
(typically for on-site use ).
         a.   Roof- and building-mounted solar energy systems . Roof- and
building-mounted solar energy systems for individual use are permitted
accessory structures in all zoning districts, subject to the following
regulations:
            i.   Height. Roof-mounted systems shall not extend more than four
feet above the roof surface to which they are affixed.
            ii.   Location. Solar energy systems shall not protrude beyond the
edge of the roof.
            iii   Building and electrical permits. Building and electrical
permits shall be required for installation of roof- and building-mounted
systems.
         b.   Ground-mounted solar energy systems . Ground-mounted solar energy
systems for individual residential or business use are permitted accessory
structures in all zoning districts, subject to the following regulations:
            i.   Location and setbacks . Solar energy systems shall be
considered accessory structures and may be located in the front, side or rear
yard , subject to the setback requirements for accessory buildings .
            ii.   Height. The height of the solar energy system and any mounts
shall not exceed 20 feet when oriented at maximum tilt.
            iii.   Screening. Landscaping shall be provided to screen the
racking from view on all sides, when visible from adjacent properties
            iv.   Building and electrical permits. Building and electrical
permits shall be required for any ground-mounted solar energy system .
            v.   Area. Ground-mounted solar energy systems shall be subject to
the maximum lot coverage standards of the zoning district.
         c.   Batteries. When solar storage batteries are included as part of
the solar collector system, they must be placed in a secure container or
enclosure when in use, and when no longer in use shall be disposed of in
accordance with applicable laws and regulations.
         d.   Removal. If a solar energy system ceases to perform its intended
function (generating electricity) for more than 12 consecutive months, the
property owner shall remove the collectors, mounts, and associated equipment
and facilities no later than 90 days after the end of the 12-month period.
Where the removal has not been lawfully completed as required above, and after
at least 30 days written notice, the township may remove or secure the removal
of the solar energy system or portion thereof, with the township's actual cost
and reasonable administrative charges to be placed as a lien on the property. A
lien on the property shall be superior to all other liens except taxes.
      5.     Solar energy systems - utility grade and community solar (for off-
site use, operated by a utility company, government entity, or quasi-
governmental entity).
         a.   Utility grade, ground-mounted solar energy systems . Utility
grade, ground mounted solar energy systems , typically over ten kW capacity,
are permitted subject to the following regulations:
            i.   Location and setbacks . The solar energy system shall meet the
minimum front, side and rear yard setbacks of the zoning district.
            ii.   Permitted zoning districts.  Utility grade and community
solar energy systems are permitted, subject to site plan and special land use
approval, in the AG-C, Commercial Agriculture, AG-SF, Agriculture Small Farms,
and I-1, Light Industrial Districts. Community solar systems are also
permitted, subject to special land use approval, in the RE, Rural Estates
District, RR, Rural Residential District, GD, Green Zone Planned Development
District, and PD, Planned Development Districts.
            iii.   Height. The height of the solar energy system and any mounts
shall not exceed 20 feet, when oriented at maximum tilt.
            iv.   Screening. Evergreen landscaping shall be provided to screen
the racking from view from the road and from adjacent residential land uses.
            v.   Building permit. A building permit shall be required for any
ground-mounted solar energy system .
            vi.   Area. Utility grade, ground-mounted solar energy systems
shall not be subject to the maximum lot coverage standards of the zoning
district, but other structures on the parcel are subject to maximum lot
coverage requirements.
            vii.   Power line placement. Power lines serving the solar energy
system shall be located underground.
            viii.   Landscaping. Suitable ground cover shall be provided and
maintained beneath the solar panels. Native Michigan plants are recommended.
            ix.   Sign . A sign shall be posted at the entrance(s) to the
facility, which shall be kept up-to-date, with the name and contact information
of the operator.
            x.   Glare. Solar energy panels shall not produce any glare that is
visible from the street or from adjacent or nearby residences.
            xi.   Locations where not permitted. Solar energy systems shall not
be located over a working septic system; in a floodplain or wetland ; on land
that is registered in the Michigan Farmland Preservation Program; or on land
that is the habitat of special status, threatened, endangered, candidate or
fully protected species, pursuant to state or federal law.
            xii.   Fencing . Utility grade solar energy systems shall be fully
enclosed within a six-foot-high fence that meets the requirements of Article
6.00.
            xiii.    Maintenance plan. At the time of site plan review, the
applicant shall present a detailed plan for maintenance of the facility,
including equipment, landscaping and groundcover maintenance.
            xiv.   Lighting. Lighting shall comply with §
2.12 of the Zoning Ordinance.
         b.   Batteries. When solar storage batteries are included as part of
the solar collector system , they must be placed in a secure container or
enclosure when in use, and when no longer in use shall be disposed of in
accordance with applicable laws and regulations.
         c.   Removal. If a solar energy system ceases to perform its intended
function (generating electricity) for more than 12 consecutive months, the
operator shall remove the collectors, mounts, associated equipment and
facilities no later than 90 days after the end of the 12-month period. Where
the removal has not been lawfully completed as required above, and after at
least 30 days written notice, the township may remove or secure the removal of
the solar energy system or portion thereof, with the township's actual cost and
reasonable administrative charges to be placed as a lien on the property. A
lien on the property shall be superior to all other liens except taxes.
         d.     Decommissioning plan. The SES project must contain a
decommissioning plan to ensure it is properly decommissioned upon the end of
the project life or facility abandonment.
            i.    Decommissioning shall include: removal of all structures
(including transmission equipment and fencing) and debris to a depth of four
feet, restoration of the soil, and restoration of vegetation within 12 months
of the end of project life or facility abandonment.
            ii.   The decommissioning plan shall state how the facility will be
decommissioned, a professional engineer's estimated cost of decommissioning,
the financial resources to be used to accomplish decommissioning, and the type
of surety to be provided prior to construction.
         e.   Abandonment.
            i.   A SES that ceases to produce energy on a continuous basis for
12 months will be considered abandoned, unless the current responsible party
(or parties) with ownership interest in the SES provides substantial evidence
(updated every six months after 12 months of no energy production) to the
township or its designee of the intent to maintain and reinstate the operation
of that facility. It is the responsibility of the responsible party (or
parties) to remove all equipment and facilities and restore the parcel to its
condition prior to development of the SES, unless otherwise approved by the
township.
            ii.   Upon determination of abandonment or other violation(s), the
township shall notify the party (or parties) responsible that it (they) must
remove the SES and restore the site to its condition prior to development of
the SES, within 365 days of notice by the township,
            iii.   If the responsible party (or parties) fails to comply, the
township may remove the SES, sell any removed materials, and initiate judicial
proceedings or take any other steps legally authorized against the responsible
party (parties) to recover the costs required to remove the SES and restore the
site to a nonhazardous, pre-development condition.
            iv.   Facilities deemed by the township to be unsafe and facilities
erected in violation of this section shall also be subject to this section. The
Code Enforcement Officer or any other employee of the Planning and Building
Departments shall have the right to request documentation and/or affidavits
from the applicant regarding the system's usage, and shall make a determination
as to the date of abandonment or the date on which other violation(s) occurred.
         f.   Surety.
            i.   The owner(s) and/or operator of the SES shall post a surety in
a form acceptable to the township, such as security bond, irrevocable letter of
credit, escrow, or other form deemed acceptable by the township, equal to 150%
of the total estimated decommissioning and reclamation costs, prior to issuance
of a building permit. The cost of decommissioning shall be reviewed between the
operator and the Township Board every five years to ensure adequate funds are
allocated for decommissioning; the surety shall be appropriately adjusted to
reflect the current decommissioning estimate.
            ii.   The surety shall be established and maintained with a company
licensed in the state or a federal- or state-chartered lending institution
acceptable to the township.
            iii.   The company providing the surety shall provide the township
with 90 days’ notice of the expiration of the surety. Lapse of a valid security
bond is grounds for the actions defined in subsection 5.f.v. below.
            iv.   In the event of sale or transfer of ownership and/or
operation of the SES, a surety shall be maintained throughout the entirety of
the process.
            v.   If at any time during the operation of the SES, or prior to,
during, or after the sale or transfer of ownership and/or operation of the SES,
the surety is not maintained, the township may take any action permitted by
law, revoke the special use permit , order a cessation of operations, and order
removal of the structure and reclamation of the site in accordance with the
decommissioning plan.
            vi.   The township shall have access to surety, for the expressed
purpose of completing decommissioning, if decommissioning is not completed by
the owner(s)/operator within 12 months of the end of the project life or
facility abandonment as defined.
            vii.   The township is granted right of access to the site,
pursuant to reasonable notice, in the event that decommissioning is not
completed by the owner(s)/operator within 12 months of the end of the project
life or facility abandonment as defined.
         g.   Required information. The following additional information shall
be required with any site plan submittal:
            i.   Evidence of ownership or control of the property on which the
solar energy system is to be located.
            ii.   A copy of the agreement with the utility company that will be
purchasing the electricity generated by the solar energy system .
   RR.   Keeping of farm animals on non-farm parcels or lots.
      1.   Introduction. Certain farm animals  may be kept on non-farm parcels
or lots as an accessory to a principal permitted single family residential use,
subject to the regulations in this section.
         a.   The regulations in this section apply to non-farm parcels or lots
that are three acres or smaller in areas zoned One Family Residential (R-1),
Suburban Residential (R-1-S), Rural Residential (RR), Rural Estates (RE),
Agricultural Small Farms (AG-SF), and Commercial Agriculture (AG-C).
         b.   The regulations in this section shall not apply to the keeping of
farm animals  on a farm operation that is on a parcel that is greater than
three acres in area zoned Commercial Agriculture (AG-C), Agricultural Small
Farms (AG-SF), Rural Estates (RE), or Rural Residential (RR), where keeping of
farm animals  is permitted in compliance with the Michigan Right to Farm Act
and the Generally Accepted Agricultural and Management Practices (GAAMPs)
promulgated therein (see subsection L, Farms). The regulations in this section
also shall not apply to the keeping of horses in a stable or riding arena,
pursuant to subsection AA.
         c.   Williamstown Township recognizes the many benefits of locally
grown and produced agricultural products. The adoption of these regulations is
intended to legalize, but more importantly, encourage residents to raise small
farm animals  in a responsible manner.
         d.   These regulations are further intended to complement the sensible
agricultural practices taught by the Future Farmers of America (FFA), 4-H, and
similar organizations. Notwithstanding the requirements set forth herein,
animals that are part of a documented FFA or 4-H program may be kept on non-
farm parcels or lots, provided that a minimum parcel or lot size of two acres
shall be required for animals exceeding 175 pounds.
         e.   Existing facilities regulated by these regulations are subject to
the nonconforming use provisions in
Article 3.00 of the Zoning Ordinance, provided that the facilities comply with
the sanitary and nuisance requirements in item 5, following.
      2.   Purpose. The regulations in this subsection are intended to
establish the conditions under which certain farm animals  may be kept in semi-
urban residential areas of Williamstown Township. Some residents on non-farm
parcels or lots wish to raise their own food because of a desire for healthier
dietary practices, community sustainability and resilience, and greater access
to safe and healthy food options. Concerns about disease and pestilence exist
when farm animals  and people live in proximity. Nuisance concerns also exist,
due to odors, noises, and other impacts associated with ffarm animals . The
regulations in this subsection are intended to address these concerns, allow
agriculture on residential parcels and lots, and minimize social conflict and
public health impacts.
      3.   Private, non-commercial use. Livestock and poultry kept and
maintained under this subsection shall be for private, non-commercial use only.
      4.   Definitions. For the purposes of this subsection, the following
definitions shall apply:
         POULTRY. Domesticated fowl collectively, especially those valued for
their meat and eggs, such as chickens, turkeys, ducks, geese, and guinea fowl.
         SMALL FARM ANIMAL. A domesticated animal that is kept for the purpose
of a farm product or service to humans and does not exceed a mature weight of
175 pounds. Small farm animals include, but are not limited to goats, miniature
pigs, sheep, and rabbits.
      5.   Sanitary requirements; nuisances. It is unlawful and shall be
considered a nuisance for any person to keep or maintain, or allow to be kept
or maintained, upon any premises owned, controlled, or occupied by the person,
any livestock and poultry that are in foul, obnoxious, malodorous, or filthy
conditions or that may become detrimental to the public health, safety and
welfare. All places where livestock and poultry are kept shall be maintained in
sanitary condition and shall be cleaned as often as necessary to avoid being a
nuisance.
      6.   Zoning permit required. A person intending to keep any of the farm
animals  cited in this subsection RR on a non-farm parcel or lot shall obtain a
zoning permit from the Township prior to acquiring the animals. By signing the
permit application, the applicant attests that he/she will abide by all the
regulations contained herein for as long as the farm animals  are kept.
Enforcement related to a permit shall be predicated on a finding that there has
been a specific violation of these regulations or that keeping of farm animals
has created a nuisance. A zoning permit for the keeping of farm animals  shall
not be transferrable from one property owner to another.
      7.   Applicability of private restrictions. Notwithstanding the
regulations set forth in this subsection, private restrictions on the use of
property for keeping of farm animals  shall remain enforceable. Private
restrictions include, but are not limited to, deed restrictions, restrictions
in condominium master deeds and bylaws, subdivision association bylaws, and
covenant deeds. The interpretation and enforcement of private restrictions is
the sole responsibility of the private parties involved.
      8.   Poultry. The keeping of poultry is permitted, subject to the
following regulations:
         a.   Gender. Only female poultry (hens) shall be kept on non-farm
parcels or lots. For example, keeping of mature roosters is prohibited.
         b.   Number of hens. The following chart indicates the maximum number
of hens permitted on a parcel or lot:
 
Size of Parcel or Lot  Maximum Number of Hens
Less than ½ acre      6
½ acre to 1 acre      12
Each additional ½ acreUp to 6
 
         c.   Location and setbacks.
            i.   In the R-1, R-1-S, and RR districts, facilities and structures
related to the keeping of poultry shall be located to the rear of the
residence.
            ii.   Coops and pens in all districts shall comply with the
following setbacks:
               Coops and pens shall comply with the minimum front yard setback
requirements for principal structures specified in the Schedule of Regulations,
§
28.02.
               Coops and pens shall be set back a minimum of 30 feet from side
and rear property lines.
               Coops and pens shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from any
building on an adjacent property used as a dwelling.
               Coops and pens shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from the
applicant's residence.
            iii.   Manure storage facilities shall be located to the rear of
the residence and set back a minimum of 50 feet from all property lines.
         d.   Coop and pen design. A coop (also called a henhouse) is a
completely enclosed structure that provides shelter for chickens or other
poultry. A pen is a fenced enclosure, typically attached to the coop, that is
mostly open to the elements, that allows the chickens or other poultry to leave
the coop while remaining in a predator safe environment. The coop and pen shall
comply with the following specifications:
            i.   Materials. Coops and pens must be constructed of durable,
weather-resistant materials. The use of corrugated metal or fiberglass, sheet
metal, plastic tarps, scrap lumber, or similar materials that would detract
from the appearance of the property and neighborhood shall be prohibited.
            ii.   Elevation of structures. The coop shall be designed to
prevent rodents or other animals from being harbored underneath, inside, or
within the walls of the structure. One method of achieving this is by elevating
the coop at least 18 inches above grade.
            iii.   Coop features. Coops shall have a roof and doors that can be
tightly secured. They shall be readily accessible for cleaning. They shall be
properly ventilated and have adequate sunlight.
            iv.   Coop and pen size. Each bird must have a minimum of three
square feet of space in the coop and ten square feet in the pen.
            v.   Pen height. If the pen is not covered, then it must be at
least 42 inches in height and the birds' wings must be clipped to prevent them
from leaving the pen.
            vi.   Cleaning requirements. Coops and pens shall be cleaned
regularly to prevent accumulation of food, fecal matter, and nesting material
that would create a nuisance or unsanitary conditions due to odor, vermin,
debris, or decay.
         e.   Additional regulations.
            i.   Feed storage. Feed shall be stored in sealable containers to
prevent access by rodents or other animals.
            ii.   Containment. Poultry shall be always kept inside a pen and
must be shut in their coop from sunset to sunrise.
            iii.   Sales. Selling of poultry on-site is prohibited.
            iv.   Slaughtering. Slaughtering of poultry shall be conducted in a
fully enclosed building.
            v.   Removal of dead poultry. Dead poultry and waste eggs shall be
promptly bagged and disposed of.
            vi.   Manure storage and removal. Stored manure shall be placed in
a fully enclosed container. No more than three cubic feet of manure shall be
stored. All other manure not used for composting or fertilizing shall be
removed from the site.
      9.   Small farm animals (other than poultry). The keeping of small farm
animals on non-farm parcels or lots is permitted, subject to the following
regulations:
         a.   Non-commercial use. The keeping of small farm animals on non-farm
parcels or lots shall be for non-commercial use only. Consequently, milk
producing, cheese producing, yogurt making, soap making, baby formula making,
or fertilizer production for commercial use or sale is prohibited.
         b.   Minimum open space. Except for rabbits, a minimum of one acre of
open space or pasture is required to keep any small farm animals.
         c.   Number of small farm animals. No more than six small farm animals
shall be permitted per acre of open space or pasture, except that up to ten
rabbits of breeding age shall be permitted per acre. Additional small farm
animals are permitted for weaning under subitem d, Breeding. No fewer than two
goats shall be kept on a parcel or lot.
         d.   Breeding. Small farm animals may be bred if all the following
conditions are met:
            i.   Time limits. Young animals shall be kept for no more than 60
days after birth to allow for weaning from the mother.
            ii.   Reduction in number. Small farm animals exceeding the number
allowed in subitem c may not be kept more than 60 days after the day they are
born.
            iii.   Buckling goats. Buckling goats shall be separated from
female goats six weeks after birth. Any buckling being permanently retained
shall be made a wether (a castrated male goat) and dehorned in no more than
seven weeks after birth.
         e.   Location and setbacks.
            i.   In the R-1, R-1-S, and RR districts, facilities and structures
related to the keeping of small farm animals shall be located to the rear of
the residence.
            ii.   Shelters and pens in all districts shall comply with the
following setbacks:
               Shelters and pens shall comply with the minimum front yard
setback requirements for principal structures specified in the Schedule of
Regulations, §
28.02.
               Shelters and pens shall be set back a minimum of 30 feet from
side and rear property lines.
               Shelters and pens shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from
any building on an adjacent property used as a dwelling.
               Shelters and pens shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from
the applicant's residence.
            iii.   Manure storage facilities shall be located to the rear of
the residence and set back a minimum of 50 feet from all property lines.
         f.   Shelter and pen design. A shelter is an enclosed structure that
provides protection for the small farm animals from the elements and predators.
A pen is a fenced outdoor enclosure, typically attached to the shelter, that
allows the small farm animals to leave the shelter while remaining in a
predator safe environment. The shelter and pen shall comply with the following
specifications:
            i.   Materials. Shelters and pens must be constructed of durable,
weather-resistant materials. The use of corrugated metal or fiberglass, sheet
metal, plastic tarps, scrap lumber, or similar materials that would detract
from the appearance of the property shall be prohibited.
            ii.   Shelter features. Shelters shall have a solid roof and shall
be designed to secure the animals. They shall be readily accessible for
cleaning.
            iii.   Shelter and pen size. Shelters and pens shall comply with
the size requirements in the following chart:
 
      Shelter Size (per animal)   Pen Size (per animal)
Goat   Doe and kid: 18 sq. ft.;    250 sq. ft.
       Wether: 15 sq. ft.
Pig    Market pig: 9.1 sq. ft.;    250 sq. ft.
       Sow with litter: 35 sq. ft.
       Market lamb -
       45 - 65 lbs: 7.5 sq. ft.;
Sheep  65 - 90 lbs: 9 sq. ft.;     250 sq. ft.
       91 - 110 lbs: 11 sq. ft.
       Ewe: 14 - 20 sq. ft.
Rabbit Small breed: 1.5 sq. ft.;   Not applicable
       Large breed: 5.0 sq. ft.
 
            iv.   Pen features. The pen must be constructed in a way to prevent
animals from getting out. The pen must be accessible by the animals from their
shelter when they are not secured in the shelter.
            v.   Cleaning requirements. Shelters and pens shall be cleaned
regularly to prevent accumulation of food and fecal matter, that would create a
nuisance or unsanitary conditions due to odor, vermin, debris, or decay.
            vi.   Prohibited containment. Small farm animals may not be kept in
a residence, porch, or attached garage.
         g.   Additional regulations.
            i.   Male goats (bucks). No male goats, also called bucks, shall be
kept.
            ii.   Hay and grain storage. Hay shall be stored to prevent mold or
excess moisture in the hay. Grain shall be stored in sealable containers to
prevent access by rodents or other animals.
            iii.    Containment. Animals shall be kept inside a pen at all
times and must be kept in their shelter from sunset to sunrise.
            iv.   Slaughterin g. Slaughtering of small farm animals is
prohibited on non-farm parcels, except in the following instances:
               a)    Where slaughtering on-site is required by a legitimate,
verifiable religious practice, in which case the slaughtering shall be
conducted in a fully enclosed building; or
               b)    Where slaughtering on-site is required to alleviate the
suffering of an injured animal.
            v.   Manure storage and removal. Stored manure shall be placed in a
fully enclosed container. No more than three cubic feet of manure shall be
stored. All other manure not used for composting or fertilizing shall be
removed from the site.
            vi.   Removal of dead animals. Dead animals shall be disposed of
within 24 hours after death, following procedures cited in the Bodies of Dead
Animals Act, Michigan Public Act 239 of 1982, as amended.
      10.   Bees. The keeping of bees is permitted, subject to the following
regulations:
         a.   Hives. Honeybee colonies shall be kept in hives with removable
combs that are capable of being inspected.
         b.   Hive density. The following chart indicates the maximum permitted
density of honeybee colonies relative to parcel or lot size:
 
Size of Parcel or Lot              Number of Colonies Permitted
Up to ¼ acre                      2
More than ¼ acre, less than ½ acr4
More than ½ acre, less than ¾ acr6
1 acre or more                     **
**On parcels or lots larger than one acre there is no limit on the number of
colonies if either of the following conditions exist:
               i.   All hives are situated at least 50 feet in any direction
from all property lines of the parcel or lot.
               ii.   All adjoining property within a 100 foot radius of any
hive is undeveloped (has no structures or facilities for human use or
occupancy).
         c.   Hive location. Hives shall comply with the following location
requirements:
            i.   Minimum setback. Hives are not permitted within 30 feet of any
lot line and occupied buildings.
            ii.   General location requirements. Hives shall be located in a
quiet area of the lot or parcel, away from roads, sidewalks, and public rights-
of-way.
            iii.   Flyway barrier. When placing hives on lots less than an acre
in size or in locations within 200 feet of the developed portion of any
property, a solid fence, wall, or dense vegetative barrier shall be erected to
prevent a direct line of flight from the hives into neighboring properties. The
barrier shall start at the ground, be a minimum of six feet in height and shall
extend beyond the direct line of sight from the entrance of the hive to the
neighboring property.
            iv.   Hive entrance. Hive entrances shall be oriented so that bees
fly across the beekeeper's property.
         d.   Provision of water. Where adequate fresh water from a nearby pond
or stream is not available, a water source shall be provided that will be
available throughout the active flight season, so that the bees do not fix on
neighborhood swimming pools, bird baths, or pet water sources.
         e.   Beekeeper's responsibilities. If a hive becomes defensive or
exhibits unusually aggressive characteristics, the beekeeper shall determine
the cause and requeen with gentle stock if necessary. Beekeepers should perform
hive manipulations when neighbors are not working or relaxing outdoors. Hive
manipulations shall be performed as quickly as possible, with minimum
disturbance to the bees. Extended hive manipulations, particularly removing
honey, should be planned to accommodate neighbors' outdoor activities.
   SS.   Event barns.
      1.   Site plan and special land use approval.
         a.   Event barns shall require site plan and special land use review
and approval, pursuant to §§
29.02 and
29.03.
         b.   The initial special land use approval shall be limited to one
year. Following the initial year of operation, the applicant may apply to the
Township Board  for continuation of special land use approval for an additional
three year period. Township Board  may grant approval for an additional three
years if it finds that the event barn is in full compliance with all section
requirements. In considering the request for approval, the Township Board
 shall also consider complaints about the event barn received at the Township
Hall or by the Meridian Township Police.
         c.   If the initial year of operation is completed to the satisfaction
of the Township Board such that the Township Board  approves continuation of
special land use approval, then the applicant may request an increase in the
permitted frequency of events (see item 22, following).
         d.   Following the fourth year of operation, the applicant may apply
to the Township Board for ongoing special land use approval, provided that the
event barn remains in full compliance with all section requirements and that
there are no unresolved complaints about the event barn.
      2.   Health Department approval. The septic system, water supply well,
and kitchen facilities shall be subject to approval by the Ingham County Health
Department prior to final Township approval.
      3.   Emergency service agencies approvals. NIESA inspection and approval
shall be required prior to final Township approval, pursuant to the current
adopted Fire Code. NIESA shall be requested to establish a maximum occupancy
load for the facility, determine if the facility must be sprinkled, and approve
the fire access route to the event barn and within the site. Emergency access
routes shall be durable all-season driveways that remain unobstructed during
events.
         Event barns shall also be subject to review and approval by the
Meridian Township Police.
      4.   Building Inspector approval. All buildings and improvements shall be
subject to inspection by the Williamstown Township Building Inspector. Event
barns shall comply with the regulations in the current adopted Michigan
Building Code covering Assembly Group A, including but not limited to the
regulations dealing with egress in Section 1029 of the Building Code. Following
approval of a site plan for an event barn, the applicant shall apply for a
building permit, pursuant to §
29.02(D)(8) of the Zoning Ordinance.
      5.   General public excluded. Food service and other event barn
facilities shall be made available only to patrons of scheduled events; such
facilities shall not be open to the general public. This regulation is not
intended to prevent agricultural tourism operations and sale of farm products
to the general public, which may be permitted under §
8.02(OO) of the Zoning Ordinance.
      6.   Number of event barns. No more than one event barn shall be
permitted per parcel.
      7.   Minimum lot area. Event barns shall not be permitted on parcels that
are less than 40 acres in size.
      8.   Transportation and access. Event barns shall have access to a paved
county primary road or to Grand River Avenue (M-43). Event barns that have
access to Grand River Avenue (M-43) shall require approval by the Michigan
Department of Transportation (MDOT). Event barns that have access to county
primary roads shall require approval by the Ingham County Road Department
(ICRD). Driveways for ingress and egress shall also be subject to review and
approval by the Planning Commission and the Northeast Ingham Emergency Services
Authority (NIESA).
         A Transportation Impact Analysis (TIA) shall be required prior to the
approval of any event barn. The TIA shall be prepared by a traffic or
transportation engineer who has a minimum of three years of experience
preparing TIAs. The TIA shall be based on accepted engineering standards and
methods established by the Institute of Transportation Engineers, Michigan
Department of Transportation, and Ingham County Road Department.
         The TIA shall contain the following elements, at minimum:
         a.   Description of the project.
         b.   Existing traffic conditions within the impact area of the
project, such as, but not necessarily limited to the number of lanes and right-
of-way of each road impacted by the project, a.m. and p.m. peak traffic counts,
Average Daily Traffic (ADT) counts, and accident history within 500 feet of the
site.
         c.   Projections, using maps and narrative to estimate the impact of
the proposed project on traffic.
         d.   Analysis of data collected, including at minimum:
            i.   Analysis of the impact of the projected traffic on the
capacity of roads serving the event barn.
            ii.   A gap study to analyze the frequency and duration of gaps in
the flow of traffic.
            iii.   Maps and narrative to analyze access (location and design of
proposed access driveways, sight distance limitations, distance to existing
adjacent driveways and intersections, etc.).
         e.   Mitigation measures needed to accommodate the projected traffic
generated by the event barn.
      9.   Parking. One off-street parking space shall be provided per three
people, based on the occupancy load of the building. Parking areas shall comply
with the following setbacks:
 
Minimum setback from road right-of-way          75 ft.
Minimum setback from side or rear property lines 100 ft.
 
         Parking in the road or road right-of-way is prohibited.
         Parking shall comply with applicable requirements in §
4.01 of the Zoning Ordinance. However, the Planning Commission may waive the
requirement for parking lot paving, upon making the determination that a gravel
surface will be adequate to handle the anticipated level of traffic. In making
such a determination, the Planning Commission shall consider the types of
vehicles anticipated (e.g., volume of bus traffic, size and weight of vehicles,
etc.). If paving is not required, then the site plan shall include a commitment
to provide dust control. All parking areas shall be clearly defined by gravel,
wheel stops, fences, and/or other visible markings.
         Compliance with the barrier-free parking requirements in §
4.01(C)(6) shall be required. Barrier-free spaces and side aisles shall be
paved, even if the remainder of the parking is gravel surfaced.
      10.   Overnight use. Overnight accommodations and parking are prohibited.
      11.   Alcoholic beverages. Alcoholic beverages may be served for on-
premises consumption during scheduled events, but only if the alcoholic
beverages are sold pursuant to properly obtained license(s) from the Michigan
Liquor Control Commission and sold in a manner compliant with the MLCC's rules
and regulations.
         The person(s) responsible for serving the alcoholic beverages shall be
identified. A copy of the MLCC license(s) shall be submitted to the township
prior to any event at which alcohol will be served.
      12.   Building design. Any new building constructed to be used as an
event barn shall emulate the architectural features of an historic agricultural
building, as described in the Michigan Barn and Farmstead Survey Manual
published by Michigan State University. For example, appropriate event barn
roof shapes include gable, gambrel, gothic, ogee, round, monitor, and hip.
Typical accessory barn features include cupolas, dormers, lightning rods,
ventilators, and weathervanes. The architectural design of any ancillary
buildings shall emulate the architecture of the main building.
      13.   Screening and landscaping. Event barns shall comply with the
screening and landscaping requirements for Non-Residential Uses in a
Residential or Agricultural District (§
5.03 (C)). Generally, required screening shall be located along the property
line (rather than next to the event barn). The Planning Commission and Township
Board may require additional landscaping, beyond the requirements in §
5.03(C), to achieve adequate screening and to mitigate potential impacts on
surrounding properties and on the visual character of adjacent public road
corridors. Plantings and berms shall be laid out to shield vehicle lights from
shining on adjacent residences.
      14.   Setbacks. Event barns, including outdoor gathering areas, shall
comply with the following setback requirements:
 
Minimum setback from road right-of-way          75 ft.
Minimum setback from side or rear property lines 300 ft.
 
      15.   Lighting. Parking areas, sidewalks, and outdoor areas used after
dark shall be adequately lit. Exterior lighting shall comply with the
requirements in §
2.12. Exterior lighting must be turned off at the conclusion of the event,
except where needed for clean-up or tear down after the event.
      16.   Permitted months of operation. Event barns shall be permitted to
operate only between May 1 and October 31 of each year.
      17.   Hours of operation. Events shall not start before 9:00 a.m. or
extend beyond 9:00 p.m. Set-up operations shall be completed within these hours
but tear down operations may extend to 10:00 p.m.
      18.   Noise and other nuisances. Event barn activities shall comply with
the requirements in the Blight Control Ordinance and the Performance Standards
in Article 9 of the Zoning Ordinance with respect to noise and other nuisances.
Amplified music and voice are permitted indoors only, provided that the level
of sound emitted from the event barn does not exceed normal conversation when
measured at or within the property boundary of the receiving district, i.e., 55
dBA.
      19.   Signs. Signs shall comply with the requirements for agricultural
seasonal events in the table in §
7.05(C).
      20.   Residential dwelling requirement. An event barn shall be permitted
on a parcel only if the parcel is also occupied by an owner-occupied
residential dwelling , which is occupied as a principal residence by the title
holder, including the entire time that the event barn is in operation.
      21.   Attendance limits. Event barns shall limit attendance at any
wedding or other event to 150 people, not including staff and vendors.
      22.   Permitted frequency and duration of events. An event barn shall
hold no more than two events per month and no more than one event per week. No
event shall last longer than one day. The proprietor of the event barn shall
maintain a log of events held for review by the township. The log shall record
date and purpose of the event, number of attendees, and whether alcohol was
served.
      23.   Minimum open space. A minimum of 33% of any parcel occupied by an
event barn shall be reserved as undeveloped open space or farmland, which shall
comply with the following requirements:
         a.   Exclusions. Reserved open space shall not include the area of any
public road or road right-of-way, the area of any easement providing access to
the site, the area of any outdoor gathering area, the area of any conventional
storm water retention or detention basin, and any area used for off-street
parking.
         b.   Open space objectives. Open space shall be located on the site to
meet the following objectives:
            i.   To preserve distinctive natural features, wooded areas, and
rural features.
            ii.   To preserve farmlands.
            iii.   To minimize impact on wetlands, streams, and other sensitive
environmental features.
         c.   Reservation of open space. Required open space shall be
permanently protected by the property owner with a recordable instrument that
assures that the open space will remain undeveloped or will be farmed for the
entire time that the event barn is in operation. This can be accomplished, by
way of example, through a deed restriction, or an irrevocable conveyance, such
as a conservation easement or restrictive covenant that runs with the land,
whereby development rights are conveyed to a land conservation organization or
other public body. Evidence that this document has been recorded with the
Ingham County Register of Deeds shall be provided to the township prior to
issuance of any permits to commence construction.
      24.   Performance guarantee and cost recovery. To ensure compliance with
the requirements in this subsection RR and any conditions of approval, the
Planning Commission or Township Board shall require that a performance
guarantee be deposited with the township, pursuant to §
2.18 of the Zoning Ordinance.
      The owner of the event barn shall be liable for the expense of police or
other enforcement action by township-authorized personnel when there is a
documented violation of this section. The "expense of police or other
enforcement action" means the direct and reasonable costs incurred by
Williamstown Township when personnel acting on behalf of the township respond
to the violation. These costs include all salaries and wages of personnel
responding to the violation, all salaries and wages of personnel engaged in
investigation and report preparation, and all costs related to any prosecution
of the person causing the violation.
      25.   Additional site plan and special land use requirements. In addition
to the information required in §§
29.02 and
29.03 for site plan and special land use review, the following information
shall be included with an event barn application:
         a.   The planned frequency of events and the maximum number of
attendees to be accommodated at any single event.
         b.   Months of operation.
         c.   Delineation of all portions of the parcel to be part of the event
barn operation, including parking areas and outdoor gathering and activity
areas.
         d.   Food preparation facilities that are to be part of the event
barn.
         e.   Delineation on the site plan of permanently protected open space,
pursuant to the preceding subsection 23.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013; Ord. 55, passed 7-9- 2014; Ord. 56, passed 8-13-2014;
Ord. 57, passed 4-8-2015; Ord. passed 6-13-2018; Ord. passed 12-12-2018; Ord.
passed 6-12-2019; Ord. passed 12-9-2020; Ord. passed 3-9-2022; Ord. passed 12-
14-2022; Ord. passed 2-8-2023)
§ 8.03 SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR RESIDENTIAL USES.
   A.   Accessory apartment . Accessory apartments shall comply with the
following regulations:
      1.   Accessory apartment defined. An ACCESSORY APARTMENT is a dwelling
unit that is accessory to and contained within a principal single-family
dwelling , and which is occupied by either persons related to the occupant of
the principal residence by blood, marriage, or legal adoption; domestic
servants; or gratuitous guests. An ACCESSORY APARTMENT typically has its own
kitchen, bath, living area, sleeping area, and usually a separate entrance.
      2.   Residence an incidental use. The accessory apartment shall be
clearly incidental to the principal residence on the site. Accordingly, the
following conditions shall be met:
         a.   Accessory apartments shall be established in, and attached to
owner-occupied homes only by means of a fully-enclosed, insulated, and heated
space.
         b.   Only one such accessory residence shall be permitted on each
parcel .
         c.   The total floor area of the accessory residence shall not exceed
800 square feet.
      3.   Setbacks and placement on the parcel . Accessory residences shall
comply with all setback requirements for the district in which they are
located.
      4.   Compatibility with surrounding land use. The design of the accessory
residence shall not detract from the single-family character and appearance of
the principal residence or the surrounding neighborhood. The accessory
residence shall not have a front entrance visible from the front yard , other
than the entrance that serves the principal residence. When viewed from the
outside, it shall appear that only one household occupies the site.
      5.   Parking and access. In addition to required parking for the
principal residence, one additional parking space shall be provided for the
accessory residence.
      6.   Termination. An accessory apartment that is no longer needed for the
purposes outlined herein shall be incorporated into and become a part of the
single-family home to which it is attached.
   B.   Multiple-family and single-family attached housing requirements. The
following site development standards shall apply to attached housing
developments , including development in the RM-1, Multiple-Family Residential
Districts:
      1.   Permitted density .
         a.   Basic formula. The permitted density of development in multiple-
family districts shall be based on the total number of rooms (excluding
kitchen, dining, and bathrooms), in accordance with the following formula:
      RM-1 District: The maximum number of rooms permitted shall be equal to
the area of the parcel in square feet divided by 1,200.
         b.   Minimum room requirements. All units in the RM-1 district shall
have at least one living room and one bedroom , and no more than 25% of the
units may be one bedroom units.
         c.   Method of measuring land area. The computations of land area for
the purposes of determining density shall not include areas occupied by road
 rights-of-way or easements , or subaqueous areas. The first 20,000 square feet
of a site that is not served by an approved public sanitary sewer shall be
excluded from density computations.
      2.   Building length. Multiple-family buildings shall not exceed 150 feet
in overall length, measured along the front line of connecting units, inclusive
of any architectural features which are attached to or connect the parts of the
building together (see illustration on next page).
ACCESS AND CIRCULATION
Section 8.03 B. 2.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/71d151aa824b5086a107ad3293684d8be35e4585/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1913.jpg]
      3.   Building spacing. The minimum distance between any two buildings
shall be based on the following table:
 
Relationship Between Buildings Minimum Distance Between Buildings
Front to Front                 70 ft.
Front to Rear                  70 ft.
Rear to Rear                   70 ft.
Side to Side                   30 ft.
Front to Side                  50 ft.
Rear to Side                   50 ft.
 
      4.   Street address. The address of each dwelling unit must be clearly
posted so that the unitcan be readily identified from the roadway or adjacent
parking area.
      5.   Access and circulation. Multiple-family developments shall comply
with the following requirements for access and circulation (see illustration):
ACCESS AND CIRCULATION
Section 8.03 B. 5.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/71d151aa824b5086a107ad3293684d8be35e4585/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1915.jpg]
         a.   Access to roads . RM-1 developments shall have direct access to a
paved collector or arterial road . However, alternate means of access may be
permitted by the Planning Commission upon finding that, due to special
circumstances, substantial improvements in traffic safety could be achieved by
reducing the number of driveways . Furthermore, an alternate means of access
shall be permitted only if one or more of the following conditions exists:
            (1)   The property directly across the street from the development
under consideration is zoned for multiple-family or nonresidential use; or
            (2)   The property directly across the street is developed with
permanent uses other than single-family residences; or
            (3)   The proposed development is in an area which, based on study
by the Planning Commission , will eventually be used for purposes other than
single-family use.
         b.   Emergency access. All dwelling units , including those under
construction, shall be readily accessible by fire and emergency vehicles from a
paved public street , paved private access road , or other approved paved area.
Private roads or driveways dedicated as fire lanes shall be posted with signs
indicating “Fire Lane, No Parking.” To facilitate emergency vehicle access, the
following guidelines shall be complied with:
            (1)   All roadways shall be paved and bi-directional allowing for
both ingress and egress . A boulevard may be utilized to provide bi-directional
traffic movement, provided that the median strip is a minimum of 25 feet in
width, and the width of each paved moving lane in each direction is at least 15
feet.
            (2)   Streets with no outlet shall be terminated with a T-
turnaround, designed in accordance with standards established and periodically
updated by the Ingham County Road Commission. Such streets with no outlet shall
not exceed 300 feet in length.
            (3)   Gatehouses and/or barricades at entrances to private roadways
shall be designed so as not to impede fire and emergency vehicle access.
         c.   Street dimensions. On-site streets and drives shall comply with
the standards in §
2.10, subsection C.
      6.   Sidewalks.  Sidewalks shall be provided within the development ,
located no less than five feet from and parallel to access drives. Such
sidewalks shall provide convenient access to community buildings and between
parking areas and dwelling units . The sidewalks shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with §
2.17.
      7.   Parking. In addition to the requirements set forth in
Article 4.00, multiple-family developments shall comply with the following
requirements:
         a.   Location. Required parking shall be located in parking lots or
individual driveways , and not in streets or access drives. Parking may be
permitted in required side and rear yard  setback areas provided that parking
lots and access drives shall be located a minimum of ten feet from any property
line or public right-of-way . Parking lots and access drives shall not be
located closer than 25 feet to a wall of any residential structure which
contains windows or doors, nor closer than ten feet to a wall of any
residential structure which does not contain openings.
         b.   Distance from dwelling units . Parking shall be located within
150 feet of the dwelling units the parking is intended to serve, measured along
the sidewalk leading to the parking lot.
         c.   Parking for community building . Parking shall be provided for
community buildings as specified in
Article 4.00.
      8.   Lighting. All parking areas, building entrances, sidewalks, and
ramps shall be illuminated to ensure the security of property and the safety of
persons using such areas, in accordance with the requirements set forth in §
2.12.
      9.   Landscaping . Multiple-family developments shall be landscaped in
accordance with §
5.03, subsection B.
      10.   Open space. Open space shall be provided in any multiple-family
development containing eight or more units. The open space shall comply with
the following requirements:
         a.   Size. Total open space required shall be based on the number and
size of units, as indicated in the following chart, provided that each
development shall contain a minimum of 10,000 square feet of open space .
 
Type of Unit       Open Space Required Per Unit
Efficiency unit    170 sq. ft. per unit
1 bedroom unit     250 sq. ft. per unit
2 bedrooms or more 350 sq. ft. per unit
 
         b.   Location. Open space shall be located conveniently in relation to
the majority of dwelling units intended to be served. Swamp areas, marshy
areas, and similar limited-use areas shall not be included in the required open
space .
         c.   Use of open space . Uses permitted within the required open space
include picnic and sitting areas, playground and park space, play equipment,
tennis courts, shuffleboard courts, and similar outdoor recreation facilities.
         d.   Phasing. Open space improvements shall be completed in proportion
to the number of units constructed in each phase.
      11.   Garages. Garages shall be permitted for each unit, in accordance
with the provisions for accessory uses in §
2.03.
      12.   Antennae. Each multiple-family building shall be permitted to erect
one antenna, subject to the requirements in §
2.22.
   C.   Open space preservation option. Open space preservation developments
may be approved in the R-1, R-1-S, RR, RE, AG-SF, and AG-C Districts, subject
to the standards and review procedures set forth herein.
      1.   Purpose.
         The purpose of open space preservation option is to preserve
undeveloped land, thereby maintaining rural character and agricultural lands.
The regulations in this subsection C propose to accomplish this purpose by
providing for grouping of homes onto the most buildable portions of a site so
that the remainder of the site can be preserved in an undeveloped state.
         As used in this subsection, the term UNDEVELOPED STATE shall have the
meaning given to it in Section 102(t) of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (P.A.
110 of 2006, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3101 through 125.3702) which states the
following:
         “Undeveloped state” means a natural state preserving natural resources
, natural features, or scenic or wooded conditions, agricultural use, open
space , or a similar use or condition. Land in an undeveloped state does not
include a golf course but may include a recreational trail, picnic area,
children’s play area, greenway, or linear park. Land in an undeveloped state
may be, but is not required to be, dedicated to the use of the public.
      2.   Applicability. Parcels measuring 20 acres or larger in the R-1, R-1-
S, RR, RE, AG-SF, and AG-C districts may be developed according to the standard
conditions and requirements for the zoning district , Or it may be developed
according to the open space preservation option standards in this subsection.
If the open space preservation option is selected, the property shall be
developed under the conditions and requirements in this subsection, other
applicable zoning regulations, and other applicable township ordinances. The
open space preservation option may be used in the R-1 district only if the
subject property is served by a public sanitary sewer system. (revised 7/6/04)
      3.   Review and approval process. Proposals for open space preservation
development shall be reviewed following the same procedures used for
conventional subdivision or condominium proposals, except that the applicant
shall complete a site features inventory prior to development . The inventory
shall consist of maps and written analysis which shall identify, describe, and
quantify the following features, at minimum: existing vegetation, topography at
two-foot contour intervals, water courses, drainage patterns, wildlife
habitats, roads and road  rights-of-way , easements , soils (based on Natural
Resources Conservation Service soils information or soil borings), MDEQ-
regulated wetlands , floodplains , woodlands and tree lines, rare and
endangered species habitats, and any additional features uniquely affecting the
site.
      4.   Permitted density . The overall density of residential uses in an
open space preservation development shall not exceed the density that would be
permitted if the site were developed as a conventional single-family
subdivision as specified in the following chart:
 
Zoning District Overall Density   Maximum Number of Units Per Acre
R-1             1 unit/0.46 acres 2.17
R-1-S           1 unit/0.92 acres 1.09
RR              1 unit/2.07 acres 0.48
RE              1 unit/3.33 acres 0.30
AG-SF           1 unit/6.66 acres 0.15
AG-C            1 unit/10 acres   0.10
 
         The permitted density shall be based on the net buildable area of the
site which consists of the portions of the site that are not encumbered by
regulated wetlands (except that one-quarter of the total wetlands may be
counted as buildable), steep slopes , existing and proposed road  rights-of-way
, easements , existing structures or lots , or other existing or proposed
features that would prevent construction of a building or use of the site for
residential purposes.
         The permitted density shall also be regulated by the parent parcel ’s
road frontage. Alternately, the parent parcel ’s road frontage may be increased
by construction of a new public road on the subject parcel , in which case the
permitted density shall be regulated by frontage on the new public road , as
specified in the following chart:
 
                                                            Minimum
Zoning   Minimum Parent Parcel  Road Frontage Per Proposed Frontage on New
District Lot                                                Road Per
                                                            Proposed Lot
R-1      100 ft.                                            75 ft.
R-1-S    120 ft.                                            90 ft.
RR       240 ft.                                            180 ft.
RE       300 ft.                                            225 ft.
AG-SF    300 ft.                                            225 ft.
AG-C     330 ft.                                            250 ft.
 
         To assist the Planning Commission in determining net buildable area
and maximum density , the applicant shall submit an alternative plan that shows
how the site could be developed under conventional zoning.
         Modifications permitted under the open space preservation option that
result in reduction in land area dedicated to individual dwelling units shall
be compensated for by an equivalent amount of open space , which shall be
maintained and preserved in accordance with the standards specified in this
subsection.
      5.   Dimensional standards. 
         a.   Setbacks. Open space preservation developments shall comply with
the following minimum yard  setback requirements:
Building Setbacks
Along perimeter adjacent to public road            50 ft.
Along perimeter, but not adjacent to a road            35 ft.
Along an internal collector or local road            40 ft.
Along an internal arterial road               50 ft.
Setback from a lake , pond, stream, or wetlands         60 ft.
The minimum rear and side yard  setback for detached single-family structures
and accessory structures thereto shall be based on sound planning and design
principles, taking into account the degree of compatibility between adjoining
uses, sensitivity to the characteristics of the site, the need for free access
for emergency vehicles, the need for adequate amounts of light and air between
buildings , and the need for proper amounts of open space for the use of
residents on the site.
Parking Lot Setbacks
Along perimeter adjacent to public road            50 ft.
Along perimeter, but not adjacent to a road            20 ft.
Setback from lakes , ponds, streams, and wetlands         60 ft.
Docks, bulkheads, patios, terraces, decks , gazebos, and pathways shall be
permitted within the 60-ft. waterfront/wetland  setback , subject to review and
approval by the Township Board , upon receiving a recommendation from the
Planning Commission .
         b.   Minimum lot size. Open space preservation developments shall
comply with the following minimum lot size requirements:
 
Zoning District Minimum Lot Size
R-1             9,000 sq. ft.
R-1-S           18,000 sq. ft.
RR              32,750 sq. ft.
RE              32,750 sq. ft.
AG-SF           32,750 sq. ft.
AG-C            32,750 sq. ft.
 
   Variation from these lot size standards may be required or permitted where
the Planning Commission finds that either of the following circumstances
exists:
            (1)   A larger lot size is required to satisfy Ingham County Health
Department septic system standards; or
            (2)   A smaller lot size is required to achieve the density
permitted under subsection C.4, above.
   In the absence of public sanitary sewer service and waste water treatment,
development in the R-1 and R-1-S Districts shall comply with the minimum lot
area requirements specified for the RR District.
         c.   Distances between buildings. Any detached single-family structure
(or accessory structure thereto) shall be located at least 30 feet from any
other detached single-family structure or accessory structure .
         d.   Floor area and height standards. Buildings in an open space
preservation development shall comply with the floor area and height standards
for the district in which the development is located.
      6.   Open space requirements. Open space preservation developments shall
provide and maintain open space in an undeveloped state, which shall comply
with the following requirements:
         a.   Open space preservation developments shall reserve at least 50%
of the parcel in an undeveloped state.
         b.   Open space shall be located on the parcel to meet the following
objectives:
            (1)   To preserve distinctive natural features, scenic or wooded
conditions, and rural characteristics.
            (2)   To preserve farmlands.
            (3)   To minimize impact from development on wetlands , streams,
and other sensitive environmental areas.
            (4)   To maintain open, rural character along main roads .
   In addition, no more than 25% of the open space may be developed with
children’s play facilities, picnic facilities, trails, and similar passive to
satisfy the needs of future residents of the development , provided that all
such facilities shall be compatible in design with other open space
requirements and objectives.
         c.   Required open space shall not include the area of any public or
private road , the area of any easement providing access to the site, the area
of any commercial recreation use (such as a golf course ), or the area of any
stormwater retention or detention pond.
         d.   The required open space shall be set aside by the developer
through an irrevocable conveyance, such as a deed restriction, conservation
easement , plat dedication, restrictive covenant, or other means that runs with
the land, whereby all rights to develop the land are conveyed to a land
conservation organization or other public body, assuring that the open space
will remain undeveloped. Such conveyance shall:
            (1)   Indicate the proposed use(s) of the required open space .
            (2)   Provide for the privately-owned open space to be maintained
by private property owners having an interest in the open space .
            (3)   Provide maintenance standards and a maintenance schedule.
            (4)   Provide notice of possible assessment to the private property
owners by the Williamstown Township for the maintenance of the open space in
the event that it is inadequately maintained and becomes a public nuisance .
            (5)   After approval from the township , the developer shall record
with the Ingham County Register of Deeds to provide record notice of the
restrictions to all persons having or seeking an interest in the property
contained in the open space preservation development . Evidence that the
document has been recorded shall be provided to the township prior to issuance
of any permits to commence construction.
      7.   Building location. Where feasible, open space preservation
developments shall comply with the following building location requirements.
Modification to these locational requirements may be approved by the township
as part of the review process, upon making the determination that other
building locations would be more appropriate because of topography, existing
trees or vegetation, proposed grading or landscaping , or other existing or
proposed site features or conditions.
         a.   Buildings shall be located on the edges of fields and in wooded
areas to minimize the visual impact of development . Buildings should not be
located in open fields.
         b.   Buildings shall not be located on the tops of ridge lines or in
areas with slopes that exceed 35%.
         c.   Buildings shall not be located in wetlands or floodplains .
         d.   Buildings shall be set back as far back from public roads as
possible so as to maintain the rural appearance of the township from the road .
This goal can also be achieved by placing buildings behind or within a
woodlands or tree line that screens the buildings from the road .
      8.   Roads and driveways . The amount of site disruption caused by road
and driveway construction and associated grading required for construction
shall be minimized in open space preservation developments . Accordingly, open
space preservation developments shall comply with the following standards:
         a.   Roads shall follow existing contours to minimize the amount of
cut and fill .
         b.   Where sites include linear features, such as existing access
roads , tree lines, and stone rows, roads shall follow these features to
minimize the visual impact of the roads .
         c.   Roads shall not be located in open fields.
         d.   Use of shared driveways to serve up to four units is permitted to
minimize the amount of paving and reduce the number of curb cuts onto public
roads . Shared driveways shall comply with the requirements in §
18.02, subsection E.4. (revised 7/6/04)
      9.   Stormwater management. 
         a.   Existing natural drainage shall be maintained to the maximum
extent feasible.
         b.   Retention and detention basins , where proposed or required,
shall resemble natural ponds with gradual slopes and shall be landscaped with
plant material that enhances the wildlife habitat.
      10.   Landscaping and lawns. 
         a.   Existing trees and other plant growth shall be preserved in areas
where disturbance is not necessary outside of the building envelope .
         b.   Conversion of woods, meadows, and other natural features into
lawns shall be avoided, except where lawn areas are a part of the open space
design or serve as residential yard space.
         c.   Where landscaping is proposed, native species shall be used.
Appropriate native species shall be based on a list kept on file at the
Township Hall which may be updated from time-to-time.
      11.   Existing structures .
         a.   When a parcel contains existing structures deemed to be of
historic, cultural, or architectural significance (such as farm  structures ),
and where these structures are suitable for rehabilitation, the structures
shall be retained.
         b.   Adaptive reuse of existing structures for residential use or
permitted accessory residential uses shall be permitted.
   D.   Single-family development options. The following site development
standards shall apply to average lot size and single-family attached
developments :
      1.   Intent. The intent of these provisions is to provide limited
flexibility in the regulation of single-family developments for the purposes
of:
         a.   Providing improved living and working environments in the
township ;
         b.   Preserving the natural beauty of the township ;
         c.   Promoting more economic residential designs;
         d.   Encouraging ingenuity and originality in the total site design;
and
         e.   Providing adequate usable open space , tree cover, recreation
areas, and scenic vistas.
These provisions shall not be used to achieve higher density  development on
parcels where portions cannot be developed because of wetlands .
      2.   Scope of requirements. Average lot size and single-family attached
developments may be approved in the R-1 and R-1-S Districts, whether developed
as conventional single-family subdivision plats or as single-family condominium
projects, subject to review and approval as provided for herein.
      3.   Eligibility criteria. In considering any proposal for average lot
size or single-family attached development , the township shall make their
determinations on the basis of the following criteria:
         a.   Compatibility with adopted plans and ordinances. The proposed
development shall be consistent with the general principles and objectives of
the adopted Township Master Plan , the Subdivision Ordinance, and all
applicable building codes.
         b.   Compliance with applicable zoning standards. The proposed
development shall comply with applicable standards of this Ordinance, except as
modified in accordance with the procedures and standards in this section.
         c.   Impact on the township . The proposed development shall not have
a substantial or undue adverse impact upon adjacent property, the character of
the neighborhood, traffic conditions, parking, utilities, and other matters
affecting the public health, safety, and welfare.
         d.   Impact on the neighboring property. The proposed development
shall be constructed, arranged, and operated so as not to interfere with the
development and use of neighboring property.
         e.   Design diversity. Diversity and originality in layout and
building design shall be encouraged to achieve the best possible relationship
between the development and the land.
         f.   Impact on residents. Individual lots (if applicable), buildings ,
units, and parking areas shall be situated to avoid any adverse effects from
shadows, noise, and traffic on the residents of the development .
         g.   Impact on natural features. Individual lots (if applicable),
buildings , streets , and parking areas shall be designed and situated to
minimize alteration of the natural features of the site which are intended to
be preserved.
         h.   Access to open space . Open space intended for recreation or
public use shall be easily accessible to pedestrians and shall meet the needs
of the handicapped and elderly.
         i.   Usability of open space . The usability of open space which is
intended for recreation or public use shall be determined by the size, shape,
and topography of the site and the location requirements of the principal
buildings or uses on the site.
      4.   Average lot size requirements. 
         a.   Permitted modifications.
            Lot size and lot width may be reduced below the minimum standards
for the zoning district in which the development is located, in accordance with
the standards specified in this section. All such reductions shall be
compensated for by an equivalent amount of open space , which shall be
maintained and preserved in accordance with the standards specified in this
section.
            In no case shall the maximum dwelling unit  density standards of
the zoning district in which the development is located be exceeded. Except as
specified in this section, other applicable standards for the district in which
the development is located shall not be modified or changed.
            This requirement shall be predicated on the following base
densities :
 
               Base Density
R-1 District   2.2 units/acre
R-1-S District 1.1 units/acre
 
         b.   Lot standards. Reduction in minimum lot size, lot width , and
yard  setback standards in average lot size developments shall be permitted as
specified in the following table provided that each lot is capable of
satisfying minimum county and township requirements with respect to septic
system/sanitary waste treatment and potable water, or provided that each lot in
the development is served by public sanitary sewers and a public water system:
 
Zoning District Minimum Lot Area per Unit (sq. ft.) Lot Width (ft.)
R-1             16,000                              80
R-1-S           32,000                              100
 
         c.   Open space requirements. Common open space shall be permanently
reserved and maintained as landscaped park or recreation space for the benefit
of residents of the average lot size development . The size, configuration, and
location of such open space shall be subject to review and approval by the
Planning Commission . Man-made stormwater retention areas shall not be counted
toward required open space .
   The required open space shall be set aside by the developer through an
irrevocable conveyance, such as deed restrictions or covenants that run with
the land, or through a conservation easement , assuring that the open space
will be developed according to the site plan and never changed to another use.
Such conveyance shall:
            (1)   Specify ownership of the open space ;
            (2)   Provide for maintenance of the open space by the private
property owners having an interest in the open space ;
            (3)   Provide for maintenance standards and a maintenance schedule;
            (4)   Provide for maintenance insurance; and
            (5)   Include any other specifics deemed necessary by the Planning
Commission .
         d.   Review and approval process. Proposals for average lot size
development shall be reviewed in accordance with applicable procedures for
Special Land Uses , §
29.03.
      5.   Single-family attached development . Single-family attached
development may be permitted in the R-1 District, subject to the following
conditions:
         a.   Permitted modifications. 
            Subject to review and approval procedures which follow, a mixture
of two to four dwelling units may be attached, either through a common dwelling
unit wall, a common garage wall, or an architectural feature, such as an
archway, provided that the common wall of adjoining dwelling units shall not
overlap by more than 50%. However, common garage walls may overlap for their
full distance on both sides.
            In no case shall the maximum dwelling unit  density standards of
the zoning district in which the development is located be exceeded. This
requirement shall be predicated on a base density of 2.2 dwelling units per
acre in the R-1 District.
            Modifications permitted under this option that result in reduction
of land area dedicated to individual dwelling unit , shall be compensated for
by an equivalent amount of open space , which shall be maintained and preserved
in accordance with the standards specified in this section.
            In no case shall the maximum dwelling unit  density standards of
the zoning district in which the development is located be exceeded. Except as
specified in this section, other applicable standards for the district in which
the development is located shall not be modified or changed.
         b.   Setbacks . 
            (1)   The front yard  setback requirements for the district in
which the development is located shall be complied with on all sides of a
development which abuts a public road or street .
            (2)   A 75-foot setback shall be provided along the entire
perimeter of a development , except on sides which abut a public road or street
.
            (3)   Dwelling units shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from
the easement of right-of-way line of any private road or drive serving the
development .
            (4)   The minimum distance between any two building clusters shall
be based on the standards in §
8.03, subsection B.3.
         c.   Minimum floor area and height standards. Dwelling units in a
single-family attached development shall comply with the floor area and height
standards for the district in which the development is located.
         d.   Landscaping . Single-family attached developments shall comply
with the landscaping requirements in §
5.03, subsection C.
         e.   Open space requirements. 
            The township may require that common open space be permanently
reserved and maintained as landscaped park or recreation space for the benefit
of residents of the single-family attached development . The size,
configuration, and location of such open space shall be subject to review and
approval by the Planning Commission .
            The required open space shall be set aside by the developer through
an irrevocable conveyance, such as deed restrictions or covenants that run with
the land, or through a conservation easement , assuring that the open space
will be developed according to the site plan and never changed to another use.
Such conveyance shall:
            (1)   Specify ownership of the open space ;
            (2)   Provide for maintenance of the open space by the private
property owners having an interest in the open space ;
            (3)   Provide for maintenance standards and a maintenance schedule;
            (4)   Provide for maintenance insurance; and
            (5)   Include any other specifications deemed necessary by the
Planning Commission .
         f.   Building design. Housing units shall be designed in a manner that
is compatible with surrounding development and the natural environment.
Accordingly, when a development faces or abuts a conventional single-family
subdivision the facades and orientation of the conventional units shall be used
as a guide for the design and layout of the single-family attached units.
         g.   Roads and utilities. Proposed roads and utilities in a single-
family attached development shall comply with adopted township standards, and
shall be subject to review and approval by the Township Engineer .
         h.   Review and approval process. Proposals for single-family attached
development shall be reviewed in accordance with applicable procedures for
special land use §
29.03.
   E.   Senior housing . Senior housing shall be subject to the following
regulations:
      1.    Intent. It is the intent of these regulations to permit the
development of senior housing in the township upon determining that the
location, size, design, and operating characteristics of the use will be
compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. In making this determination,
consideration shall be given to the scale, coverage, and density of development
; to the availability of utilities and services; to the generation of traffic
and capacity of surrounding roads ; and to other relevant impacts.
      2.    Minimum site size. The minimum site size for a senior housing
 development shall be based on compliance with setbacks , maximum coverage,
parking, open space , and other requirements set forth herein.
      3.    Project density . The number of dwelling units within the facility
shall not exceed 12 units per net acre for senior apartments , congregate
housing, and other types of independent living , and 24 units per net acre for
assisted living and other types of dependent living . Wetlands on the site may
be counted as part of the net acreage for the purposes of determining project
density . However, the overall density on the upland portion of the site,
together with the wetlands -related density , shall not exceed 130% of the
density allowed on the upland portion alone.
      4.    Setbacks . The minimum setbacks for senior housing shall be as
follows:
         a.    Front: 40 feet from the planned road  right-of-way line.
         b.    Each side: 30 feet.
         c.    Rear: 30 feet.
      5.    Spacing between buildings . Where more than one building is
proposed in a senior housing complex, the minimum spacing between buildings
shall be in accordance with the following requirements:
 
Building Relationship Minimum Building Separation
Front to Front        60 feet
Front to Rear         60 feet
Rear to Rear          60 feet
Side to Side          20 feet
Front to Side         50 feet
Rear to Side          50 feet
 
      6.    Minimum floor area per unit. The minimum floor area per dwelling
unit shall be as follows:
 
                     Independent Living          Dependent Living
Type of Unit         (including senior apartments (including assisted living )
                     and congregate housing)
Studio or Efficiency 450 sq. ft.                  325 sq. ft.
1 bedroom            600 sq. ft.                  425 sq. ft.
2 bedroom            800 sq. ft.                  600 sq. ft.
                     800 sq. ft. + 150 sq. ft.    600 sq. ft. + 150 sq. ft. for
3 or more bedrooms   for each additional room     each additional room over 4
                     over 4
 
      7.    Building and site design.
         a.   Building length. The maximum permitted building length along any
one continuous plane shall be 225 feet. A continuous plane is defined as an
uninterrupted wall, without breaks or corners, other than architectural
features customarily found, such as porches, bay windows, projections, and/or
recesses. A building that turns a corner of at least a 90 degree angle shall be
considered an “end” at that corner.
         b.   Building articulation. Building facades of greater than 100 feet
in length shall incorporate recesses or projections to break up the expanse of
the building elevation.
         c.   Roof. Roofs shall be sloped with a pitch of no less than 5:12.
Variations in roof lines are encouraged to reduce the scale of the building and
to add interest.
         d.   Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be provided from the main building
entrance(s) to parking areas and to sidewalks along adjacent public or private
roads .
         e.   Resident access. The pick-up/ drop-off of residents shall be
provided at the front entrance of the building with a covered canopy.
      8.    Building height . The senior housing facility shall comply with the
maximum building height for the district in which it is located.
      9.   Maximum coverage. The maximum coverage of the site by buildings
shall be limited to 25% of the net site area (not including planned right-of-
way ).
      10.    Parking. Parking for senior housing shall comply with the
following requirements:
 
Use                               Required Number of Parking Spaces per Unit of
                                  Measure*
Senior Apartments                 2 spaces per Dwelling Unit
                                  1 per 4 units, plus 1 per employee based on
Dependent Living, Assisted Living the greatest number of employees in any one
                                  shift
                                  1 per 2 units, plus 1 per employee based on
Congregate Care                   the greatest number of employees in any one
                                  shift
Independent Living                1 per unit, plus 1 per employee based on the
                                  greatest number of employees in any one shift
 
      *   The Planning Commission may reduce the parking requirements set forth
in this table if the applicant provides credible evidence that fewer spaces are
needed due to, for example, the operation of a transportation system for
residents.
      11.   Loading.  Loading areas shall be located to the side or rear of the
building being served such that it is screened from view from adjoining roads
and adjacent residential area.
      12.   Vehicular access. All vehicular access to the site shall be from a
paved collector or primary road . The Planning Commission may allow secondary
access from local streets upon making the determination that such access will
not create or exacerbate traffic congestion or create unsafe traffic or
pedestrian conditions. Vehicles must be able to easily circulate within and
through the site to designated pick-up/drop-off areas with impeding circulation
on the site or traffic on adjacent roads .
      13.   Open space. Common outdoor landscaped open space shall be provided
for residents, subject to the following:
         a.   Landscaped open space for residents shall constitute a minimum of
15% of the total site. Enclosed courtyards may be counted as landscaped open
space .
         b.    Recreation facilities such as paved walkways and covered sitting
areas shall be provided in a manner that meets the needs of the resident
population.
         c.    Road  rights-of-way , required setback areas, and access drives
shall not be counted as required landscaped open space . Ten percent of the
submerged land areas of a pond, lake , or stream, and wetlands may be counted
as required landscaped open space .
      14.    Lighting. All parking areas, building entrances, sidewalks, and
ramps shall be illuminated to ensure the safety of persons using such areas and
the security of property, in accordance with the requirements set forth in §
2.12.
      15.   Landscaping and screening. Senior housing  developments shall
comply with the landscaping and screening requirements in
Article 5.00.
      16.   Resident services. Support services offered solely to residents may
be permitted provided that such services are contained within the principal
building and are accessory to the principal senior residential use. Such
support services include, but are not necessarily limited to: congregate
dining, health care, personal services, private meeting rooms , and social,
recreational, and educational facilities and programs.
   F.   Model homes. Model homes in subdivisions shall comply with the
following standards:
      1.   Permitted use . The model home shall be used solely as a sales and
promotion office for the subdivision in which the home is located. The model
home shall not be used to conduct other business, or as a model home to promote
sales in other subdivisions.
      2.   Termination. Use of the home for sales and promotion shall cease as
soon as all lots in the subdivision are sold to potential end users or in two
years, whichever occurs sooner, whereupon the model home shall be offered for
sale for use as a dwelling unit . Prior to expiration of the initial or
subsequent approvals, the applicant may seek a one year extension from the
Planning Commission .
      3.   Appearance. The model home and site shall be maintained to look like
a typical single-family dwelling at all times. However, one identification sign
shall be permitted, subject to the following requirements:
         Maximum size: 6 square feet
         Maximum height: 6 feet
         Type: ground or wall
         Location: sign shall comply with setback requirements for district
      4.   Parking. A minimum of two temporary paved off-street parking spaces
shall be provided per employee. Off-street parking shall comply with the
requirements in
Article 4.00.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
ARTICLE 9.00
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
§ 9.01 INTENT AND SCOPE OF APPLICATION.
   A.   Intent. The purpose of this article is to establish controls on the
impacts generated by permitted uses so as to prevent an unreasonable negative
impact that might interfere with another person’s use of his or her property,
or that might cause harm to the public health, safety, and welfare.
   B.   Scope of application. After the effective date of this Ordinance, no
structure or tract of land shall hereafter be used, created, or occupied , and
no structure , or part thereof, shall be erected , altered, reconstructed, or
moved, except in conformity with all applicable performance standards set forth
in this article. No site plan or other land use or development application
shall be approved unless evidence is presented to indicate conformity with the
requirements of this article.
   C.   Submission of additional data. Nothing in this article shall preclude
the applicant or other interested party from submitting additional data or
evidence related to a specific case. In consideration of such data or evidence,
the Planning Commission may waive or modify the regulations set forth in this
Article, provided that the Planning Commission finds that no harm to the public
health, safety, and welfare will result and that the intent of this Ordinance
will be upheld.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 9.02 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   No activity, operation, or use of land, buildings , or equipment shall be
permitted if such activity, operation, or use produces an environmental impact
or irritant to sensory perception which exceeds the standards set forth in this
section. Agricultural operations are exempt from these performance standards
provided the agricultural operation is in compliance with generally accepted
agricultural and management practices (GAAMPs).
   A.   Noise.
      1.   Definitions. The terms used in this section shall have the meaning
ascribed to them as follows. Terms used in this section but not defined below
or in §
1.03 shall have the meaning ascribed to them by the American National Standards
Institute (ANSI) or its successor body.
          a.   A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL. The sound pressure level in decibels as
measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighting network. The level so
read may be designated dB(A).
         b.   DAY-NIGHT AVERAGE SOUND LEVEL. The 24-hour energy average of the
A-weighted sound pressure level, with the levels during the period of 10:00
p.m. to 7:00 a.m. the following day increased by 10 dB(A) before averaging.
         c.   EMERGENCY.  Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving
actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage which demands immediate
attention.
         d.   IMPULSIVE SOUND. Sound of short duration, usually less than one
second, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay. Examples of sources of impulsive
sound include explosions, drop forge impacts, and discharge of firearms.
         e.   NOISE. Any sound which annoys or disturbs humans or which causes
or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans.
         f.   NOISE DISTURBANCE. Any sound which:
            (a)   Endangers or injures the safety or health of humans or
animals; or
            (b)   Annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal
sensitivities; or
            (c)   Endangers or injures personal or real property . For the
purposes of this Ordinance, a NOISE DISTURBANCE shall be further defined as any
sound which exceeds the limits set forth in Table A, following, or other
standards set forth in this section.
         g.   NOISE SENSITIVE ZONE. An area which contains noise-sensitive
activities such as but not limited to, operations of school libraries, churches
, hospitals , and nursing homes .
         h.   PURE TONE. Any sound which can be distinctly heard as a single
pitch or a set of single pitches.
         i.   SOUND. An oscillation in pressure, particle displacement,
particle velocity or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal forces
that causes compression and rarefaction of that medium.
         j.   SOUND LEVEL. The weighted sound pressure level obtained by the
use of a sound level meter and frequency weighing network (for the purposes of
this Ordinance an A-weighted network), as specified by the American National
Standards Institute.
         k.   VIBRATION. An oscillatory motion of solid bodies of deterministic
or random nature described by displacement, velocity, or acceleration with
respect to a given reference point.
      2.   Noise disturbances prohibited. No person shall unreasonably make,
continue, or cause to be made or continued, any noise disturbance. Examples of
noise disturbances include, but are not limited to:
         a.   Sounds which exceed limits in Table A. Any sound which exceeds
the limits set forth in Table A, following, shall be deemed a noise
disturbance.
          b.   Loading and unloading. Loading and unloading, opening, closing,
or other handling of boxes, crates, containers, building materials, garbage
cans, or similar objects shall be prohibited between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a residential
district boundary or within a noise sensitive zone.
         c.   Construction. Operation of any tools or equipment used in
construction, drilling, or demolition work shall be prohibited where the sound
therefrom creates a noise disturbance across a residential district boundary or
within a noise sensitive zone, between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on
Monday through Saturday or any time on Sundays or holidays. This provision
shall not apply to emergency work of public service utilities.
         d.   Vibration. Operating of any device that creates vibration which
is above the vibration perception threshold of an individual at or beyond the
property of the source shall be prohibited. For the purposes of this section,
vibration perception threshold means the minimum ground or structure -borne
vibrational motion necessary to cause a normal person to be aware of the
vibration by such direct means as, but not limited to, sensation by touch or
observation of moving objects.
         e.   Noise sensitive zones. Creating of any sound within any noise
sensitive zone so as to disrupt the activities normally conducted within the
zone shall be prohibited, even if the average A-weighted sound level is lower
than the values shown in Table A, provided that conspicuous signs are displayed
indicating the presence of the zone.
      3.   Exceptions. 
         a.   Emergency exceptions. The provisions in this section shall not
apply to:
            (a)   The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to
existence of an emergency; or
            (b)   The emission of sound in the performance of emergency work.
         b.   Additional exceptions. The provisions in this section shall not
apply to the following activities, provided that such activities are conducted
in a legally-accepted manner:
            •   Snow plowing, street sweeping, and other public works
activities.
            •   Agricultural uses.
            •   Church bells, chimes, and carillons.
            •   Lawn care and house maintenance that occurs between 8:00 a.m.
and 9:00 p.m.
            •   Licensed vehicles being operated on a road or street .
            •   Trains and aircraft when on the ground.
      4.   Variances . An application for a variance from the provisions in
this section may be submitted to the Zoning Board of Appeals . The owner or
operator of equipment on the property shall submit a statement regarding the
effects of sound from the equipment on the overall sound level in the area. The
statement shall include a study of the background sound levels, predicted level
of sound at the boundary line due to the proposed operation, and justification
for the variance . Upon review of the request for a variance , the Zoning Board
of Appeals may grant a variance where strict adherence to the permitted sound
level would create unnecessary hardship and only if the variance would not
create a threat to the health, safety, and welfare of the public. The Zoning
Board of Appeals may impose conditions of operation when granting a variance .
      5.   Maximum permitted sound levels by receiving Zoning District . Sound
emitted by any source is considered a noise disturbance when its average A-
weighted sound level exceeds the limit set forth for the receiving zoning
district in Table A, when measured at or within the property boundary of the
receiving district. All measurements and designations of sound levels shall be
expressed in day-night average sound levels.
 
Table A
Maximum Permitted Average A-Weighted Sound Levels
Receiving Zoning District Time                   Average Sound Level dB(A)
Residential Districts     7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. 55
                          9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. 50
Commercial, Office, and   7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. 62
Industrial Districts      6:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. 55
 
   Notes Related to Table A
   a.   Correction for Tonal Sounds.  For any source of sound which emits a
pure tone sound, the maximum sound level limits in Table A shall be reduced by
5 dB(A) where the receiving district is residential or commercial noise
sensitive.
   b.   Correction for Impulsive or Impact Type Sounds. For any source of sound
which emits an atypical impulsive or impact type sound, the maximum sound level
limits in Table A shall be reduced by 5 dB(A) where the receiving district is
residential or commercial noise sensitive.
   c.   Planned Development . Where the receiving district is a planned
development district, the applicable standard in Table A shall be based on the
types of uses within the planned development .
      6.   Permitted land use. No new or substantially modified structure shall
be approved for construction unless the owner or developer of such land
demonstrates that the completed structure and the activities associated with
and on the same property as the structure will not generate a noise disturbance
as set forth in this section at the time of initial full-scale operation of
such activities.
   B.   Surface water flow. No site plan review application and no proposal for
division of land shall be approved if subsequent development within the
required setbacks would result in identifiable disruption to the existing or
natural flow of water within drainage ditches, natural water courses, or drains
having a recorded easement , unless evidence of a feasible alternate method of
drainage is presented and approved by the County Drain Commissioner.
   C.   Dust, smoke, soot, dirt, fly ash, and products of wind erosion. 
      Dust, smoke, soot, dirt, fly ash, and products of wind erosion shall be
subject to the regulations established in conjunction with the Natural
Resources and Environmental Protection Act, Michigan Public Act 451 of 1994,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 324.101 through 324.90106, as amended, or other applicable
state or federal regulations. No person, firm, or corporation shall operate or
maintain any process for any purpose, or furnace or combustion device for the
burning of coal or other natural or synthetic fuels, unless such processes or
devices use or are equipped with recognized and approved equipment, methods, or
technology to reduce the quantity of gas-borne or airborne solids or fumes
emitted into the open air.
      The drifting of air-borne matter beyond the lot line , including wind-
blown dust, particles, or debris from open stock piles, shall be prohibited.
Emission of particulate matter from material products, or surfaces subject to
wind erosion shall be controlled by paving, oiling, wetting, covering,
landscaping , fencing, or other means.
   D.   Odor. Offensive, noxious, or foul odors shall not be allowed to escape
into the atmosphere in concentrations which are offensive, which produce a
public nuisance or hazard on adjoining property, or which could be detrimental
to human, plant, or animal life.
   E.   Glare and heat. Any operation or activity which produces glare shall be
conducted so that direct and indirect illumination from the source of light
does not exceed one-half of one foot candle when measured at any point along
the property line of the site on which the operation is located. Any operation
which produces intense glare or heat shall be conducted within an enclosure so
as to completely obscure and shield such operation from direct view from any
point along the lot lines . If heat is a result of an industrial operation, it
shall be so insulated as to not raise the temperature at any property line at
any time.
   F.   Impacts from other activities. Property owners shall provide the
township with evidence of compliance with county, state, and federal laws,
ordinances, rules, and regulations related to any of the following activities:
      1.   Storage and handling of flammable liquids, liquefied petroleum, and
explosives.
      2.   Use of above or below ground storage tanks to contain flammable or
toxic material.
      3.   The storage, use, or manufacture of detonable material.
      4.   Operation of a waste water treatment plant.
      5.   Emission of gasses that could be injurious or destructive to life or
property.
      6.   Use of electronic equipment in an industrial, commercial, or other
operation.
      7.   Use of radioactive material and production of radioactive waste.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 9.03 PROCEDURES FOR DETERMINING COMPLIANCE.
   In the event that the township receives complaints or otherwise acquires
evidence of possible violation of any of the performance standards set forth in
this Article, the following procedures shall be used to investigate, and if
necessary, resolve the violation:
   A.   Official investigation. 
      Upon receipt of evidence of possible violation, the Zoning Administrator
shall make a determination whether there is reasonable cause to suspect the
operation is indeed in violation of the performance standards. The Zoning
Administrator may initiate an official investigation in order to make such a
determination.
      Upon initiation of an official investigation, the Zoning Administrator is
empowered to require the owner or operator of the facility in question to
submit data and evidence deemed necessary to make an objective determination
regarding the possible violation. Failure of the owner or operator to supply
requested data shall constitute grounds for taking legal action to terminate
the use and/or deny or cancel any permits required for continued use of the
land. Data which may be required includes, but is not limited to the following:
      1.   Plans of the existing or proposed facilities, including buildings
and equipment.
      2.   A description of the existing or proposed machinery, processes, and
products.
      3.   Specifications for the mechanisms and techniques used or proposed to
be used to control emissions regulated under the provisions of this Article.
      4.   Measurement of the amount or rate of emissions of the material
purported to be in violation.
   B.   Method and cost of determination. 
      The Zoning Administrator shall take measurements and complete
investigation necessary to make an objective determination concerning the
purported violation. Where required measurements and investigation can be
accurately made by the Zoning Administrator using equipment and personnel
normally available to the township without extraordinary expense, such
measurements and investigation shall be completed before notice of violation is
issued. If necessary, skilled personnel and spec equipment or instruments shall
be secured in order to make the required determination.
      If the alleged violation is found to exist in fact, the costs of making
such determination shall be charged against those responsible, in addition to
such other penalties as may be appropriate. If it is determined that no
substantive violation exists then the costs of this determination shall be paid
by the township .
   C.   Appropriate remedies. If, after appropriate investigation, the Zoning
Administrator determines that a violation does exist, the Zoning Administrator
shall take or cause to be taken lawful action as provided by this Ordinance to
eliminate such violation. The owners or operators of the facility deemed
response shall be given written notice of the violation. The Zoning
Administrator shall take appropriate action in accordance with the owner or
operator’s response to the notice of violation. Appropriate action includes the
following:
      1.   Correction of violation within time limit. If the alleged violation
is corrected within the specified time limit, even if there is no reply to the
notice, the Zoning Administrator shall note “Violation Corrected” on the
township ’s copy of the notice, and the notice shall be retained on file. If
necessary, the Zoning Administrator may take other action as may be warranted
by the circumstances of the case, pursuant to the regulations in this and other
ordinances.
      2.   Violation not corrected and no reply from owner or operator. If
there is no reply from the owner or operator within the specified time limits
(thus establishing admission of violation, as provided §
9.03, subsection A), and the alleged violation is not corrected in accordance
with the regulations set forth in this Article, then the Zoning Administrator
shall take such action as may be warranted to correct the violation.
      3.   Reply requesting extension of time. If a reply is received within
the specified time limit indicating that an alleged violation will be corrected
in accordance with the regulations set forth in the Zoning Ordinance, but that
more time is required than was granted by the original notice, the Zoning
Administrator may grant an extension if-
         a.   The Zoning Administrator deems that such extension is warranted
because of the circumstances in the case; and
         b.   The Zoning Administrator determines that such extension will not
cause imminent peril to life, health, or property.
      4.   Reply requesting technical determination. 
         If a reply is received within the specified time limit request further
review and technical analysis even though the alleged violations continue, then
the Zoning Administrator may call in properly qualified experts to complete
such analysis and confirm or refute the initial determination of violation.
         If expert findings indicate that violations of the performance
standards do exist in fact, the costs incurred in making such a determination
shall be paid by the persons responsible for the violations, in addition to
such other penalties as may be appropriate under the terms of this Ordinance.
Such costs shall be billed to those owners or operators of the subject use who
are deemed responsible for the violation. If the bill is not paid within 30
calendar days, the township shall take whatever appropriate action is necessary
to recover such costs, or alternately, the cost shall be charged against the
property where the violation occurred. If no substantial violation is found,
cost of determination shall be paid by the township .
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
ARTICLE 10.00
ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS
§ 10.01 CREATION OF DISTRICTS.
   For the purposes of this Ordinance, Williamstown Township is hereby divided
into the following zoning districts as shown on the official zoning map:
   Residential Districts
   R-1         One-Family Residential
   R-1-S         Suburban Residential
   RR         Rural Residential
   RE         Rural Estates
   AG-SF         Agricultural Small Farms
   RM-1         Multiple-Family Residential
   MHP         Mobile Home Park District
   Nonresidential Districts
   AG-C         Commercial Agriculture
   OS-1         Office Service
   B-1         Limited Business
   B-2         Commercial Center
   I-1         Light Industrial
   GD         Green Zone Planned Development District
   Other District
   MU         Mixed Use Overlay District
   M-43          Corridor Overlay District
   PD         Planned Development
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 10.02 ADOPTION OF ZONING MAP.
   The boundaries of the zoning districts listed in §
10.01 are hereby established as shown on the official zoning map of the
Township of Williamstown. The zoning map with all notations, references, and
other information shown thereon shall be, and is hereby declared to be a part
of this Ordinance as if fully described herein.
   In accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance and Michigan Public Act
110 of 2006, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3101 through 125.3702, as amended, changes
made in district boundaries and other matters portrayed on the zoning map shall
be entered on the zoning map after the amendment has been approved by the
Township Board and has been published in a newspaper of general circulation in
the township . No changes of any nature shall be made to the zoning map except
in conformity with the procedures set forth in
Article 29.00 of this Ordinance.
   Regardless of the existence of copies of the zoning map which may, from time
to time, be made or published, the official zoning map shall be located at the
Township Hall and shall be the final authority with regard to the current
zoning status of all land in the township .
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 10.03 INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   The following rules shall apply to the interpretation of zoning district
boundaries:
   A.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of
streets , roads , railroad rights-of-way , or alleys shall be construed to
follow such center line.
   B.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall
be construed as following such lot lines .
   C.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following township limits shall
be construed as following such limits.
   D.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of
streams, rivers, or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such
center lines.
   E.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the shoreline of a body
of water shall be construed to follow such shoreline; in the event of a change
in the shoreline, the boundary shall be construed as moving with the actual
shoreline.
   F.   Boundaries indicated as parallel to or as an extension of features
cited in paragraphs A through E above shall be construed as being parallel to
or an extension of the features cited. Distances not specified on the official
zoning map shall be determined using the scale on the map.
   G.   Where there is any uncertainty, contradiction, or conflict concerning
the intended location of zoning district boundaries, the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall interpret the exact location of zoning district boundaries.
   H.   Insofar as some or all of the various districts may be indicated on the
zoning map by patterns that, for the sake of map clarity, do not cover public
rights-of-way , it is intended that such district boundaries do extend to the
center of the rights-of-way .
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 10.04 ZONING OF VACATED AREAS.
   Whenever any street , alley , or other public way within the township is
vacated, such street , alley , or other public way shall automatically be
classified in the same zoning district as the property to which it attaches,
and shall be subject to the standards for said zoning district .
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 10.05 ZONING OF FILLED LAND.
   Whenever any fill is permitted in any stream or other body of water, the
land created automatically and without further governmental action becomes
subject to the same zoning regulations that are applicable to the land to which
the newly-created land attaches.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 10.06 DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS.
   Buildings and uses in any district shall be subject to all applicable
standards and requirements set forth in this Zoning Ordinance, including but
not limited to
Article 28.00 -- Schedule of Regulations.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
ARTICLE 11.00
R-1, ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
§ 11.01 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   The intent of the One-Family Residential District is to provide areas of the
township for the construction and continued use of single-family detached
dwellings within safe, stable neighborhoods. It is intended that R-1 zoned
development occur within approved platted subdivisions, condominiums , or
similar developments located adjacent to collector or arterial roads in
locations that are served by adequate public services, particularly a municipal
sanitary sewer and waste water treatment system. Where sanitary sewer service
is not available, it is the intent of this district to allow development within
the R-1 District, but at a lower density and in accordance with regulations
considered appropriate in areas that lack such services.
   It is further the intent of this District to permit a limited range of
residentially-related uses, and to prohibit multiple-family, office , business,
commercial, industrial, and other uses that would interfere with the quality of
residential life in this District.
   It is intended that developments in this District be designed to preserve
significant natural features and promote public health, safety, and welfare.
Preservation of open space , protection of flood prone areas, protection of
wetlands , woodlands, and groundwater recharge areas, and preservation of other
natural features is encouraged, consistent with state law.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 11.02 PERMITTED USES AND STRUCTURES.
   A.   Principal uses and structures . In all areas zoned R-1, One-Family
Residential, no building shall be erected , used, or structurally altered, nor
shall the land or premises be used in whole or in part, except for one or more
of the following principal permitted uses :
      1.   One-family detached dwellings .
      2.   Manufactured homes, subject to the provisions in §
2.05.
      3.   Family child care homes that provide care for no more than seven
individuals.
      4.   Essential services , subject to the provisions in §
2.16.
      5.   Adult foster family homes , family child day care homes, child
foster family homes , child foster family group homes , any of which shall have
a capacity of no more than six.
   B.   Accessory uses and structures . The following uses and structures
accessory to principal uses and structures in the R-1 District shall be
permitted, subject to the provisions in §
2.03:
      1.   Uses and structures incidental to and customarily associated with
one-family detached dwelling units .
      2.   Private parks owned and maintained by a homeowner’s association that
are part of an approved plat or condominium project.
      3.   Home occupations and home-based businesses , subject to the
provisions in §
2.06.
      4.   Pens and enclosures for household pets .
      5.   Private swimming pools , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection W.
      6.   Signs , subject to the provisions in
Article 7.00.
      7.   Off-street parking, subject to the provisions in
Article 4.00.
   C.   Special uses. The following uses may be permitted by the Township Board
, subject to the conditions specified for each use; review and approval of the
site plan by the Planning Commission and Township Board ; any special
conditions imposed by the Planning Commission or Township Board that are
necessary to fulfill the purposes of this Ordinance; and, the procedures and
requirements set forth in §
29.03.
      1.   An accessory apartment , subject to the provisions in §
8.03, subsection A.
      2.   Publicly owned and operated parks, parkways, and recreation
facilities, institutional or community recreation centers, and non-profit swim
clubs , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection W.
      3.   Municipal buildings and uses that do not require outside storage of
materials or equipment.
      4.   Public, parochial, and other private elementary, intermediate, or
high schools licensed by the State of Michigan to offer courses in general
education.
      5.   Cemeteries , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection G.
      6.   Adult foster care small group homes and group child care homes.
Group child care homes shall be subject to the requirements in §
8.02 , subsection Y.
      7.   Religious institutions , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection X.
      8.   Public or private golf courses , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection N.
      9.   A model home to promote sales in new residential developments ,
subject to the provisions in §
8.03, subsection F.
      10.   Private kennels, subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection P.
      11.   Bed and breakfast establishments , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection F.
      12.   Medical marijuana facilities , subject to the requirements of §§
2.02 and
8.02, subsection MM.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013; Ord. 55, passed 7-9-2014 ; Ord. passed 2-8-2023)
§ 11.03 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   A.   Site plan review. Site plan review and approval is required for all
uses except principal and accessory structures and uses, in accordance with §
29.02.
   B.   Area, height, bulk , and placement regulations. 
      Buildings and uses in the One-Family Residential District are subject to
the area, height, bulk , and placement requirements in
Article 28.00, Schedule of Regulations.
      The following chart summarizes the regulations in
Article 28.00, but the user is cautioned to refer to
Article 28.00 for more detailed information and explanatory notes.
Regulations
Regulations
Minimum Lot Area          20,000 sq. ft.
Minimum Lot Width         100 ft.
Maximum Height            2 ½ stories, 35 ft.
Maximum Building Coverage 20%
Minimum Front Setback     25 ft.
Minimum Side Setback      10 ft.
Minimum Rear Setback      35 ft.
Minimum Usable Floor Area 900 sq. ft.
 
   C.   Planned development . Planned development may be permitted as a means
to achieve the basic intent of this district, in accordance with §
29.04.
   D.   Single-family development options. Single-family development in the R-
1, One-Family Residential District may be developed in accordance with the open
space preservation, average lot size and single family attached options in §
8.03, subsection D.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 11.04 PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT.
   Any violation of this Ordinance, or any part thereof, shall be deemed a
municipal civil infraction and is punishable by a fine not to exceed $100. Upon
notice of a violation, the appropriate township employee shall investigate any
violation and then make a determination as to whether the penalty shall he
imposed. The imposition of a penalty for a violation shall not excuse the
violation or be considered a permit to allow the violation to continue. Each
day that a violation exists or continues to exist shall constitute a separate
offense. The Township Supervisor or his/her designated agent is hereby
authorized to mite and serve municipal civil infraction tickets. This municipal
civil infraction ticket shall serve as notice of the alleged violation.
Proceedings for the municipal civil infraction shall proceed as provided in the
Township Municipal Civil Infractions Ordinance.
(Ord. 54, passed 6-11-2014)
ARTICLE 12.00
R-1-S, SUBURBAN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
§ 12.01 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   The intent of the Suburban Residential District is to provide areas of the
township for the construction and continued use of single-family detached
dwellings within safe, stable neighborhoods. Generally, it is intended that R-
1-S zoned development occur adjacent to collector or arterial roads . In
certain R-1S neighborhoods included with the June 12, 2000 Agreement for
Conditional Transfer of Property pursuant to 1984 PA 425, being M.C.L.A. §§
124.21 through 124.30, single-family development may be facilitated by the
future availability of sanitary sewer service.
   It is further the intent of this District to permit a limited range of
residentially-related uses, and to prohibit multiple-family, office , business,
commercial, industrial and other uses that would interfere with the quality of
residential life in this district.
   It is intended that developments in this district be designed to preserve
significant natural features and promote public health, safety, and welfare.
Preservation of open space , protection of flood prone areas, protection of
wetlands , woodlands, and groundwater recharge areas, and preservation of other
natural features is encouraged, consistent with state law.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 12.02 PERMITTED USES AND STRUCTURES.
   A.   Principal uses and structures. In all areas zoned R-1-S, Suburban
Residential District, no building shall be erected , used, or structurally
altered, nor shall the land or premises be used in whole or in part, except for
one or more of the following principal permitted uses :
      1.   One-family detached dwellings .
      2.   Manufactured homes, subject to the provisions in §
2.05.
      3.   Essential services , subject to the provisions in §
2.16.
      4.   Adult foster family homes , family day care homes, child foster
family homes , and child foster family group homes .
   B.   Accessory uses and structures . The following uses and structures
accessory to principal uses and structures in the R-1-S District shall be
permitted, subject to the provisions in §
2.03:
      1.   Uses and structures incidental to and customarily associated with
one-family detached dwelling units .
      2.   Other accessory uses and structures permitted in §
11.02, subsection B.
   C.   Special uses. Special uses permitted in §
11.02, subsection C, may be permitted by the Township Board , subject to the
conditions specified for each use; review and approval of the site plan by the
Planning Commission and Township Board ; and any conditions imposed by the
Planning Commission or Township Board that are necessary to fulfill the
purposes of this Ordinance; subject to the procedures and requirements in §
29.03.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013; Ord. passed 2-8-2023)
§ 12.03 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   A.   Site plan review. Site plan review and approval is required for all
uses except principal and accessory structures and uses, in accordance with §
29.02.
   B.   Area, height, bulk , and placement regulations. Buildings and uses in
the Suburban Residential District are subject to the area, height, bulk , and
placement requirements in
Article 28.00, Schedule of Regulations.
   The following chart summarizes the regulations in
Article 28.00, but the user is cautioned to refer to
Article 28.00 for more detailed information and explanatory notes.
Regulations
Regulations
Minimum Lot Area          40,000 sq. ft.
Minimum Lot Width         120 ft.
Maximum Height            2 ½ stories, 35 ft.
Maximum Building Coverage 20%
Minimum Front Setback     25 ft.
Minimum Side Setback      10 ft.
Minimum Rear Setback      35 ft.
Minimum Usable Floor Area 900 sq. ft.
 
   C.   Planned development . Planned development may be permitted as a means
to achieve the basic intent of this district, in accordance with §
29.04.
   D.   Single-family development options. Single- family development in the R-
1-S, Suburban Residential District may be developed in accordance with the
average lot size and single-family attached options in §
8.03, subsection D.
   E.   Open space preservation option. The open space preservation option is
permitted in the R-1-S District as a means of permitting residential use and
preserving open space and agricultural lands, subject to the provisions in §
8.03, subsection C.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
ARTICLE 13.00
RR, RURAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
§ 13.01 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   The Rural Residential District is intended to provide areas of the township
for orderly low-density residential growth and restricted agricultural uses.
The standards in this District are intended to assure that permitted uses
peacefully coexist in a low-density setting, while preserving the rural-like
features and character of certain portions of the township . Low-density
residential development is further intended to protect the public health in
areas where it is not likely that public water and sewer services will be
provided.
   It is further the intent of this District to permit a limited range of
residentially-related uses, and to prohibit multiple-family, office , business,
commercial, industrial, and other uses that would interfere with the quality of
residential life in this District.
   It is intended that developments in this District be designed to preserve
significant natural features and promote public health, safety, and welfare.
Preservation of open space , protection of flood prone areas, protection of
wetlands , woodlands, and groundwater recharge areas, and preservation of other
natural features is encouraged, consistent with state law.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 13.02 PERMITTED USES AND STRUCTURES.
   A.   Principal uses and structures. In all areas zoned RR, Rural Residential
District, no building shall be erected , used, or structurally altered, nor
shall the land or premises be used in whole or in part, except for one or more
of the following principal permitted uses :
      1.   One-family detached dwellings .
      2.   Generalized and specialized farming and other activities related to
the definition of “farm ” in §
1.03, subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection L.
      3.   Idle cropland that is being maintained so as to prevent the erosion
of soil.
      4.   Manufactured homes, subject to the provisions in §
2.05.
      5.   Adult foster family homes , family day care homes, child foster
family homes , and child foster family group homes .
      6.   Temporary real estate auctions , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection LL.
      7.   Temporary general auctions , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection LL.
      8.   Essential services , subject to the provisions in §
2.16.
   B.   Accessory uses and structures . The following uses and structures
accessory to principal uses and structures in the RR District shall be
permitted, subject to the provisions in §
2.03:
      1.   Uses and structures incidental to and customarily associated with
one-family detached dwelling units .
      2.   Other accessory uses and structures permitted in §
11.02, subsection B.
      3.   Barns, silos, sheds, equipment storage and other farm buildings , as
defined in §
1.03.
      4.   One roadside stand for the sale of agricultural products raised on
the property, subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection Z.
      5.   Private kennels, subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection P.
      6.   Private stables and riding arenas , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection AA.
   C.   Special uses. Unless otherwise permitted in this section, the following
uses may be permitted by the Township Board , subject to the
conditionsspecified for each use; review and approval of the site plan by the
Planning Commission and Township Board ; any special conditions imposed by the
Planning Commission or Township Board that are necessary to fulfill the
purposes of this Ordinance; and, the procedures and requirements set forth in §
29.03.
      1.   Special uses permitted in §
11.02, subsection C.
      2.   Raising or growing of plants, trees, shrubs, and nursery stock,
including any buildings or structures used for such activities, or for the
storage of equipment and materials necessary for such activities.
      3.   The growing, stripping, and removal of sod, provided that all
stripped land shall be reseeded by fall of the year in which it was stripped so
as to prevent the erosion of soil by wind or water.
      4.   Wineries , subject to a minimum lot size of four acres and subject
to the standards in §
8.02, subsection JJ.
      5.   Cemeteries , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection G.
      6.   Medical marijuana facilities , subject to the requirements in §§
2.02 and
8.02, subsection MM.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013; Ord. 55, passed 7-9- 2014; Ord. passed 2-8-2023)
§ 13.03 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   A.   Site plan review. Site plan review and approval is required for all
uses except principal and accessory structures and uses, in accordance with §
29.02.
   B.   Area, height, bulk , and placement regulations.
      Buildings and uses in the Rural Residential District are subject to the
area, height, bulk , and placement requirements in
Article 28.00, Schedule of Regulations.
      The following chart summarizes the regulations in
Article 28.00, but the user is cautioned to refer to
Article 28.00 for more detailed information and explanatory notes.
Regulations
Regulations
Minimum Lot Area          90,000 sq. ft.
Minimum Lot Width         240 ft.
Maximum Height            2 ½ stories, 35 ft.
Maximum Building Coverage 15%
Minimum Front Setback     50 ft.
Minimum Side Setback      30 ft.
Minimum Rear Setback      35 ft.
Minimum Usable Floor Area 900 sq. ft.
 
   C.   Planned development . Planned Development may be permitted as a means
to achieve the basic intent of this District, in accordance with §
29.04.
   D.   Open space preservation option. The open space preservation option is
permitted in the RR District as a means of permitting residential use and
preserving open space and agricultural lands, subject to the provisions in §
8.03, subsection C.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
ARTICLE 14.00
RE, RURAL ESTATE DISTRICT
§ 14.01 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   The Rural Estate District is intended to address conditions in rural
portions of the township where low-density residential development has occurred
and is expected to continue in a rural setting. The Rural Estate District
provides opportunity for additional low-density rural residential development ,
while accommodating continued agricultural use.
   The standards in this District are intended to assure that permitted uses
peacefully coexist in a low-density setting, while preserving the rural-like
features and character of certain portions of the township . Low-density
residential development is further intended to protect the public health in
areas where it is not likely that public water and sewer services will be
provided.
   It is further the intent of this District to permit a limited range of
residentially-related uses, and to prohibit multiple-family, office , business,
commercial, industrial, and other uses that would interfere with the quality of
residential life in this district.
   It is intended that developments in this district be designed to preserve
significant natural features and promote public health, safety, and welfare.
Preservation of open space , protection of flood prone areas, protection of
wetlands , woodlands, and groundwater recharge areas, and preservation of other
natural features is encouraged, consistent with state law.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 14.02 PERMITTED USES AND STRUCTURES.
   A.   Principal uses and structures. In all areas zoned RE, Rural Estate
District, no building shall be erected , used, or structurally altered, nor
shall the land or premises be used in whole or in part, except for one or more
of the following principal permitted uses :
      1.   One-family detached dwellings .
      2.   Generalized and specialized farming and other activities related to
the definition of “farm ” in §
1.03, subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection L.
      3.   Raising or growing of plants, trees, shrubs, and nursery stock,
including any buildings or structures used for such activities, or for the
storage of equipment and materials necessary for such activities.
         Retail sales of such items and items reasonably related to the raising
and growing of plant material may be permitted in conjunction with such a use
if the following conditions are met:
         The retail component shall not occupy more than 20% of the total area
of the site. The retail component includes buildings and structures related to
retail sales, outside display and sales areas, customer parking, and other
accessory retail facilities. The retail component includes plants on display
for sale, but does not include areas occupied by plants, trees, shrubs, and
nursery stock that are being grown and tended for future sale.
      4.   Idle cropland that is being maintained so as to prevent the erosion
of soil.
      5.   Manufactured homes, subject to the provisions in §
2.05.
      6.   Adult foster family homes , family day care homes, child foster
family homes , and child foster family group homes .
      7.   Temporary real estate auctions , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection LL.
      8.   Temporary general auctions , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection LL.
      9.   Essential services , subject to the provisions in §
2.16.
   B.   Accessory uses and structures. The following uses and structures
accessory to principal uses and structures in the RE District shall be
permitted, subject to the provisions in §
2.03:
      1.    Uses and structures incidental to and customarily associated with
one-family detached dwelling units .
      2.    Other accessory uses and structures permitted in §
11.02, subsection B.
      3.    Barns, silos, sheds, equipment storage, and other farm buildings ,
as defined in §
1.03.
      4.    One roadside stand for the sale of agricultural products raised on
the property, subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection Z.
      5.    Private kennels, subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection P.
      6.    Private stables and riding arenas , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection AA.
   C.   Special uses. Unless otherwise permitted in this section, the following
uses may be permitted by the Township Board , subject to the conditions
specified for each use; review and approval of the site plan by the Planning
Commission and Township Board ; any special conditions imposed by the Planning
Commission or Township Board that are necessary to fulfill the purposes of this
Ordinance; and, the procedures and requirements set forth in §
29.03.
      1.    Special uses permitted in §
11.02, subsection C.
      2.    Golf driving ranges, subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection N.
      3.    Commercial stables and riding arenas , subject to the provisions in
§
8.02, subsection AA.
      4.    Commercial kennels, subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection P.
      5.    Veterinary clinics , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection DD.
      6.    Radio, television, and telephone transmitting towers, subject to
the provisions in §
8.02, subsection V.
      7.    Oil and gas processing facilities, subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection T.
      8.    The growing, stripping, and removal of sod, provided that all
stripped land shall be reseeded by fall of the year in which it was stripped so
as to prevent the erosion of soil by wind or water.
      9.    Nature centers , demonstration farms , and similar uses, subject to
the provisions in §
8.02, subsection HH.
      10.    Wineries , subject to a minimum lot size of four acres and subject
to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection JJ.
      11.   Medical marijuana facilities , subject to the requirements in §§
2.02 and
8.02, subsection MM.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013; Ord. 55, passed 7-9- 2014; Ord. passed 2-8-2023)
§ 14.03 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   A.   Site plan review. Site plan review and approval is required for all
uses except principal and accessory structures and uses, in accordance with §
29.02.
   B.   Area, height, bulk , and placement regulations.  
      Buildings and uses in the Rural Estate District are subject to the area,
height, bulk , and placement requirements in
Article 28.00, Schedule of Regulations.
      The following chart summarizes the regulations in
Article 28.00, but the user is cautioned to refer to
Article 28.00 for more detailed information and explanatory notes.
Regulations
Regulations
Minimum Lot Area          5 acres
Minimum Lot Width         300 ft.
Maximum Height            2 ½ stories, 35 ft.
Maximum Building Coverage 10%
Minimum Front Setback     50 ft.
Minimum Side Setback      30 ft.
Minimum Rear Setback      40 ft.
Minimum Usable Floor Area 900 sq. ft.
 
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
ARTICLE 15.00
AG-SF, AGRICULTURAL-SMALL FARMS DISTRICT
§ 15.01 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   The Agricultural-Small Farms District is intended to address conditions in
those portions of the township where agriculture is a logical and reasonable
use, but where it is also reasonable to allow limited non-farm residential
development . In contrast with the Rural Estate District, the Agricultural-
Small Farms District provides for lower density  development (i.e., larger
minimum lot size), thereby providing greater opportunity to preserve
agricultural uses. The Agricultural-Small Farms District also provides for
limited accessory agricultural uses on parcels  occupied by non-farm single-
family dwellings .
   The standards in this District are intended to assure that permitted uses
peacefully coexist in a low-density setting, while preserving the rural-like
features and character of certain portions of the township . Low-density
residential development is further intended to protect the public health in
areas where it is not likely that public water and sewer services will be
provided.
   It is further the intent of this District to permit a limited range of
residentially-related uses, and to prohibit multiple-family, office , business,
commercial, industrial, and other uses that would interfere with the quality of
residential life in this District.
   It is intended that developments in this District be designed to preserve
significant natural features and promote public health, safety, and welfare.
Preservation of open space , protection of flood prone areas, protection of
wetlands , woodlands, and groundwater recharge areas, and preservation of other
natural features is encouraged, consistent with state law.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 15.02 PERMITTED USES AND STRUCTURES.
   A.   Principal uses and structures . In all areas zoned AG-SF, Agricultural-
Small Farms District, no building shall be erected , used, or structurally
altered, nor shall the land or premises be used in whole or in part, except for
one or more of the following principal permitted uses :
      1.   One-family detached dwellings .
      2.   Generalized and specialized farming and other activities related to
the definition of “farm ” in §
1.03, subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection L, or the generally accepted agricultural and management
practices (GAAMPs), whichever is applicable.
      3.   Raising or growing of plants, trees, shrubs, and nursery stock,
including any buildings or structures used for such activities, or for the
storage of equipment and materials necessary for such activities.
      4.   The growing, stripping, and removal of sod, provided that all
stripped land shall be reseeded by fall of the year in which it was stripped so
as to prevent the erosion of soil by wind or water.
      5.   Idle cropland that is being maintained so as to prevent the erosion
of soil.
      6.   Manufactured homes, subject to the provisions in §
2.05.
      7.   Adult foster family homes , family day care homes, child foster
family homes , and child foster family group homes .
      8.   Temporary real estate auctions , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection LL.
      9.   Temporary general auctions , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection LL.
      10.   Essential services , subject to the provisions in §
2.16.
      11.   Minor agricultural tourism uses, subject to the regulations in §
8.02, subsection OO.
   B.   Accessory uses and structures . The following uses and structures
accessory to principal uses and structures in the AG-SF District shall be
permitted, subject to the provisions in §
2.03:
      1.   Uses and structures incidental to and customarily associated with
one-family detached dwelling units .
      2.   Other accessory uses and structures permitted in §
11.02, subsection B.
      3.   Barns, silos, sheds, equipment storage and other farm buildings , as
defined in §
1.03.
      4.   One roadside stand for the sale of agricultural products raised on
the property, subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection Z.
      5.   Private kennels, subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection P.
      6.   Private stables and riding arenas , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection AA.
   C.   Special uses. Unless otherwise permitted in this section, the following
uses may be permitted by the Township Board , subject to the conditions
specified for each use; review and approval of the site plan by the Planning
Commission and Township Board ; any special conditions imposed by the Planning
Commission or Township Board that are necessary to fulfill the purposes of this
Ordinance; and, the procedures and requirements set forth in §
29.03.
      1.   Special uses permitted in §
11.02, subsection C.
      2.   Golf driving ranges, subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection N.
      3.   Public stables and riding arenas , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection AA.
      4.   Commercial kennels, subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection P.
      5.   Veterinary clinics , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection DD.
      6.   Radio, television, and telephone transmitting towers, subject to the
provisions in §
8.02, subsection V.
      7.   Oil and gas processing facilities, subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection T.
      8.   Landscape contractor’s operation , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection FF.
      9.   Outdoor events, subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection GG.
      10.   Retreat centers , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection EE.
      11.   Nature centers , demonstration farms , and similar uses, subject to
the provisions in §
8.02, subsection HH.
      12.   Small wine makers and hard cider producers, subject to a minimum
lot size of four acres and subject to the regulations in §
8.02 , subsection JJ.
      13.   Permanent agricultural auctions , subject to the provisions in §
8.02 , subsection LL.
      14.   Major agricultural tourism  uses, subject to the regulations in §
8.02 , subsection OO.
      15.   Small distillers, subject to a minimum lot size of four acres and
subject to the regulations in §
8.02 , subsection OO.
      16.   Community solar facilities and utility grade solar facilities,
subject to the regulations in §
8.02 , subsection QQ.5.
      17.   Event barns, subject to the provisions in §
8.02 , subsection SS.
   D.   Accessory special land uses . 
      The following uses and structures may be permitted in the AG-SF District
provided that such uses and structures shall be accessory to permitted
principal uses and structures , and subject to the provisions in §
2.03, the conditions specified for each use, review, and approval by the
Planning Commission and Township Board , and the procedures and requirements in
§
29.03:
      1.   A landing area or airport for personal aircraft use, subject to the
provisions in §
8.02, subsection B, and the following additional provision:
      A minimum parcel size of 20 acres shall be required, unless the applicant
demonstrates that a smaller parcel size will be appropriate for the category,
class, and type of aircraft that will normally use the landing area , and that
such use will not create a negative impact or safety concern on adjoining land.
The Township Board may consider operational characteristics of the aircraft
permitted to use the landing area .
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013; Ord. 55, passed 7-9- 2014; Ord. 57, passed 4-8-2015;
Ord. passed 12-14-2022; Ord. passed 2-8-2023)
§ 15.03 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   A.   Site plan review. Site plan review and approval is required for all
uses except principal and accessory uses and structures , in accordance with §
29.02.
   B.   Area, height, bulk , and placement regulations. 
      Buildings and uses in the agricultural-small farms district are subject
to the area, height, bulk , andplacement requirements in
Article 28.00, Schedule of Regulations.
      The following chart summarizes the regulations in
Article 28.00, but the user is cautioned to refer to
Article 28.00 for more detailed information and explanatory notes.
Regulations
Regulations
Minimum Lot Area          10 acres
Minimum Lot Width         300 ft.
Maximum Height            2 ½ stories, 35 ft.
Maximum Building Coverage 10%
Minimum Front Setback     50 ft.
Minimum Side Setback      30 ft.
Minimum Rear Setback      35 ft.
Minimum Usable Floor Area 900 sq. ft.
 
   C.   Planned development . Planned development is permitted as a means to
achieve the basic intent of this district, in accordance with §
29.04.
   D.   Open space preservation option. The open space preservation option is
permitted in the AG-SF District as a means of permitting residential use and
preserving open space and agricultural lands, subject to the provisions in §
8.03, subsection C.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
ARTICLE 16.00
MHP, MOBILE HOME PARK DISTRICT
§ 16.01 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   The Mobile Home Park District is intended to provide for the location and
regulation of mobile home parks . These districts should be located in areas
where they will be compatible with adjacent land uses. Accordingly, mobile home
parks shall be located in proximity to Multiple-Family Districts and shall
serve as a transition zone between residential and nonresidential districts.
Mobile home parks should not be located where they would interrupt the
continuity of permanent single family neighborhoods. Furthermore, the location
of a mobile home park shall not have an adverse impact on the proper
functioning of community facilities and utility systems, including but not
limited to the following: roads , sanitary sewers, water, storm drainage,
police and fire protection, and the educational system.
   The regulations established by state law (Michigan Public Act 96 of 1987,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.2301 through 125.2349, as amended) and the Mobile Home
Commission Rules govern all mobile home parks . When regulations in this
article exceed the state law or the Mobile Home Commission Rules they are
intended to insure that mobile home parks meet the development and site plan
standards established by this Ordinance for other comparable residential
development and to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the township ’s
residents
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 16.02 PERMITTED USES AND STRUCTURES.
   In all areas zoned MHP, Mobile Home Park District, no building shall be
erected , used, or structurally altered, nor shall the land or premises be used
in whole or in part, except for one or more of the following principal uses :
      1.   Mobile home parks .
      2.   Multiple-family and attached single-family housing, subject to the
requirements in §
8.03, subsection B.
      3.   Adult foster family homes , family day care homes, child foster
family homes , and child   foster family group homes .
      4.   Essential services , subject to the provisions in §
2.16.
      5.   Uses and structures accessory to the above, subject to the
provisions in this article.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013; Ord. passed 2-8-2023)
§ 16.03 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   A.   Site plan review. 
      Pursuant to Section 11 of Michigan Public Act 96 of 1987, being M.C.L.A.
§ 125.2311, as amended, a preliminary plan shall be submitted to the township
for review by the Planning Commission . The preliminary plan shall include the
location, layout, general design, and general description of the project. The
preliminary plan shall not include detailed construction plans.
      In preparing the preliminary plan and when reviewing the plan, the
developer and Planning Commission shall generally follow the procedures and
requirements in §
29.02 of this Ordinance, where applicable, except where said procedures and
requirements are superseded by requirements in Public Act 96 of 1987, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 125.2301 through 125.2349, as amended, or the Mobile Home
Commission Rules.
      Pursuant to § 11 of Public Act 96 of 1987, being M.C.L.A. § 125.2311, as
amended, the Planning Commission shall take action on the preliminary plan
within 60 days after the township officially receives the plan.
   B.   Minimum requirements. Mobile home parks shall be subject to all the
rules and requirements as established and regulated by Michigan law including,
by way of example, Act 96 of 1987, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.2301 through 125.2349,
as amended, and the Mobile Home Commission Rules and, in addition, shall
satisfy the following minimum requirements:
      1.   Parcel size for overall park. The minimum parcel size for mobile
home parks shall be 15 acres.
      2.   Minimum site size. The mobile home park shall be developed with
sites averaging 5,500 square feet per mobile home unit. These 5,500 square feet
for any one site may be reduced by 20% provided that the individual site shall
be equal to at least 4,400 square feet. For each square foot of land gained
through the reduction of a site below 5,500 square feet, at least an equal
amount of land shall be dedicated as open space , but in no case shall the open
space and distance requirements be less than that required under R 125.1946,
Rule 946, and R 125.1941 and R 125.1944, Rules 941 and 944 of the Michigan
Administrative Code.
      3.   Setbacks . Mobile homes shall comply with the following minimum
distances and setbacks :
         a.   Twenty feet from any part of an adjacent mobile home .
         b.   Ten feet from any on site parking space of an adjacent mobile
home site.
         c.   Ten feet from any accessory attached or detached structure of an
adjacent mobile home .
         d.   Fifty feet from any permanent building .
         e.   One hundred feet from any baseball softball or similar
recreational field.
         f.   Ten feet from the edge of an internal road , provided that such
road is not dedicated to the public. Mobile homes and other structures in the
MHP District shall be set back at least 20 feet from the right-of-way line of a
dedicated public road with the mobile home park .
           g.   Seven and one half feet from any parking bay.
         h.   Seven feet from a common pedestrian walkway.
         i.   All mobile homes and accessory buildings shall be set back not
less than 50 feet from any park boundary line, including the future right of
way line of abutting streets and highways .
         j.   Forty feet from the edge of any railroad right-of-way .
      4.   Maximum height. Buildings in the MHP district shall not exceed two
and one-half stories or 35 feet, except that storage sheds shall not exceed 15
feet in height.
      5.   Roads . Roads shall satisfy the minimum dimensional, design, and
construction requirements as set forth in the mobile home commission rules
except as follows:
         a.   Two-way streets shall have a minimum width of 21 feet where no
parallel parking is permitted, 31 feet where parallel parking is permitted on
one side only, and 41 feet where parallel parking is permitted on both sides of
the street .
         b.   One-way streets shall have a minimum width of 13 feet where no
parallel parking is permitted, 23 feet where parallel parking is permitted on
one side only, and 33 feet where parallel parking is permitted on both sides of
the street .
         c.   Dead-end streets shall terminate in a cul-de-sac having an
adequate turnaround with paving that is a minimum of 50 feet in diameter. No
parking shall be permitted in the cul-de-sac turnaround.
         d.   The main entrance to the park shall have access to a public
thoroughfare or shall be connected to a paved public collector or arterial road
by a permanent easement which shall be recorded by the developers. Sole access
to the park via an alley is prohibited.
         e.   All roads shall be constructed with curbs and gutters.
      6.   Parking. 
         a.   All mobile home sites shall be provided with two parking spaces
per Mobile Home Commission Rules 925 and 926.
         b.   In addition, a minimum of one parking space for every three
mobile home sites shall be provided for visitor parking located convenient to
the area served.
         c.   No unlicensed or inoperable vehicle of any type shall be parked
in this district at any time except within a covered building .
         d.   Common areas for the storage of boats, motorcycles, recreation
vehicles, and similar equipment may be provided in a mobile home park , but
shall be limited to use only by residents of the mobile home park . The
location of such storage areas shall be shown on the site plan. No part of any
such storage area shall be located in any yard required on the perimeter of the
mobile home park . Such storage area shall be screened from view from adjacent
residential properties with an opaque six-foot wooden fence , six-foot masonry
wall with landscaping , or landscaped greenbelt . If a landscaped greenbelt is
used, it shall consist of closely spaced evergreen plantings (i.e., no farther
than 15 feet apart) which can be reasonably expected to form a complete visual
barrier that is at least six feet above ground level within three years of
planting.
      7.   Sidewalks. Sidewalks having a minimum width of three feet shall be
provided along each side of the street upon which mobile home sites front.
      8.   Accessory buildings and facilities.
         a.   Accessory buildings and structures , including park management
offices and public works facilities, storage buildings , laundry facilities,
recreation or community facilities, and other accessory facilities, shall be
designed and operated for use by residents of the park only.
         b.   All buildings constructed on site within a mobile home park shall
be constructed in compliance with the Williamstown Township Building Codes and
shall require all applicable permits. Any addition to a mobile home unit that
is not certified as meeting the standards of the U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development for mobile homes shall comply with the Williamstown Township
Building Codes. Site plan approval shall be required prior to construction of
any on site building within a mobile home park , except for storage sheds or
garages for individual mobile homes .
         c.   Each mobile home shall be permitted one storage shed or garage
not to exceed 400 square feet in area. The installation of any such shed or
garage shall comply with codes and ordinances of Williamstown Township and
shall require a building permit. Storage underneath a mobile home or outside on
any mobile home site is prohibited.
      9.   Open space . Open space shall be provided in any mobile home park
containing eight or more units. The open space shall comply with the following
requirements:
         a.   A minimum of 300 square feet of well drained, usable open space
shall be provided for each mobile home site.
         b.   Open space shall be located conveniently in relation to the
majority of dwelling units intended to be served. Swamp areas, marshy areas,
and similar limited use areas shall not be included in the required open space
.
      10.   Screening.
         a.   All mobile home parks shall be screened from existing adjacent
residential land use by either a six-foot wall or a densely planted landscaped
greenbelt .
         b.   Required screen walls shall be constructed of masonry material
that is constructed of face brick, decorative block, or poured concrete with a
simulated brick or stone pattern. Required walls shall be placed inside and
adjacent to the lot line except where underground utilities would interfere
with the placement of the wall or where the wall would unreasonably obstruct
the use of adjacent property, in which case the wall may be set back from the
property line a sufficient distance to resolve such concerns.
         c.   If a landscaped greenbelt is used, it shall consist of closely
spaced evergreen plantings (i.e., no farther than 15 feet apart) which can be
reasonably expected to form a complete visual barrier that is at least six feet
above ground level within three years of planting. Deciduous plant materials
may be used provided that visual screening is maintained throughout the year.
      11.   Signs .
         a.   One permanent residential entranceway sign shall be permitted at
each entrance to the mobile home park . Such signs shall not be more than six
feet in height and 32 square feet in area and shall be set back a minimum of
ten feet from any property or right-of-way line.
         b.   Management offices in the Mobile Home Park District shall be
permitted one identification sign not to exceed six square feet in area.
      12.   Trash dumpsters. If proposed, trash dumpsters shall comply with the
following requirements:
         a.   Dumpsters shall be set back a minimum distance of 50 feet from
the perimeter of the mobile home park and at least 15 feet from any building in
a location that is clearly accessible to the servicing vehicle.
         b.   Dumpsters shall be screened on three sides with a decorative
masonry wall or wood fencing, not less than six feet in height. The fourth side
of the dumpster screening shall be equipped with an opaque lockable gate that
is the same height as the enclosure around the other three sides.
         c.   Dumpsters shall be placed on a concrete pad. Bollards (concrete
filled metal posts) shall be installed at the opening of the dumpster enclosure
to prevent damage to the screening wall or fence .
      13.   Canopies and awnings. Canopies and awnings may be attached to any
mobile homes and may be enclosed for use as a sunroom or recreation room , but
not as a bedroom . Canopies and awnings shall comply with the setback and
distance requirements set forth in this article and shall require a building
permit.
      14.   Operational requirements. No mobile home shall be permitted to be
placed in a mobile home park until a permit has been granted by the Building
Official and a license has been issued by the Michigan Department of Commerce.
No individual mobile home site shall be occupied until the required
improvements, including utilities and access roads which serve the site are in
place and are functioning. A certificate of occupancy issued by Williamstown
Township shall be required prior to use of any buildings constructed on site.
      15.   Sale of mobile homes . The business of selling new or used mobile
homes as a commercial operation in connection with the operation of a mobile
home park shall be prohibited. New or used mobile homes located on sites within
the mobile home park to be used and occupied on that site may be sold by a
licensed dealer or broker. This section shall not prohibit the sale of a used
mobile home by a resident of the mobile home park provided the park’s
regulations permit such sale.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
ARTICLE 17.00
RM-1, MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
§ 17.01 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   The intent of the Multiple-Family Residential District is to address the
varied housing needs of township residents by providing locations for
development of multiple-family housing at higher density than is permitted in
single-family districts. In addressing these housing needs, multiple-family
housing in the RM-1 District should be designed in consideration of the
following objectives:
   1.   It is intended that developments in this District be designed to
preserve significant natural features and promote public health, safety, and
welfare. Preservation of open space , protection of flood prone areas,
protection of wetlands , woodlands, and groundwater recharge areas, and
preservation of other natural features is encouraged, consistent with state
law.
   2.   Multiple-family housing should be provided with necessary services and
utilities, including public sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment, usable
outdoor recreation space, and a well-designed internal road network.
   3.   Multiple-family housing should be designed to be compatible with
surrounding or nearby single-family housing. Accordingly, multiple-family
development generally should be located where it serves as a transition zone
between nonresidential and single-family uses.
   4.   Multiple-family developments should have direct access to a collector
or arterial road .
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 17.02 PERMITTED USES AND STRUCTURES.
   A.   Principal uses and structures . In all areas zoned RM-1, Multiple-
Family Residential, no building shall be erected , used, or structurally
altered, nor shall the land or premises be used in whole or in part, except for
one or more of the following principal permitted uses :
      1.   All principal uses permitted in the R-1 District, §
11.02, subsection A.
      2.   Two-family dwellings .
      3.   Multiple-family and single-family attached housing, subject to the
requirements in §
8.03, subsection B.
      4.   Temporary real estate auction , subject to the provision in §
8.02, subsection LL.
      5.   Temporary general auction , subject to the provision in §
8.02, subsection LL.
      6.   Adult foster family homes , family day care homes, child foster
family homes , and child foster family group homes .
   B.   Accessory uses and structures. The following uses and structures
accessory to principal uses and structures in the RM-1 District shall be
permitted, subject to the provisions in §
2.03:
      1.   Uses and structures incidental to and customarily associated with
one-family detached, two-family, or multiple-family dwelling units.
      2.   Private parks owned and maintained by a homeowner’s association that
are part of an approved plat or condominium project, or that are owned and
maintained by the proprietor of the housing development .
      3.   Home occupations and home-based businesses , subject to the
provisions in §
2.06.
      4.   Pens and enclosures for household pets .
      5.   Private swimming pools , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection W.
      6.   Signs , subject to the provisions in
Article 7.00.
      7.   Off-street parking, including private garages , carports, and
community garages, subject to the provisions in
Article 4.00.
   C.   Special uses. The following uses may be permitted by the Township Board
, subject to the conditions specified for each use; review and approval of the
site plan by the Planning Commission and Township Board ; any special
conditions imposed by the Planning Commission or Township Board that are
necessary to fulfill the purposes of this Ordinance; and, the procedures and
requirements set forth in §
29.03.
      1.   An accessory apartment associated with a single-family dwelling ,
subject to the provisions in §
8.03, subsection A.
      2.    General hospitals , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection O.
      3.   Housing for the elderly.
      4.   Nursing homes and convalescent homes , subject to the provisions in
§
8.02, subsection S.
      5.   Publicly owned and operated parks, parkways, and recreation
facilities, institutional or community recreation centers, and non-profit swim
clubs , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection W.
      6.   Municipal buildings and uses that do not require outside storage of
materials or equipment.
      7.   Public, parochial, and other private elementary, intermediate, or
high schools licensed by the State of Michigan to offer courses in general
education.
      8.   Public or private colleges , universities and other such
institutions of higher learning, offering courses in general, technical, or
religious education, subject to the following standards:
         a.   Minimum site size: 40 acres.
         b.   Minimum building  setback : 80 feet.
      9.   Adult foster care large group homes and adult foster care congregate
facilities.
      10.   Religious institutions , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection X.
      11.   Public or private golf courses , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection N.
      12.   Group day care homes or child care center , subject to the
requirements in §
8.02, subsection Y.
      13.   Medical marijuana facilities , subject to the requirements in §§
2.02 and
8.02, subsection MM.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013; Ord. 55, passed 7-9- 2014; Ord. passed 2-8-2023)
§ 17.03 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   A.   Site plan review. Site plan review and approval is required for all
uses except detached one-family residential uses, in accordance with §
29.02.
   B.   Area, height, bulk , and placement regulations. 
      Buildings and uses in the Multiple-Family Residential District are
subject to the area, height, bulk , and placement requirements in
Article 28.00, Schedule of Regulations.
      The following chart summarizes the regulations in
Article 28.00, but the user is cautioned to refer to
Article 28.00 for more detailed information and explanatory notes.
Regulations
Regulations
Minimum Lot Area          See § 8.03(B)
Minimum Lot Width         200 ft.
Maximum Height            3 stories, 35 ft.
Maximum Building Coverage 25%
Minimum Front Setback     50 ft.
Minimum Side Setback      50 ft.
Minimum Rear Setback      50 ft.
Minimum Usable Floor Area See § 28.02, footnote P
 
   C.   Planned development. Planned development is permitted as a means to
achieve the basic intent of this district, in accordance with §
29.04.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
ARTICLE 18.00
AG-C, COMMERCIAL AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
§ 18.01 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is intended that developments in this District be designed to preserve
significant natural features and promote public health, safety, and welfare.
Preservation of open space , protection of flood prone areas, protection of
wetlands , woodlands, and groundwater recharge areas, and preservation of other
natural features is encouraged, consistent with state law. This District is
further established to achieve the following objectives:
   1.   To discourage the encroachment of urban and suburban services into
agricultural and rural portions of the township .
   2.   To create a stable environment for agricultural production.
   3.   To permit services and uses that are necessary to support agricultural
activities.
   4.   Encourage use of land that promotes public health, safety, and welfare.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 18.02 PERMITTED USES AND STRUCTURES.
   A.   Principal uses and structures. In all areas zoned AG-C, Commercial
Agricultural, no building shall be erected , used, or structurally altered, nor
shall the land or premises be used in whole or in part, except for one or more
of the following principal permitted uses :
      1.   Farms and other agricultural activities related to the definition of
“farm ” in §
1.03, subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection L, or the generally accepted agricultural and management
practices (GAAMPs), whichever is applicable.
      2.   Barns, silos, sheds, equipment storage and other farm buildings , as
defined in §
1.03.
      3.   One farm  dwelling per farm , which serves as the principal
residence of the owner, operator, or employee(s) of the farm .
      4.   Idle cropland, provided that such land is maintained so as to
prevent the erosion of soil.
      5.   Raising and growing of plants, trees, shrubs, and nursery stock,
including any buildings or structures used for such activities.
      6.   The growing, stripping, and removal of sod, provided that all
stripped land shall be reseeded by the fall of the year in which it was
stripped so as to prevent the erosion of soil by wind or water.
      7.   Forestry and forest management.
      8.   Riding arenas or boarding stables, subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection AA.
      9.   One roadside stand for the sale of agricultural products raised on
the farm , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection Z.
      10.   Home occupations and home-based businesses , subject to the
provisions in §
2.06.
      11.   Adult foster family homes , family day care homes, child foster
family homes , and child foster family group homes .
      12.   Housing for migrant farm laborers, subject to the requirements for
agricultural labor camps in Part 124 of the Michigan Environmental Health Code.
      13.   Retail sales of ornamental trees, shrubs, and nursery stock that is
grown on the premises.
      14.   Commercial livestock operations that are subject to compliance with
the GAAMPS standards.
      15.   “U-pick” agricultural operations, provided that sufficient parking
is provided.
      16.   The township may permit a second single-family dwelling unit on a
parcel used and occupied as a farm in addition to the principal dwelling unit
permitted in §
18.02(A), where the additional unit is for use by those engaged in the farm
operation, including owners/operators, partners, or laborers on the farm , and
their families, subject to the following conditions:
         a.   The applicant shall submit a plot plan that illustrates the
location of the proposed dwelling unit in relation to property lines and
existing buildings on the parcel . The proposed dwelling shall be set back a
sufficient distance from other buildings and property lines so that it could
eventually be split off on a separate parcel in conformance with the standards
in the Rural Residential District. If the dwelling is split off on a separate
parcel , the parent parcel must comply with all of the standards in the
Commercial Agricultural District.
         b.   In the event that the additional dwelling ceases to be used by
persons associated with the farm operation, then it shall be split off on a
separate parcel in conformance with the standards in the Rural Residential
District.
         c.   Only one such second dwelling unit shall be permitted on a parcel
. If such a dwelling is split off on a separate parcel , another dwelling unit
shall not be permitted on the parent parcel .
         d.   Proposals to place a second dwelling unit on a parcel shall be
subject to approval by the Planning Commission , who shall be responsible for
determining if the additional unit will be used by those engaged in the farm
operation.
      17.   Essential services , subject to the provisions in §
2.16.
      18.   Uses and structures accessory to the above, subject to the
provisions in §
2.03.
      19.   Temporary real estate auctions , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection LL.
      20.   Temporary general auctions , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection LL.
      21.   Major agricultural tourism uses, subject to the regulations in §
8.02, subsection OO.
   B.   Accessory uses and structures. The following uses and structures
accessory to principal uses and structures in the AG-SF District shall be
permitted, subject to the provisions in §
2.03:
      1.   Roof and building-mounted solar energy systems for individual use,
subject to the requirements in §
8.02 , subsection QQ.4.
   C.   Special uses.
      The following uses may be permitted by the Township Board , subject to
the conditions specified for each use; review and approval of the site plan by
the Planning Commission and Township Board ; any special conditions imposed by
the Planning Commission or Township Board that are necessary to fulfill the
purposes of this Ordinance; and, the procedures and requirements set forth in §
29.03.
      1.   Commercial agricultural service establishments whose principal
function is performing agricultural or horticultural services on a fee or
contract basis, including but not limited to:
         a.   Crop dusting, seeding, and spraying.
         b.   Farm equipment sales, service, and repair.
         c.   Veterinary clinics , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection DD.
         d.   Bulk feed, seed, or fertilizer sales, storage, or mixing.
         e.   Auction sales facilities, subject to the requirements in §
8.02, subsection LL.
      Special approval shall not be required for farms and agricultural
activities that are permitted principal uses and that provide one or more of
the services listed in this sub-item 1 to other farms on a fee or contract
basis, provided that such fee or contract services do not become the principal
use of the site.
      2.   Commercial egg production.
      3.   Game preserves.
      4.   Gun clubs .
      5.   Sand, gravel, or mineral extraction, subject to the provisions in §
2.13.
      6.   Commercial kennels, subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection P.
      7.   Municipal buildings and uses.
      8.   Public, parochial, and other private elementary, intermediate, or
high schools licensed by the State of Michigan to offer courses in general
education.
      9.   Adult foster care small group homes and group child care homes.
Group child care homes shall be subject to the regulations in §
8.02 , subsection Y.
      10.   Cemeteries , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection G.
      11.   Religious institutions , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection X.
      12.   Public or private golf courses , including country clubs and
driving ranges, subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection N.
      13.   Radio and television transmitting and receiving towers, subject to
the provisions in §
8.02, subsection V.
      14.   Oil and gas processing facilities, subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection T.
      15.   Confined animal feeding operations (CAFO), also known as feedlots .
      16.   Wireless communications facilities on monopoles, subject to the
standards and conditions in §
8.02(V).
      17.   Airports for public use, landing areas for other than personal use,
and related accessory uses , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection B.
      18.   Landscape contractor’s operation , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection FF.
      19.   Outdoor events, including outdoor events in the Williamstown
Township Park, subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection GG.
      20.   Nature centers , demonstration farms , and similar uses, subject to
the provisions in §
8.02, subsection HH.
      21.   Small wine makers and hard cider producers, subject to a minimum
lot size of four acres and subject to the regulations in §
8.02 , subsection JJ.
      22.   Permanent agricultural auctions , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection LL.
      23.   Medical marijuana facilities , subject to the requirements in §§
2.02 and
8.02, subsection MM.
      24.   Major agricultural tourism uses, subject to the regulations in §
8.02 , subsection OO.
      25.   Small distillers, subject to a minimum lot size of four acres and
subject to the regulations in §
8.02 , subsection OO.
      26.   Community solar facilities and utility grade solar facilities,
subject to the regulations in §
8.02 , subsection QQ.5.
      27.   Event barns, subject to the provisions in §
8.02 , subsection SS.
   D.   Option to permit a lot split for an existing dwelling . In addition to
conventional methods of land division permitted by this or other ordinances or
laws, every farm which contains a single-family dwelling at the time of
adoption of these regulations shall be allowed to split one lot from the main
farm acreage to create a new lot for the existing dwelling . This new lot shall
comply with the lot size requirements in this subsection C unless additional
land is needed to meet the setback requirements. The purpose of these standards
is to permit division and sale of lots for residential use while providing the
opportunity for continued farming or open space preservation.
      1.   Compliance with Subdivision Control Act. No lot split shall be
permitted where the split would be in violation of the lot split provisions in
the Subdivision Control Act (Michigan Public Act 288 of 1967, being M.C.L.A. §§
560.101 through 560.293, as amended).
      2.   Minimum lot dimensions. Lot splits permitted by this subsection
shall comply with the following dimensional standards:
         a.   Lot area. Lots created pursuant to the regulations in this
subsection shall be at least two acres and no larger than five acres in size,
plus-or-minus 5%, unless a larger lot area is required to accommodate a septic
system as required by the Ingham County Health Department.
         b.   Minimum lot width. Two hundred forty feet.
         c.   Minimum setbacks for principal and accessory buildings. As
specified for single-family lots in the RR District.
      3.   Septic system. Each lot shall contain one replacement drain field
approved by the Ingham County Health Department prior to issuance of a building
permit. The location of the field shall be illustrated on building plans
submitted to the Building Inspector. A building , structure , or impervious
surface shall not be placed or constructed over any active, proposed, or
replacement drain field area.
      4.   Conforming status of new lots . Both lots legally created using the
procedures outlined herein shall be considered conforming with respect to
minimum lot size.
   E.   Accessory special land uses . A landing area or airport may be
permitted in the AG-C District provided that such a use is accessory to
permitted principal uses and structures on the same parcel , and subject to the
provisions in §§
2.03 and 8.02(B), review and approval by the Planning Commission and Township
Board , and the procedures and requirements in §
29.03.
   F.   Option to permit lot splits for non-farm dwellings . In addition to
other methods of land division permitted by this or other ordinances or laws,
land division to create lots for non-farm dwellings shall be permitted by right
in the AG-C District, subject to the requirements in this subsection. The
purpose of these requirements is to permit division and sale of lots for
residential use while providing the opportunity for continued farming or open
space preservation.
      1.   Maximum number of lot splits . 
         The maximum number of lots that may be created shall be based on the
following formula (provided that minimum lot dimensions can be met):
   Total acreage of parcel divided by 10 = Maximum number of lots
         When the above calculation results in a fractional number, round down
to the nearest integer to determine the permitted number of lots .
      2.   Compliance with the Land Division Act. No parcel split shall be
permitted where the split would be in violation of the land division
requirements of the Land Division Act (Michigan Public Act 288 of 1967, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101 through 560.293, as amended).
      3.   Minimum lot dimensions.
 Option A: Frontage on Public Road Option B: Shared Driveway Option
                      Option A: Frontage on Public Option B: Shared Driveway
                      Road                         Option
Maximum Lot Area      2 acres, +/- 5%*             2 acres, +/- 5%*
Minimum Lot Area      40,000 sq. ft.               40,000 sq. ft.
Minimum Lot Width     200 feet                     120 feet
Minimum Frontage on a 200 feet                     200 feet**
Public Road
Front Setback         50 feet                      50 feet
Side Setback          30 feet                      30 feet
Rear Setback          40 feet                      40 feet
 
* A larger lot area may be permitted if required by the Ingham County Health
Department to accommodate a septic system.
**The Township Board , upon receiving a recommendation from the Planning
Commission , may waive the requirement for 200 feet of frontage on a public
road for no more than four lots served by a shared driveway upon finding that:
         a.   The proposal to create up to four lots lacking public road
frontage would be superior (compared to one with public road frontage) for one
or more of the following reasons:
            i.   It would maintain the township ’s rural character and image by
allowing houses in locations where they are all fully or substantially screened
from the public road .
            ii.   It would allow development on the parts of the parent parcel
that are best suited for development , because of suitability of soils for
septic systems and least disruption to sensitive environmental areas, such as
wetlands , floodplains , and woodlands.
            iii.   It would allow development that is compatible with
surrounding land use.
         b.   The shared driveway meets all of the requirements of the
following subsection 4.
         c.   The shared driveway would provide adequate emergency access.
Where the shared driveway is longer than 600 feet in length, then a circular
turnaround shall be provided at the end of the shared driveway with a minimum
radius of 60 feet.
      4.   Shared driveway option. Vehicular access to lots created pursuant to
this subsection E may be provided by a shared driveway , subject to the
following requirements:
         a.   A shared driveway may provide access to no more than four parcels
.
         b.   A shared driveway shall not exceed 1,320 feet in length.
         c.   The minimum width of a shared driveway shall be 18 feet.
         d.   Prior to issuance of a building permit for any lot served by a
shared driveway , proof shall be submitted that a driveway  easement has been
recorded and that an easement maintenance agreement has been executed and
recorded.
         e.   The driveway  easement shall provide for unrestricted access for
emergency and public vehicles and normal ingress and egress for property owners
served by the driveway , their families, guests, invitees, tradespeople, and
others traveling to or leaving properties served by the driveway .
         f.   The driveway maintenance agreement shall provide for ongoing
maintenance and a means of funding such maintenance.
         g.   Shared driveways shall comply with the requirements in §
2.10, subsection D. Such driveways shall provide sufficient horizontal and
vertical clearance to allow the free passage and maneuvering of fire apparatus,
subject to review by the Fire Chief. There shall be a minimum of 12 feet
vertical and 18 feet horizontal clearance.
      5.   Buffer zone. A buffer zone shall be required along lots which have
public road frontage, which shall be densely planted with trees and shrubs
(“densely planted,” for example, would be a double row of spruce trees, planted
15 feet on-center). The buffer zone shall occupy a commons area and shall not
occupy any portion of the frontage lots . For the purposes of this subsection,
a buffer zone is a strip of land having a minimum width of 50 feet, containing
a variety of trees and shrubs that achieve the following purposes:
         a.   Screens development from view from the road ; and
         b.   Maintains or enhances rural character. Prior to completion of the
lot split (s), the developer or property owner shall post a bond for the full
cost of the proposed landscaping plus installation to assure trees and shrubs
are properly planted in accordance with the plans. Plantings shall be
continuously maintained and dead or diseased plant material shall be replaced
in the same growing season that the dead or diseased condition is noted.
      6.   Development of the remainder of the parcel . 
         The development rights on the farmland or open space that is intended
to be preserved shall be conveyed to the township or to an approved open space
or agricultural preservation trust so that such land may be only used for
agriculture or left as open space in perpetuity. The legal instrument by which
the development rights are conveyed shall be subject to review and approval by
the Township Attorney.
         The ownership of the preserved land (minus the development rights) may
be retained by the property owner who initiates the land division, or the
ownership may be conveyed to the owners of the newly created lots , the open
space or agricultural preservation trust, or to another owner. If the permitted
number of lot splits is not completed all at once, then the conveyance may
provide for additional future splits, provided that the total number of splits
shall not exceed the maximum specified in sub-item 1.
      7.   Septic system. Each lot shall identify the location of one primary
and one replacement drain field approved by the Ingham County Health Department
prior to issuance of a building permit. The location of the septic fields shall
be shown on the building plans submitted to the Building Inspector. A building
, structure , or impervious surface (e.g., a driveway ) shall not be placed or
constructed over any active, proposed, or replacement septic drain field.
      8.   Conforming status of new lots . Lots legally created using the
procedures outlined herein shall be considered conforming with respect to lot
dimensional requirements.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013; Ord.55, passed 7-9-2014; Ord. 57, passed 4-8-2015; Ord.
passed 12-14-2022; Ord. passed 2-8-2023)
§ 18.03 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   A.   Site plan review. Site plan review and approval is required for all
uses except principal and accessory structures and uses, in accordance with §
29.02.
   B.   Area, height, bulk , and placement requirements. 
      Buildings and uses in the Commercial-Agricultural District are subject to
the area, height, bulk , and placement requirements in
Article 28.00, Schedule of Regulations.
      The following chart summarizes the regulations in
Article 28.00, but the user is cautioned to refer to
Article 28.00 for more detailed information and explanatory notes, and
exceptions.
Regulations
Regulations
Minimum Lot Area          40 acres***
Minimum Lot Width         330 ft.
Maximum Height            2 ½ stories, 35 ft.
Maximum Building Coverage 10%
Minimum Front Setback     50 ft.
Minimum Side Setback      50 ft.
Minimum Rear Setback      50 ft.
Minimum Usable Floor Area 900 sq. ft.
 
   ***Creation of lots or parcels that are less than 40 acres may be permitted
in the following instances:
         a.   When the lot or parcel that is less than 40 acres is an entire
quarter-quarter section or a half of a half of a quarter section; or
         b.   When the land division creating the new lot or parcel would
permit use of the land in accordance with the purposes of the Commercial
Agricultural district (see §
18.01) and with the township  Master Plan , and where the existing parent
parcel being divided is between 74 and 80 acres. In this instance, a lot or
parcel being created through land division may be as small as 35 acres.
   C.   Open space preservation option. The open space preservation option is
permitted in the AG-C District as a means of permitting residential use and
preserving open space and agricultural lands, subject to the provisions in §
8.03, subsection C.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
ARTICLE 19.00
OS-1, OFFICE SERVICE DISTRICT
§ 19.01 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   The intent of the OS-1, Office Service District is to accommodate various
types of administrative and professional offices, as well as certain personal
service businesses, which can serve as a transitional use between more
intensive land uses (such as commercial uses ) and less intensive residential
uses.
   This district is intended to prohibit those types of retail uses and other
activities that typically generate large volumes of traffic, traffic
congestion, parking problems, and other impacts that could negatively affect
the use of enjoyment of surrounding property.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 19.02 PERMITTED USES AND STRUCTURES.
   A.   Principal uses and structures . In all areas zoned OS-1, Office Service
District, no building shall be erected , used, or structurally altered, nor
shall the land or premises be used in whole or in part, except for one or more
of the following principal permitted uses :
      1.   Office  buildings for any of the following occupations:
administrative services, accounting, clerical, drafting, education, executive,
insurance, professional, real estate, research, sales agent, stock broker,
technical training, stenographic, or writing.
      2.   General office  buildings and uses, provided that goods are not
manufactured, exchanged, or sold on the premises.
      3.   Medical and dental clinics or offices.
      4.   Financial institutions, including banks, credit unions, and savings
and loan associations.
      5.   Offices of a municipality or other public entity, including public
utility  buildings , provided there is no outside storage of materials or
vehicles.
      6.   Electronic data processing and computer centers, including software
development.
      7.   Sales facilities, such as call centers and facilities dedicated to
internet sales.
      8.   Photographic studios.
      9.   Religious institutions , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection X.
      10.   Essential services , subject to the provisions in §
2.16.
      11.   Other uses similar to the above, subject to the provisions in this
article.
      12.   Uses and structures accessory to the above, subject to the
provisions in §
2.03.
      13.   Temporary real estate auctions , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection LL.
      14.   Temporary general auctions , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection LL.
   B.   Special uses. The following uses may be permitted by the Township Board
, subject to the conditions specified for each use; review and approval of the
site plan by the Planning Commission and Township Board ; any special
conditions imposed by the Planning Commission or Township Board that are
necessary to fulfill the purposes of this Ordinance; and, the procedures and
requirements set forth in §
29.03.
      1.   Business schools, vocational training schools, dance schools, music
and voice schools, and art studios.
      2.   Accessory retail uses customarily related to principal office uses
permitted in this section, including but not limited to a pharmacy or
apothecary shop, sales of home-health care equipment, optical services, barber
shop or beauty salon, or other retail or service business that is intended to
serve the occupants and patrons of the principal uses . Such uses may be
permitted only under the following conditions:
         a.   There shall be no exterior display or advertising; and
         b.   Any such use shall be an incidental in a building that
accommodates a principal office use. The floor space set aside for the interior
display and sale of merchandise shall occupy no more than 25% of the total
usable floor area of the building .
      3.   Mortuaries , funeral homes , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection M.
      4.   Personal service establishments, including barber shops and beauty
salons.
      5.   Standard restaurants when located within an office  building or as a
part of a multiple building complex.
      6.   Medical or dental laboratories, excluding the manufacturing of
pharmaceutical or other products for wholesale distribution.
      7.   Child care centers or day care centers .
      8.   Antiques malls located in a single building not exceeding 15,000
square feet in area devoted to the display and sale of antiques. All display
and sale of goods must be conducted entirely within the building .
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 19.03 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   A.   Required conditions. Unless otherwise noted, buildings and uses in the
OS-1 Office Service District shall comply with the following requirements:
      1.   All permitted retail or service establishments shall deal directly
with customers. Manufacturing of products for wholesale distribution off of the
premises is not permitted.
      2.   All business, services, or processing, except off-street parking and
loading, shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building . No displays
of merchandise or products or signs advertising such merchandise or products
shall be visible from the outside.
      3.   There shall be no outside storage of any goods, inventory, vehicles,
or equipment.
      4.   Commercially used or licensed vehicles with a rated capacity of one
ton or more shall not be parked on the site, except for a short duration during
normal deliveries.
   B.   Site plan review. Site plan review and approval is required for all new
construction and expansion of existing buildings , in accordance with §
29.02.
   C.   Area, height, bulk , and placement requirements. 
      Buildings and uses in the Office Service District are subject to the
area, height, bulk , and placement requirements in
Article 28.00, Schedule of Regulations.
      The following chart summarizes the regulations in
Article 28.00, but the user is cautioned to refer to
Article 28.00 for more detailed information and explanatory notes.
 
Regulations
Minimum Lot Area      20,000 sq. ft.
Minimum Lot Width     100 ft.
Maximum Height        2 stories, 35 ft.
Minimum Front Setback 45 ft.
Minimum Side Setback  10 ft.
Minimum Rear Setback  20 ft.
 
   D.   Planned development. Planned development is permitted as a means to
achieve the basic intent of this District, in accordance with the guidelines in
§
29.04.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
ARTICLE 20.00
B-1, LIMITED BUSINESS DISTRICT
§ 20.01 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   The intent of the B-1, Limited Business District is to meet the day-to-day
convenience shopping and service needs of persons residing in nearby
residential areas. Intensive commercial uses that generate large volumes of
traffic or that have other characteristics that tend to adversely affect the
quality of surrounding residential areas are not permitted in this District.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 20.02 PERMITTED USES AND STRUCTURES.
   A.   Principal uses and structures . In all areas zoned B-1, Limited
Business District, no building shall be erected , used, or structurally
altered, nor shall the land or premises be used in whole or in part, except for
one or more of the following principal permitted uses :
      1.   Retail businesses that supply commodities on the premises for
persons residing in nearby residential areas, such as groceries, meats, dairy
products, alcoholic beverages, baked goods, and other foods, drugs, dry goods,
notions, hardware, books, stationery and school supplies, records, video
cassette sales and rental, bicycles, flowers, hobby equipment, paints,
periodicals, shoes, sporting goods, sundry small household articles, and
tobacco products.
      2.   Establishments that perform services on the premises for persons
residing in nearby residential areas, such as beauty and barber shops; watch,
radio, television, clothing.
      3.   Office  buildings and uses, provided that goods are not
manufactured, exchanged, or sold on the premises.
      4.   Financial institutions, including banks, credit unions, and savings
and loan associations.
      5.   Laundry and dry cleaning customer outlets and similar operations.
      6.   Carry-out and standard restaurants , as defined in §
1.03.
      7.   Child care centers and day care centers .
      8.   Municipal buildings and uses, including post offices, provided there
is no outside storage.
      9.   Photographic studios.
      10.   Data processing and computer centers.
      11.   Essential services , subject to the provisions in §
2.16.
      12.   Wireless communications facilities on monopoles, subject to the
standards and conditions in §
8.02, subsection V.
      13.   Wineries , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection JJ.
      14.   Other uses similar to the above, subject to the provisions in this
article.
      15.   Temporary real estate auction , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection LL.
      16.   Temporary general auction , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection LL.
      17.   Uses and structures accessory to the above, subject to the
provisions in §
2.03.
      18.   Medical marijuana facilities , subject to the requirements in §§
8.02, subsection MM, and in
2.02.
      19.   Brewpub s, subject to the requirements in §
8.02, subsection NN.
   B.   Special uses. The following uses may be permitted by the Township Board
, subject to the conditions specified for each use; review and approval of the
site plan by the Planning Commission and Township Board ; any special
conditions imposed by the Planning Commission or Township Board that are
necessary to fulfill the purposes of this Ordinance; and, the procedures and
requirements set forth in §
29.03.
      1.   Utility and public service facilities and uses needed to serve the
immediate vicinity, including transformer stations, lift stations, and
switchboards, but excluding outside storage yards , subject to the provisions
in §
8.02, subsection CC.
      2.   Theaters , assembly halls, concert halls, or similar places of
assembly, private or public clubs , and lodge halls subject to the following
conditions:
         a.   All operations shall be conducted within a completely-enclosed
building .
         b.   All buildings shall be set back at least 100 feet from any
residential district or use.
      3.   Bars and lounges.
      4.   Mortuaries and funeral homes , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection M.
      5.   Wireless communications facilities on towers other than monopoles,
subject to the standards and conditions in §
8.02, subsection V.
      6.   Permanent on-line auctions , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection LL.
      7.   Microbreweries , subject to the requirements in §
8.02, subsection NN.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013; Ord. 55, passed 7-9-2014; Ord. 56, passed 8-13-2014)
§ 20.03 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   A.   Required conditions. Unless otherwise noted, buildings and uses in the
B-1 Limited Business District shall comply with the following requirements:
      1.   All such businesses shall be retail or service establishments
dealing directly with consumers. Manufacturing of products for wholesale
distribution off of the premises is not permitted.
      2.   All goods produced and services performed on the premises shall be
sold at retail on the premises where produced.
      3.   All business, servicing, or processing, except off-street parking or
loading, shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building .
      4.   There shall be no outside storage of goods, inventory, or equipment.
      5.   Commercially used or licensed vehicles used in the normal operation
of a permitted retail or service use on the site may be parked in the rear
only. This provision shall also apply to operable vehicles that are moved on
and off of the site on a regular basis.
      6.   Development in the B-1 District shall comply with the access and
service road requirements in §
2.10.
   B.   Site plan review. Site plan review and approval is required for all new
construction and expansion of existing buildings , in accordance with §
29.02.
   C.   Area, height, bulk , and placement requirements. 
      Buildings and uses in the Limited Business District are subject to the
area, height, bulk , and placement requirements in
Article 28.00, Schedule of Regulations.
      The following chart summarizes the regulations in
Article 28.00, but the user is cautioned to refer to
Article 28.00 for more detailed information and explanatory notes.
 
Regulations
Minimum Lot Area      40,000 sq. ft.
Minimum Lot Width     200 ft.
Maximum Height        2 stories, 35 ft.
Minimum Front Setback 45 ft.
Minimum Side Setback  20 ft.
Minimum Rear Setback  20 ft.
 
   D.   Planned development . Planned development is permitted as a means to
achieve the basic intent of this District, in accordance with the guidelines in
§
29.04.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
ARTICLE 21.00
B-2, COMMERCIAL CENTER DISTRICT
§ 21.01 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   A.   The intent of the B-2, Commercial Center District is to provide for
commercial development that offers a broad range of goods and services to meet
the convenience and comparison shopping needs of township residents. Because of
the variety of businesstypes permitted in the B-2 District, special attention
must be focused on site layout, building design, vehicular and pedestrian
circulation, and coordination of site features between adjoining uses.
Accordingly, Commercial Center developments should be:
   •   Compatible in design with adjacent commercial development ;
   •   Designed as part of a planned shopping center in coordination with
development on adjoining sites;
   •   Buffered from or located away from residential areas; and
   •   Served by a minor or principal arterial road .
   B.   The intent of the B-2 District is to allow certain state-licensed
residential facilities for adults, where compatibility with adjacent commercial
development can be achieved through site layout, building design, landscaping,
and other measures.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013; Ord. passed 12-9-2020)
§ 21.02 PERMITTED USES AND STRUCTURES.
   A.   Principal uses and structures . In all areas zoned B-2, Commercial
Center District, no building shall be erected , used, or structurally altered,
nor shall the land or premises be used in whole or in part, except for one or
more of the following principal permitted uses :
      1.   All principal uses permitted in the B-1, Limited Business District,
§
20.02, subsection A.
      2.   Veterinary clinics and hospitals , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection DD.
      3.   Business schools or colleges , vocational training schools, dance
schools, music and voice schools, and art studios.
      4.   Indoor recreation uses such as bowling establishments, gymnasiums ,
ice skating rinks, tennis clubs , roller skating rinks, court sports
facilities, and similar recreation facilities, subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection W.
      5.   Mortuaries and funeral homes , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection M.
      6.   Restaurants , taverns, bars/lounges, and other uses serving
alcoholic beverages, including catering and banquet halls, where the patrons
are served while seated within a building  occupied by such establishments, but
not drive-in  restaurants .
      7.   Outdoor seating for such restaurants may be permitted subject to
special land use review.
      8.   Offices, showrooms, or workshop of a plumber, electrician, building
contractor, upholsterer, caterer, exterminator, decorator, or similar trade,
subject to the following:
         a.   All services performed on the premises, including fabrication,
repair, cleaning, or other processing of goods, shall be sold at retail on the
premises where produced.
         b.   The ground floor premises facing upon and visible from any
abutting street shall be used only for entrances, offices, sales, and display.
         c.   There shall be no outside storage of materials or goods of any
kind.
      9.   Fitness centers.
      10.   Public transit waiting stations or park-and-ride lots.
      11.   Newspaper offices and print shops with minor printing facilities.
      12.   Crematoriums.
      13.   Wireless communications facilities on monopoles, subject to the
standards and conditions in §
8.02, subsection V.
      14.   Tattoo parlors.
      15.   Temporary real estate auctions , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection LL.
      16.   Temporary general auctions , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection LL.
      17.   Other uses similar to the above, subject to the provisions in this
article.
      18.   Medical marijuana facilities, subject to the requirements in §
8.02, subsection MM, and §
2.02.
      19.    Brewpub s, subject to the requirements in §
8.02, subsection NN.
      20.   Child care centers and day care centers .
      21.   Uses and structures accessory to the above, subject to the
provisions in §
2.03.
   B.   Accessory uses and structures . The following uses and structures
 accessory to principal uses and structures in the AG-SF District shall be
permitted, subject to the provisions in §
2.03 :
      1.   Roof- and building-mounted solar energy systems for individual use,
subject to the requirements in §
8.02, subsection QQ.4..
   C.      Special uses. The following uses may be permitted by the Township
Board , subject to the conditions specified for each use; review and approval
of the site plan by the Planning Commission and Township Board ; any special
conditions imposed by the Planning Commission or Township Board that are
necessary to fulfill the purposes of this Ordinance; and, the procedures and
requirements set forth in §
29.03.
      1.   Automobile filling and service stations and automobile repair
garages , including tire, battery, muffler, and rustproofing establishments and
quick oil change and lubrication stations, subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection D, and the following additional conditions:
         a.   In general, major repair, as defined in §
1.03, shall not be permitted in the B-2 District, except as provided for under
item 18, below.
         b.   The servicing and repair of vehicles shall be limited to those
which may be serviced during a normal workday.
         c.   Outside parking of vehicles overnight is prohibited except for
the operable vehicles of the employees working at the station and up to two
service vehicles used by the service station.
         d.   There shall be no outside display of parts or products.
      2.   Automobile wash or car wash establishments , subject to the
provisions in §
8.02, subsection E.
      3.   New and used automobile , truck and tractor, boat, mobile home ,
recreational vehicle and trailer sales, subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection C.
      4.   Arcades, when developed as an accessory use in a larger indoor
recreation facility, a restaurant or bar, or a club or lodge, subject to the
provisions in §
8.02, subsection W.
      5.   Hotels and motels , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection R.
      6.   Mini-warehouses , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection Q.
      7.   Open-air display and sales of nursery plants and materials ; lawn
furniture; playground equipment and swimming pools ; garden supplies; and
similar open-air displays, subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection U.
      8.   Outdoor recreation facilities, such as a children’s amusement park
and par-3 golf courses , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection W.
      9.   Drive-in, drive-through, and fast-food restaurants , subject to the
provisions in §
8.02, subsection K.
      10.   Drive-in establishments (other than drive-in restaurants ), subject
to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection J.
      11.   Adult book or supply stores, adult motion picture theaters , adult
live stage performing theaters , adult motion picture arcades, adult motels ,
adult model studios, group “A” cabarets, massage parlors or establishments, and
similar adult uses, subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection A.
      12.   Lumber yards or building material sales establishments that have
storage in partially open structures , subject to the following conditions:
         a.   The ground floor premises facing upon and visible from any
abutting street shall be used only for entrances, offices, sales, or display.
         b.   Open storage structures shall be enclosed on three sides and
shall have a roof.
         c.   The entire site, exclusive of access drives, shall be enclosed
with a six-foot high chain link fence or masonry wall, constructed in
accordance with
Article 6.00.
      13.   Recycling collection stations .
      14.   Utility and public service facilities and uses needed to serve the
immediate vicinity, including transformer stations, lift stations, and
switchboards, but excluding outside storage yards , subject to the provisions
in §
8.02, subsection CC.
      15.   Theaters , assembly halls, concert halls or similar places of
assembly, private or public clubs , and lodge halls subject to the following
conditions:
         a.   All operations shall be conducted within a completely-enclosed
building .
         b.   All buildings shall be set back at least 100 feet from any
residential district or use.
      16.   Owner-occupied residential uses in combination with a principal
permitted use , subject to the following requirements:
         a.   Residential uses shall not occupy more than 50% of the gross
floor area of the building .
         b.   Residential uses shall be permitted only on upper levels or to
the rear of the principal business use in the building .
         c.   Off-street parking shall be provided pursuant to the requirements
in
Article 4.00, except that parking for the residential use shall be located
behind the building .
         d.   A minimum of 300 square feet of usable outdoor open space shall
be reserved for the exclusive use of each such residential unit. The open space
shall not be located within a required setback .
      17.   Wireless communications facilities on towers other than monopoles,
subject to the standards and conditions in §
8.02, subsection V.
      18.   Automobile body, frame, and fender straightening, and similar
collision repair service, subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection II, and the following additional conditions:
         a.   Hours of operation shall be limited to between 7:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m.
         b.   Service shall be limited to cars, vans, and small trucks.
      19.   Permanent on-line auctions , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection LL.
      20.   Permanent auction house, subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection LL.
      21.   Permanent general purpose auctions , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection LL.
      22.   Microbreweries , subject to the requirements in §
8.02, subsection NN.
      23.   State-licensed adult foster care small group homes .
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013; Ord. 55, passed 7-9- 2014; Ord. 56, passed 8-13-2014;
Ord. passed 12-9-2020)
§ 21.03 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   A.   Required conditions. Unless otherwise noted, buildings and uses in the
B-2 Commercial Center District shall comply with the following requirements:
      1.   All such businesses shall be retail or service establishments
dealing directly with consumers. Manufacturing of products for wholesale
distribution off of the premises is not permitted.
      2.   All goods produced and services performed on the premises shall be
sold at retail on the premises where produced.
      3.   All business, servicing, or processing, except off-street parking or
loading, shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building .
      4.   There shall be no outside storage of goods, inventory, or equipment.
      5.   Commercially used or licensed vehicles used in the normal operation
of a permitted retail or service use on the site may be parked in the rear
only. This provision shall also apply to operable vehicles that are moved on
and off of the site on a regular basis.
      6.   Development in the B-2 District shall comply with the access and
service road requirements in §
2.10.
   B.   Site plan review. Site plan review and approval is required for all new
construction and expansion of existing buildings , in accordance with §
29.02.
   C.   Area, height, bulk , and placement requirements. Buildings and uses in
the Commercial Center District are subject to the area, height, bulk , and
placement requirements in
Article 28.00, Schedule of Regulations.
   The following chart summarizes the regulations in
Article 28.00, but the user is cautioned to refer to
Article 28.00 for more detailed information and explanatory notes.
 
Regulations
Minimum Lot Area      40,000 sq. ft.
Minimum Lot Width     200 ft.
Maximum Height        2 stories, 35 ft.
Minimum Front Setback 45 ft.
Minimum Side Setback  20 ft.
Minimum Rear Setback  20 ft.
 
   D.   Planned development . Planned development is permitted as a means to
achieve the basic intent of this District, in accordance with the guidelines in
§
29.04.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
ARTICLE 22.00
I-1, LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
§ 22.01 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   The intent of the I-1, Light Industrial District is to provide locations for
planned industrial development , including development within planned
industrial park subdivisions and on independent parcels . It is intended that
permitted activities or operations produce no external impacts that are
detrimental in any way to other uses in the district or to properties in
adjoining districts. Permitted uses should be compatible with nearby
residential or commercial uses . Accordingly, permitted manufacturing,
distribution, warehousing, and light industrial uses permitted in this district
should be fully contained within well-designed buildings on amply-landscaped
sites, with adequate off-street parking and loading areas.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 22.02 PERMITTED USES AND STRUCTURES.
   A.   Principal uses and structures . In all areas zoned I-1, Light
Industrial District, no building shall be erected , used, or structurally
altered, nor shall the land or premises be used in whole or in part, except for
one or more of the following principal permitted uses :
      1.   Any use charged with the principal function of basic research,
design, and pilot or experimental product development when conducted within a
completely enclosed building .
      2.   Greenhouses and plant nurseries.
      3.   Essential services , subject to the provisions in §
2.16.
      4.   Wireless communications facilities on monopoles, subject to the
standards and conditions in §
8.02, subsection V.
      5.    Wineries , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection JJ. Uses and structures accessory to the above, subject to the
provisions in §
2.03.
      6.   Temporary real estate auctions , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection LL.
      7.   Temporary general auctions , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection LL.
      8.   Medical marijuana facilities , subject to the requirements in §§
8.02, subsection MM, and
2.02.
      9.   Small distillers, subject to the regulations in §
8.02, subsection PP.
      10.   Data processing and computer centers, including electronic data
processing and computer equipment service establishments.
   B.   Special land uses . The following uses may be permitted by the Township
Board , subject to the conditions specified for each use; review and approval
of the site plan by the Planning Commission and Township Board ; any special
conditions imposed by the Planning Commission or Township Board that are
necessary to fulfill the purposes of this Ordinance; and, the procedures and
requirements set forth in §
29.03.
      1.   The manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging, treatment, or
fabrication of such products as: bakery goods, candy, ceramics, cosmetics,
clothing, jewelry, instruments, neon or electric signs , optical goods,
pharmaceuticals, toiletries, food products (except fish, sauerkraut, vinegar,
yeast, rendering or refining of fats and oils, and similar food products
involving the creation of odors or other offensive impacts), hardware, and
cutlery.
      2.   The manufacturing, compounding, assembling, or treatment of articles
or goods from the following previously prepared materials: bone, cellophane,
canvas, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, fiber, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather,
paper, plastics, precious or semi-precious metals or stones, shell, textiles,
tobacco, yarns, sheet metal, wax, wire, and wood.
      3.   The manufacture of pottery and figurines or other similar ceramic
products using only previously pulverized clay, and kilns fired only by
electricity or gas.
      4.   The manufacture or assembly of musical instruments, toys, novelties,
sporting goods, photographic equipment, and metal or rubber stamps, or other
small molded rubber products.
      5.   The manufacture of light sheet metal products, including heating and
ventilating equipment, cornices, eaves, and similar products.
      6.   Metal polishing and buffing, but not including metal plating.
      7.   Laboratories involved in basic research, experiment, design,
testing, or prototype product development .
      8.   The manufacturing or assembly of electrical appliances, electronic
instruments and devices, radios and phonographs.
      9.   Manufacturing and repair of electric or neon signs .
      10.   Printing, lithography, blueprinting, and similar uses.
      11.   Warehousing and wholesale activities.
      12.   Tool, die, gauge, and machine shops.
      13.   Lumber yards or building material sales establishments, which may
have storage in partially open structures , subject to the following
conditions:
         a.   The ground floor premises facing upon and visible from any
abutting street shall be used only for entrances, offices, sales, or display.
         b.    Open storage structures shall be enclosed on three sides and
shall have a roof.
         c.   The entire site, exclusive of access drives, shall be enclosed
with a six-foot high chain link fence or masonry wall, constructed in
accordance with
Article 6.00.
         d.   A landscaped greenbelt with a minimum width of 20 feet shall be
required adjacent to any street , in conformance with §
5.02, subsection D.
      14.   Central dry cleaning plants and laundries, provided that such
plants do not deal directly with the customer at retail.
      15.   Railroad classification yard and related facilities, including rail
car storage, marshaling, switching and transfer facilities; facilities for
maintaining railroad cars; tool and equipment storage buildings ; radio
communication towers; transmission towers; and crew quarters.
      16.   Construction equipment and related equipment sales, leasing, and
storage, subject to the following conditions:
         a.   Where feasible, equipment shall be stored inside. Open storage
structures may be permitted by the Planning Commission , provided that such
structures are enclosed on three sides and have a roof.
         b.   Storage yards shall be screened from any abutting public or
private road in accordance with §
5.02, subsection E.
      17.   Contractor’s storage yards and landscaping contractor’s operations
, provided that such yards are completely enclosed within a masonry wall or
screening, that is a minimum of five feet in height but may be required to be
up to eight feet in height, in accordance with §
5.02, subsection E. All such uses shall comply with requirements for outside
storage in §
22.03, subsection A.
      18.   Public utility or municipal service buildings , including electric
or gas service buildings and yards , telephone exchange buildings , electric
transformer stations, gas-regulator stations, water treatment plants and
reservoirs, and sewage treatment plants.
      19.   Oil and gas processing facilities, subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection T.
      20.   Recycling collection stations and centers .
      21.   Automobile repair garages , including minor and major repair,
subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection D and provided that all operations are carried on within a
completely enclosed building .
      22.   Radio and television transmitting and receiving towers, subject to
the provisions in §
8.02, subsection V.
      23.   Mini-warehouses , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection Q.
      24.   Commercial kennels and/or veterinary clinics , subject to the
provisions in §
8.02, subsection P and DD.
      25.   Retail uses which are typically industrial-like in character
because of their outdoor storage requirements or the nature of their
operations, including but not necessarily limited to lumber yards , building
material outlets, boat sales, agricultural implement dealers, big box retailers
(such as warehouse stores and similar stores typically ranging in size from
50,000-300,000 sq. ft. in floor area) and so forth.
      26.   Crematoriums.
      27.   Other research or light manufacturing uses similar to the above.
      28.   Limited office and retail operations may be permitted in the I-
1 district, subject to the following requirements:
         a.   Principal and special land uses and structures permitted in the
B-2, Commercial Center District, may be permitted in the I-1 District.
         b.   Retail operations shall occupy no more than 25% of the total
floor area of the business.
         c.   The type and quantity of traffic generated by the office and
retail sales operations shall be compatible with permitted industrial uses in
the I-1 District.
         d.   Adequate parking shall be provided for the office and retail
sales operations, as specified in
Article 4.00.
         e.   In addition to the office and retail sales permitted in
accordance with items a through e, an additional 5% of the total floor area of
the business may be occupied by retail or service uses that are intended to
serve the employees and visitors of the principal industrial use. Such retail
and service uses may include: convenience stores , drug stores and other retail
uses that are intended to serve the convenience shopping needs of employees and
visitors; personal service uses, such as a dry cleaners or barber shop;
restaurants or cafeterias; and, financial institutions, such as a bank or
credit union.
      29.   Wireless communications facilities on towers other than monopoles,
subject to the standards and conditions in §
8.02, subsection V.
      30.   Permanent on-line auctions , permanent auction houses, permanent
vehicle auctions , and permanent general purpose auctions , all of which are
subject to §
8.02, subsection LL.
      31.   Uses and structures accessory to the above, subject to the
provisions in §
2.03. Accessory office and sales operations may be permitted where such
activities are clearly incidental to the principal industrial use.
      32.   Other uses similar to the above, subject to the provisions in this
article.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013; Ord. 55, passed 7-9- 2014; Ord. passed 2-13-2019)
§ 22.03 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   A.   Required conditions. Except as otherwise noted, buildings and uses in
the Light Industrial District shall comply with the following requirements:
      1.   All manufacturing, compounding, assembling, processing, packaging,
or other industrial or business activity shall comply with the performance
standards set forth in
Article 9.00.
      2.   All manufacturing, compounding, assembling, processing, packaging,
or other industrial or business activity shall be conducted within a completely
enclosed building , except as otherwise specified.
      3.   Where applicable, machinery shall comply with the standards in §
8.02, subsection BB.
      4.   Outside storage may be permitted, subject to the following
conditions:
         a.   Outside storage areas shall be located no closer than 150 feet to
any street  right-of-way line and no closer than 20 feet to all other property
lines .
         b.   Outside storage areas shall be located no closer than 300 feet to
any residential district.
         c.   Outside storage areas which have the potential to be visible from
a public or private road or which abut a residential or commercial district
shall be screened by a wall or fence , constructed in accordance with
Article 6.00.
         d.   No materials shall be stored above eight feet in height.
         e.   Proper access to all parts of the storage areas shall be provided
for fire and emergency vehicles.
   B.   Site plan review. Site plan review and approval is required for all new
construction and expansion of existing buildings , in accordance with §
29.02.
   C.   Area, height, bulk , and placement requirements. 
      Buildings and uses in the Light Industrial District are subject to the
area, height, bulk , and placement requirements in
Article 28.00, Schedule of Regulations.
      The following chart summarizes the regulations in
Article 28.00, but the user is cautioned to refer to
Article 28.00 for more detailed information and explanatory notes.
 
Regulations
Minimum Lot Area      90,000 sq. ft.
Minimum Lot Width     300 ft.
Maximum Height        2 stories, 40 ft.
Minimum Front Setback 75 ft.
Minimum Side Setback  40 ft.
Minimum Rear Setback  40 ft.
 
   D.   Planned development . Planned development is permitted as a means to
achieve the basic intent of this district, in accordance with the guidelines in
§
29.04.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
ARTICLE 23.00
RESERVED
ARTICLE 24.00
GD, GREEN ZONE PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
§ 24.01 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   The Green Zone Planned Development District (the “Green Zone”) is a diverse
mixed use zoning district created to guide development of a portion of the
Grand River corridor. Historically, land along Grand River Road, from
approximately Zimmer Road to Meridian Road, has been used predominantly for
agriculture. Historically, when agricultural uses cease, land transitions to
rural open space . This transition provides opportunities for future
development . By creating the Green Zone, the township seeks more sustainable
development than might be achieved under conventional zoning. Such development
would be characterized by, for example, conservation of natural areas through
compact design; preservation and use of native vegetation in landscaping ;
permeable paving; clearing and grading to minimize site disturbance; more
narrow driving lanes; integrating bio-retention swales in parking lots, and
similar measures. The regulations and standards that follow are intended to
further the principles of sustainable development as applied to the Grand River
corridor, with the overall goal of providing a quality living and working
environment for residents and users of the district.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 24.02 BOUNDARIES IN WHICH THE GREEN ZONE MAY BE USED.
   The boundaries within which the Green Zone may be used shall be established
on the Official Zoning Map. The boundaries may be amended according to the
procedures set forth in §
29.06, Amendments.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 24.03 ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA.
   An applicant who develops under the Green Zone standards shall first
demonstrate that the following criteria will be met:
   A.   Recognizable benefits. The development shall result in a recognizable
and substantial benefit to the ultimate users of the project and to the
community, with the result being a higher quality of development than could be
achieved under conventional zoning.
   B.   Compliance with the green zone principles. The development shall comply
with the Green Zone principles, as summarized in the statement of purpose and
described further herein.
   C.   Minimum size. 
      The minimum size of a nonresidential or mixed use development  parcel in
the Green Zone shall be 20 acres of contiguous, developable land. However, the
Township Board , upon recommendation from the Planning Commission , may permit
a smaller parcel if: 1) The project has unique characteristics or benefits;
and/or 2) The parcel in question has unique characteristics that significantly
impact development , such as unusual topography, tree stands, wetlands , poor
soil conditions on portions of the parcel , water courses, unusual shape or
proportions, or utility easements that cross the parcel .
      A parcel in existence on the date of adoption of the Green Zone Planned
Development District, that is less than 20 acres in size, may be developed in
accordance with the zoning in place prior to being zoned Green Zone. However,
if the parcel is combined with one or more other parcels so that the total size
exceeds 20 acres, then the new larger parcel shall be subject to the Green Zone
regulations.
   D.   Compatibility with the Master Plan . A proposed Green Zone development
shall not have an adverse impact upon the Master Plan for the township .
   E.   Preservation of natural features. The proposed development shall
preserve distinctive natural features on the site to the maximum extent
feasible, such as, but not limited to: woodlands, wetlands , rolling
topography, and natural drainage courses.
   F.   Use of public services. The type and density of the proposed
development shall not result in an unreasonable increase in the use of public
services (such a police and fire protection), public facilities, and utilities.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 24.04 PERMITTED USES AND STRUCTURES.
   It is intended that the Green Zone be a lively, pedestrian-friendly mixed
use district. This can be accomplished with the proper mix of uses, in
combination with quality urban design. With this in mind, the township seeks
uses that:
   1)   Are compliant with the Green Zone principles as expressed herein;
   2)   Are compliant with the use and dimensional regulations set forth
herein; and
   3)   Are compatible with each other and with surrounding development .
   In addition, it is essential that uses from each development , in
combination with uses from surrounding developments , contribute to the sense
of liveliness and vibrancy that is desired in this District.
   If a proposal contains uses that do not satisfy the criteria listed above,
the proposal shall be subject to denial.
   The following uses and structures are permitted in the Green Zone, subject
to the criteria and provisions noted above:
   1.   Research and technology service businesses, including the following:
      a.   Architectural, engineering, and related services, as described in
the North American Industrial Classification System (NAIAS) under heading 5413.
      b.   Computer systems design and related services (NAIAS heading 5415).
      c.   Management, scientific, and technical consulting services (NAIAS
heading 5416).
      d.   Scientific research and development services (NAIAS heading 5417).
   2.   Any use charged with the principal function of basic research, design,
and pilot or experimental product development , when conducted within a
completely enclosed building .
   3.   Colleges , universities , corporate training facilities, and other
educational institutions.
   4.   Residential development , including:
      a.   Single-family attached and detached buildings .
      b.   Two-family dwellings .
      c.   State licensed residential facilities .
         i.   Providing care for up to six individuals.
         ii.   Providing care for seven or more individuals, subject to the
requirements in §
8.02, subsection Y.
      d.   Group day care homes , subject to the requirements in §
8.02, subsection Y.
      e.   Senior housing , subject to the requirements in §
8.03, subsection E.
   5.   Public transit stations and park and ride lots.
   6.   Public or private parks and recreation facilities, subject to the
requirements in §
8.02, subsection W.
   7.   Religious institutions , subject to the requirements in §
8.02, subsection X.
   8.   Public or private cultural facilities and museums.
   9.   Private parks owned and maintained by a homeowner’s association in a
subdivision or condominium  development .
   10.   Community recreation centers and non-profit swim clubs , subject to
the requirements in §
8.02, subsection W.
   11.   General or specialized farming and related activities, subject to the
requirements in §
8.02, subsection L, provided that on no farm shall the number of animal unit
equivalents exceed 49.
   12.   Uses and structures incidental to and customarily associated with
single- and two-family dwellings , including:
      a.   Pens and enclosures for household pets .
      b.   Home occupations and home-based businesses , subject to the
requirements in §
2.06.
      c.   Private swimming pools , subject to the requirements in §
8.02, subsection W.
      d.   One accessory apartment per single family detached dwelling unit ,
subject to the requirements in §
8.03, subsection A.
      e.   Off-street parking, including private garages .
      f.   On-site wind energy systems , subject to the requirements in §
8.02, subsection KK.
   13.   Commercial uses , when part of mixed use development , provided that:
      1)   The net usable floor area of each commercial establishment does not
exceed 5,000 square feet;
      2)   The total of all commercial uses does not comprise more than one-
third of the total area of the development ; and
      3)   Mixed use development containing commercial uses shall be located
only on parcels that front on Grand River Road. Permitted commercial uses
include, but are not necessarily limited to the following:
         a.   Food stores.
         b.   Drug stores (without drive-through).
         c.   Carry out and standard restaurants (without drive-through).
         d.   Personal care services, such as hair salons, barbershops, nail
salons, etc.
         e.   Medical, dental, or veterinary clinics .
         f.   Personal fitness centers .
         g.   Financial institutions (without drive-through).
         h.   Legal, accounting, and real estate service offices.
         i.   Child care centers .
         j.    Brewpub s, subject to the requirements in §
8.02, subsection NN.
         k.   Microbreweries capable of producing no more than 5,000 barrels of
beer per year, subject to the requirements in §
8.02, subsection NN.
   14.   Essential services , subject to the requirements in §
2.16.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013; Ord. 56, passed 8-13-2014)
§ 24.05 PROHIBITED USES AND STRUCTURES.
   The following uses are prohibited in the Green Zone because they would not
be consistent with the principles of Green Zone development , as expressed
herein:
   1.   Manufacturing, except for the following special land uses :
      a.   Prototype development that is accessory to permitted research or
technology services.
      b.   Low impact manufacturing operations. Unlike traditional mass or
batch manufacturing, low impact manufacturing is characterized by:
         i.   Demonstrated efforts to use less non-renewable resources.
         ii.   Innovative, advanced production processes.
         iii.   Manufacturing best practices.
         iv.   No toxic waste .
         v.   Implementation of the principles of Kaizen1 for continuous
improvement.
         vi.   Replanting or protecting existing vegetation.
         vii.   Reducing impervious surfaces , such as roads , parking lots,
and roof tops.
         viii.   Using bio-retention, pervious pavement, and other small-scale
storm water controls.
   2.   Automobile oriented uses, including:
      a.   Automobile repair garage .
      b.   Automobile service station , filling station , or gas station .
      c.   New or used automobile dealership .
      d.   Drive-in and drive-through establishments .
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
___________________
1 Kaizen is Japanese for “improvement” or “change for the “better.” It refers
to a philosophy or practices that focus on continuous improvement of processes
in manufacturing, engineering, supporting businesses processes, and management.
§ 24.06 PROJECT DESIGN REQUIREMENTS.
   Proposed Green Zone developments shall comply with the following project
design requirements:
   A.   Location. A Green Zone development may be proposed, and will only be
approved, if it is located within the Green Zone boundaries as established on
the Official Zoning Map of the township . The Green Zone boundaries may be
expanded through rezoning of parcels contiguous to land that is currently zoned
Green Zone.
   B.   Planned development review. Proposals in the Green Zone are subject to
the Planned Development review procedures in §
29.04 of the Zoning Ordinance. The standards herein supersede the planned
development standards in
Article 25.00 for the purpose of Green Zone development .
   C.   Residential density . Green Zone developments shall comply with the
following residential densities :
      1.   One-family attached. See §
8.03(B) of the Zoning Ordinance (formula works out to approximately 12 two-
bedroom homes per acre).
      2.   One-family detached. Minimum lot area is 40,000 sq. ft.
      3.   Two-family units. Minimum lot area is 20,000 sq. ft.
      4.   An increase in density may be permitted by the Township Board , upon
recommendation from the Planning Commission , upon finding that the increase is
justified because certain characteristics of the proposed development would
result in a substantial benefit to the users and the community as a whole.
Among the characteristics that the Planning Commission and Township Board may
consider in making this determination are the following:
         a.   The proposed Green Zone development exhibits extraordinary design
excellence, examples of which include, but are not limited to innovative energy
efficient design; provision of more open space than required; added
improvements to assure vehicular and pedestrian safety; and added landscaping
or other site features to assure long-term aesthetically pleasing appearance.
         b.   The proposed arrangement of uses and residential densities within
the planned development enhances the compatibility of the proposed development
existing or planned land use on adjacent land.
         c.   The planned development would contain environmentally-conscious
public facilities to enhance the long term viability of the project and reduce
its impact on natural resources .
         d.   The planned development would address a societal need, such as
provide affordable or senior housing .
   D.   Parking. Developments in the Green Zone shall comply with the
requirements in
Article 4.00 of the Zoning Ordinance, except as follows:
      1.   Alternatives to conventional storm water drainage ponds shall be
incorporated into the parking lot design. Such alternatives may include, but
are not limited to, use of pervious pavement, bio-swales, and rain gardens.
      2.   Collective use of off-street parking, whereby two or more uses
having different hours of operation share the same parking so as to reduce the
total number of required spaces, is required where feasible.
      3.   The size of any single off-street parking lot shall not exceed three
acres.
      4.   On-street parking is permitted on interior roads in the Green Zone,
subject to Ingham County Road Commission approval (if the roads are public).
All roads shall meet Ingham County Road Commission standards.
   E.   Landscaping . Developments in the Green Zone shall comply with the
requirements in
Article 5.00 of the Zoning Ordinance, except as follows:
      1.   Native plants. A minimum of 50% of new landscaping shall consist of
plant material that is native to Michigan, so as to minimize the need for
irrigation and chemical applications. Appropriate native species shall be based
on a list kept on file at the Township Hall, which may be updated from time to
time.
      2.   Treatment of existing plant material. The existing natural landscape
shall be left intact, except where conversion into a more manicured landscape
treatment is required as part of an integral landscape design plan. Existing
trees in good condition and with straight trunks, that are at least two and
one-half inches DBH (diameter at breast height, or trunk caliper measured four
and one-half feet from the ground), may be counted on a tree-for-tree basis
toward any landscaping requirements in the Green Zone. However, undesirable
trees listed in §
5.04, subsection C.9, are not eligible for the tree-for-tree allowance.
      3.   Landscaping adjacent to Grand River Road. The landscape within the
viewshed along Grand River Road shall consist of native and other plants in an
informal setting so as to give the appearance of a naturally-occurring
landscape. However, a more formal landscape is acceptable at the Grand River
Road entrance to a development and along the driveway or road leading to the
development .
      4.   Screening. Landscaping shall be used to screen nonresidential uses
and loading areas from residentially-zoned or used land. Such screening shall
comply with the requirements in §
5.02, subsection B. In the Green Zone, substitution of wall or fence in lieu of
landscaping is not permitted.
      5.   Parking lot landscaping. Off-street parking areas containing greater
than ten spaces shall comply with the requirements for parking lot landscaping
in §
5.02, subsection F, except as follows:
         a.   Deciduous shade trees on the interior of or surrounding a parking
lot shall be distributed so that no parking space is more than 50 feet from the
base of a tree.
         b.   Parking lot landscaping shall incorporate bio-retention swales or
rain gardens to facilitate cleansing and infiltration of storm water.
      6.   Parks and plazas. The overall goal of the Green Zone is to enhance
the quality of life for residents and users of the district and community. One
way to help accomplish this is by providing outdoor gathering spaces.
Accordingly, provision of parks and/or plazas in conjunction with new
development is encouraged.
      7.   Streetscape. A streetscape plan and cross-section shall be presented
for frontage roads in conjunction with new development . The plan shall show
locations of deciduous trees, lighting, benches, and other streetscape
elements. The plan shall be coordinated with adjoining streetscape designs so
as to achieve continuity.
   F.   Storm water management. Storm water controls shall be subject to review
by the Ingham County Drain Commissioner’s office . Where feasible, storm water
design shall conform to the following design standards:
      1.   Existing drainage patterns. Existing drainage patterns on the site
shall be maintained.
      2.   Drainage ponds. Retention and detention ponds, if required, shall
resemble natural ponds, with gradual slopes and landscaping to enhance local
wildlife.
   G.   Signs . Signs shall conform to the requirements in
Article 7.00, except as follows:
      1.   The maximum wall and freestanding sign area for nonresidential
businesses in the Green Zone is 72 square feet (rather than 48 square feet
specified in §
7.08, subsections D and E).
      2.   In the interest of saving energy, sign lighting shall be shut off no
later than midnight each night.
   H.   Green building criteria. 
      1.   Nonresidential development. All new nonresidential and mixed use
construction in the Green Zone shall meet the criteria for green building
certification through the U. S. Green Building Council’s LEED (Leadership in
Energy and Environmental Design) certification system. A completed
certification checklist shall be provided to the township with the site plan
review submission.
      2.   Residential development. Compliance with green building
certification (LEED-H or LEED-ND) is encouraged for all residential-only
development .
   I.   Non-motorized transportation. 
      1.   Grand River path. New development with frontage on Grand River Road
shall provide a ten-foot wide paved path in the right-of-way , approximately
one foot from the right-of-way line, unless conditions dictate another setback
. The path shall be subject to township and Michigan Department of
Transportation standards.
      2.   Red Cedar River path. New development with frontage on the Red Cedar
River shall provide an eight-foot wide path and recorded path easement along
the river, in accordance with township plans and standards.
      3.   Sidewalks. Concrete sidewalks with a minimum width of six feet shall
be provided on all interior roads within nonresidential developments .
Sidewalks shall provide a direct pedestrian connection from the street to the
front entrance of the building .
   J.   Public transportation review. All new developments shall be designed to
accommodate public transportation, by providing, where appropriate, park-and-
ride lots, bus stops and shelters, and other accommodations for public
transportation. The site plan for any new development shall be submitted to the
Capital Area Transportation Authority (CATA) for comment prior to site plan
review.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 24.07 AREA, HEIGHT, BULK, AND PLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   Proposed Green Zone developments shall comply with the following area,
height, bulk , and placement requirements:
   A.   Summary table. The following table is for reference only; the text in
this section provides additional guidance and shall control in the event of a
discrepancy.
 Single Family Detached Nonresidential and Mixed Use
                    Single Family     Nonresidential and Mixed Use
                    Detached
Minimum Lot Area    40,000 sq. ft.    20 acres
Minimum Lot Width   120 ft.           660 ft.
Minimum Usable      1,200 sq. ft.     20,000 sq. ft.
Floor Area per Unit
Maximum Lot         20%               Mixed Use: 25%       Nonresidential: 30%
Coverage
Grand River Ave.    350 ft. or 40% of 350 ft. or 40% of
Setback/Viewshed    lot depth,        lot depth, whichever
                    whichever is less is less
Front Setback -     30 ft.            30 ft.
Internal Streets
Side Setback        20 ft.            20 ft.
Rear Setback       35 ft.            35 ft.
Red Cedar River     50 ft. from top of bank, unless there is a path along the
Setback            river, in which case a 40-foot setback shall be measured
                    from the edge of the path.
 
   B.   Lot dimensions. 
      1.   Minimum lot area - residential uses. The minimum lot area for
single-family residential development in the Green Zone shall be 40,000 square
feet, provided that the parcel has adequate usable land area to be developed in
conformance with the Zoning Ordinance, and provided further that there is
sufficient area for placement of a septic system. Single-family residential
development in the Green Zone shall comply with the R-1-S, Suburban Residential
zoning requirements.
   2.   Minimum lot area - nonresidential uses. The minimum lot area for
nonresidential and mixed use development in the Green Zone shall be 20 acres,
provided that the parcel has adequate usable land area to be developed in
conformance with applicable Zoning Ordinance requirements.
   3.   Minimum lot width - residential uses. The minimum lot width for single-
family residential parcels in the Green Zone shall be 120 feet.
   4.   Setback from waterbodies. A minimum setback of 60 feet shall be
maintained from any lake , pond, other open body of water, or wetland , unless
a larger setback is required by the Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ).
This requirement shall apply to all principal and accessory structures and
roads .
   C.   Minimum usable floor area. The minimum usable floor area shall be as
follows:
      1.   Single-family detached dwelling units : 1,200 sq. ft.
      2.   Single and two-family attached dwelling units : 1,400 sq. ft.
      3.   Nonresidential development : 20,000 sq. ft.
   D.   Maximum lot coverage . The maximum lot coverage shall be as follows:
      1.   Residential development : 20%
      2.   Mixed use development : 25%
      3.   Nonresidential development : 30%
   E.   Minimum setbacks . 
      1.   Grand River Road Viewshed. Nonresidential and mixed use parcels of
land in the Green Zone that have frontage on Grand River Road shall provide the
following minimum setbacks so as to maintain the open, rural character of the
corridor.
         a.   All principal and accessory buildings and structures shall be set
back from the existing Grand River Road right-of-way a minimum distance equal
to 40% of the lot depth (as defined herein) or 350 feet, whichever is less.
This setback requirement shall not apply to legally permitted signs and public
transit shelters.
         b.   Off-street parking areas, including drive aisles, shall be set
back a minimum of 200 feet from the existing road  right-of-way .
         c.   All principal and accessory building and structures shall be set
back a minimum of 50 feet from the existing right-of-way on residential parcels
with a depth of 500 feet or less at the time of adoption of this section of the
Ordinance. Off-street parking on these parcels shall be set back a minimum of
20 feet from the existing Grand River Road right-of-way .
      2.   Front yard or side yard facing a street. The following requirements
shall apply to buildings , structures and parking located on or facing a road
other than Grand River Road:
         a.   The minimum setback for buildings and structures shall be 30
feet, measured from the existing right-of-way line.
         b.   The minimum setback for off-street parking, including drive
aisles shall be 20 feet.
      3.   Interior side yard . 
         a.   The minimum interior side yard  setback for all buildings and
structures in the Green Zone shall be 20 feet.
         b.   Off-street parking, including drive aisles, shall be set back a
minimum of ten feet from an interior side lot line .
      4.   Rear yard . 
         a.   The minimum rear yard  setback for buildings and structures in
the Green Zone shall be 35 feet.
         b.   Off-street parking, including drive aisles, shall be set back a
minimum of ten feet from an interior side lot line .
      5.   Minimum setbacks for residential uses. Residential uses not located
in a mixed use development shall comply with the setback requirements specified
for the R-1-S, Suburban Residential District.
   F.   Maximum height. 
      1.   Maximum height. The maximum height for buildings and structures in
the Green Zone is 40 feet, except that accessory buildings and structures shall
comply with the height requirements in §
2.03.
      2.   Exception for green building features. Where necessary because of
the use of green building features (i.e., green roofs, passive solar
architecture, convection cooling towers, etc.), the maximum height shall be 45
feet. The maximum height for wind turbines is 130 feet.
   G.   Open space requirements. 
      1.   Minimum open space. A minimum of 33% of any nonresidential or mixed-
use parcel in the Green Zone shall be reserved as undeveloped open space . The
calculations of required open space may include the land within the Grand River
Road Viewshed. Fifty percent of the area of a green roof may be counted as open
space . Recorded path easements called for in §
24.06, subsection I, may be counted as open space .
      2.   Exclusions. Required open space shall not include the area of any
public road , the area of any easement providing access to the site, the area
of any commercial recreation use, the area of any conventional storm water
retention or detention pond, and any interior parking lot landscaping .
      3.   Open space objectives.  Open space shall be located on the site to
meet the following objectives:
         a.   To preserve distinctive natural features, wooded areas, and rural
features.
         b.   To preserve land that can still be farmed after development .
         c.   To minimize the impact on wetlands , streams, and other sensitive
environmental features.
         d.   To maintain an open, rural character along Grand River Road.
         e.   To further the objectives of the Master Plan .
      4.   Reservation of open space. Required open space (not including green
roofs) shall be permanently reserved by the developer with a recordable legal
instrument that assures that the open space will remain undeveloped. This can
be accomplished, by way of example, through a deed restriction, or an
irrevocable conveyance, such as a conservation easement or restrictive covenant
that runs with the land, whereby rights are conveyed to a land conservation
organization or other public body.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
ARTICLE 25.00
PD, PLANNED DEVELOPMENT
§ 25.01 INTENT.
   It is the intent of this article to authorize the use of planned development
regulations for the purposes of encouraging the use of land in accordance with
its character and adaptability; conserving natural resources , natural features
and energy; encouraging innovation in land use planning; providing enhanced
housing, employment, shopping, traffic circulation and recreational
opportunities for the people of this township ; ensuring compatibility of
design and use between neighboring properties; and, encouraging development
that is consistent with the township ’s Master Plan .
   The provisions of this article are not intended as a device for ignoring the
Zoning Ordinance and specific standards set forth therein, or the planning upon
which it has been based. To that end, provisions of this article are intended
to result in land development substantially consistent with the zoning
standards generally applied to the proposed uses, allowing for modifications
and departures from generally applicable standards in accordance with
guidelines in this article to insure appropriate, fair, and consistent decision
making.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 25.02 ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA.
   To be eligible for planned development approval, the applicant must
demonstrate that the following criteria will be met:
   A.   Recognizable benefits. The planned development will result in a
recognizable and substantial benefit to the ultimate users of the project and
to the community, and shall result in a higher quality of development than
could be achieved under conventional zoning.
   B.   Minimum size.
      The minimum size of a planned development shall be 20 acres of contiguous
land. However, in the interest of maximizing the use of Planned Development as
a tool to promote high quality planning and development , the Township Board ,
upon recommendation from the Planning Commission , may permit a smaller planned
development if:
      (a)   The proposed project has unique characteristics and benefits; and/
or
      (b)   The parcel in question has unique characteristics that
significantly impact development , such as unusual topography, tree stands,
wetlands , poor soil conditions on portions of the parcel , water courses,
unusual shape or proportions, or utility easements which cross the parcel .
      In such case, the applicant shall submit a letter to the township
requesting a waiver of the minimum planned development size requirements. The
request shall be submitted prior to submittal of a site plan and application
for planned development approval. The Planning Commission shall review the
request and make a recommendation to the Township Board . The Township Board
shall make the final decision concerning a request to waive the planned
development size requirements.
   C.   Use of public services. The proposed type and density of use shall not
result in an unreasonable increase in the use of public services, facilities,
and utilities, and shall not place an unreasonable burden upon the subject
site, surrounding land, property owners and occupants, or the natural
environment.
   D.   Compatibility with Master Plan . The proposed development shall not
have an adverse impact upon the Master Plan for the township . Notwithstanding
this requirement, the township may approve a planned development proposal that
includes uses which are not called for on the future land use map, provided
that the Planning Commission and Township Board determine that such a deviation
from the future land use map is justified in light of the current planning and
development objectives of the township .
   E.   Economic impact. The proposed development shall not result in an
unreasonable negative economic impact upon surrounding properties.
   F.   Unified control. 
      The proposed development shall be under single ownership or control such
that there is a single person or entity having responsibility for completing
the project, or assuring completion of the project, in conformity with this
Ordinance.
      The applicant shall provide legal documentation of single ownership or
control in the form of agreements, contracts, covenants, and deed restrictions
which indicate that the development can be completed as shown on the plans, and
further, that all portions of the development that are not to be maintained or
operated at public expense will continue to be operated and maintained by the
developers or their successors. These legal documents shall bind all
development successors in title to any commitments made as a part of the
documents. This provision shall not prohibit a transfer of ownership or
control, provided notice of such transfer is given to the Township Clerk.
   G.   Preservation of natural features and rural character. The proposed
development shall preserve natural features and the rural character of the
township to the maximum extent feasible. In the case of single-family
residential development , this may be accomplished by implementing principles
of “rural cluster zoning ” and “rural open space environment .”
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 25.03 PROJECT DESIGN STANDARDS.
   Proposed planned developments shall comply with the following project design
standards:
   A.   Location. A planned development may be approved in any location in the
township , subject to review and approval as provided for herein.
   B.   Permitted uses . Any land use authorized in this Ordinance may be
included in a planned development as a principal or accessory use , provided
that:
      1.   The predominant use on the site shall be consistent with the uses
specified for the parcel on the township ’s future land use map.
      2.   There shall be a reasonably harmonious relationship between the
location of buildings on the site relative to buildings on lands in the
surrounding area.
      3.   Nonresidential uses shall be separated and buffered from residential
units in a manner that is consistent with good site design and planning
principles.
      4.   The mix of uses and the arrangement of those uses within a planned
development shall not impair the public health, safety, welfare, or quality of
life of residents or the community as a whole.
   C.   Residential density . 
      The overall density of residential uses within a planned development
shall not exceed the density that could be achieved with the underlying zoning
(see definition of “underlying zoning ” in §
1.03). In determining the density achievable with the underlying zoning , only
the net buildable area of the site shall be considered. The “net buildable area
” consists of the portion of a site which is not encumbered by regulated
wetlands , steep slopes , existing and proposed road  rights-of-way (including
proposed road  rights-of-way within the development ), easements , existing
structures or lots , or other existing or proposed features that would prevent
construction of a building or use of the site for residential purposes. To
assist in determining net buildable area , the applicant shall submit an
alternate plan that shows how the site could be developed economically and
legally under the underlying zoning .
      An increase in density may be permitted by the Township Board , upon
recommendation from the Planning Commission , upon finding that the increase is
justified because certain characteristics of the proposed development would
result in a substantial benefit to the users and the community as a whole.
Among the characteristics which the Planning Commission and Township Board may
consider in making this determination are the following:
      1.   The planned development exhibits extraordinary design excellence,
examples of which include, but are not limited to: innovative energy efficient
design; provision of additional open space above the required amount; added
improvements to assure vehicular and pedestrian safety; or, added landscaping
or other site features to assure a long-term aesthetically pleasing appearance.
      2.   The planned development would include certain public facilities,
such as a sewer treatment plant or public water system, to enhance the long-
term viability of the project and allow for more efficient use of the land.
      3.   The proposed arrangement of uses and residential densities within
the planned development enhances the compatibility of proposed development with
existing or planned land use on adjacent land.
      4.   Implementation of design approaches to achieve or preserve a rural
open space environment . One such design approach, by way of example, might be
Rural Cluster Zoning (see definitions of “Rural Open Space Environment ” and
“Rural Cluster Zoning ” in §
1.03).
   D.   Dimensional standards. 
      1.   Setbacks . Planned developments shall comply with the following
minimum yard  setback requirements:
 Residential Use Nonresidential Use
                                            Residential Use Nonresidential Use
Along perimeter adjacent to public road     50 ft.          50 ft. *
Along perimeter, but not adjacent to a road 35 ft.          40 ft.
Along an internal collector or local road   40 ft.          50 ft.
Along an internal thoroughfare road        50 ft.          50 ft. *
   Between parking lot and property line
   •   Adjacent to road             50 ft.          50 ft.
   •   Not fronting on road         20 ft.          20 ft.
 
* Industrial uses shall be set back a minimum of 75 feet.
Modification to these yard  setback requirements may be approved by the
Township Board , upon recommendation from the Planning Commission , upon making
the determination that other setbacks would be more appropriate because of the
topography, existing trees and other vegetation, proposed grading and
landscaping , or other existing or proposed site features.
      2.   Lot size. Residential dwelling units in planned developments served
by individual septic systems shall have a minimum lot size of 0.75 acres
(32,670 sq. ft.), unless a larger lot size is required by the Ingham County
Health Department to satisfy the need for septic fields.
   E.   Distances between buildings . Buildings within a planned development
shall comply with the following spacing requirements:
      1.   Any detached single-family structure (or accessory structure
thereto) shall be located at least 30 feet from any other detached single-
family structure (or accessory structure thereto).
      2.   The minimum rear yard  setback and minimum lot size for detached
single-family structures and accessory structures thereto in a planned
development shall be based on good planning and design principles, taking into
account the degree of compatibility between adjoining uses, sensitivity to the
characteristics of the site, the need for free access for emergency vehicles,
the need for adequate amounts of light and air between buildings , and the need
for proper amounts of open space for the exclusive use of residents on the
site.
      3.   Residential buildings containing more that one unit (i.e.,
apartments , townhouses , attached dwellings ) shall conform to the spacing
requirements set forth in §
8.03(B).
      4.   Nonresidential buildings shall be located at least 100 feet from any
residential buildings . This standard shall not apply to garages and other
permitted structures that are accessory to a single-family structure .
      5.   The distance between adjacent freestanding nonresidential structures
shall be based on good planning and design principles, taking into account the
need for: free access for emergency vehicles, adequate amounts of light and air
between buildings , and proper amounts of landscaping .
   Modification to these building spacing requirements may be approved by the
Township Board , upon recommendation from the Planning Commission , upon making
the determination that other building spacing requirements would be more
appropriate because of the particular design and orientation of buildings .
   F.   Building height. Buildings within a planned development shall not
exceed 35 feet in height.
   G.   Parking and loading. Planned developments shall comply with the parking
and loading requirements specified in
Article 4.00 of the Zoning Ordinance.
   H.   Landscaping . Planned developments shall comply with the following
landscaping requirements:
      1.   General site requirements. All unpaved portions of the site that are
not left in a natural state shall be planted with grass, ground cover,
shrubbery, or other suitable live plant material, which shall extend to any
abutting road shoulder or curb edge. Seeded areas shall be watered and
fertilized regularly so as to provide a healthy lawn within 90 days after
planting.
      2.   Landscaping adjacent to roads. All commercial, office , industrial,
and multiple-family uses shall comply with the requirements for landscaping
adjacent to roads in §
5.02, subsection B.
      3.   Berm requirements. Wherever front, side, or rear yards adjacent to
public rights-of-way are used for parking, a berm may be required to screen the
parking from view of the road . The berm shall be a minimum of two feet in
height, and shall be planted in accordance with the previous requirements for
landscaping adjacent to roads .
      4.   Screening.
         Screening in the form of a landscaped berm , greenbelt , wall, or
fence shall be required wherever a commercial, office , or industrial use is
located adjacent to a residential use, school, park, or similar public area. A
landscaped berm or greenbelt is preferred rather than a wall or fence by
itself. Depending on the design, a wall or fence with some landscaping could be
found to be equally desirable.
         Landscaped screening shall comply with the requirements in §
5.02, subsection E. If a wall or fence is used instead of landscaping , the
following requirements shall be complied with:
         a.   Location. Required obscuring walls or fences shall be placed
inside and adjacent to the lot line except where underground utilities
interfere with placement of the wall or fence at the property line , in which
case the wall or fence shall be placed on the utility easement line located
nearest the property line .
         b.   Time of construction. Wherever construction of an obscuring wall
or fence is required adjacent to residentially zoned or used property, the wall
or fence shall be installed prior to the beginning of site grading and general
construction, except where such activity would result in damage to the wall or
fence .
         c.   Corner clearance. No wall or fence shall be erected that will
obstruct the view of drivers in vehicles approaching an intersection of two
roads or the intersection of a road and a driveway .
         d.   Wall specifications. Required walls shall be constructed of
masonry material that is architecturally compatible with the materials used on
the facade of the principal structure on the site, such as face brick,
decorative block, or poured concrete with simulated brick or stone patterns.
         e.   Fence specifications. Fences used for screening shall be
constructed of redwood, cedar, or No. 1 pressure-treated wood. Chain link
fences shall not be permitted for screening purposes.
         f.   Height requirements. Walls or fences used for screening shall be
a minimum of 4.5 feet in height.
      5.   Parking lot landscaping. Off-street parking areas containing greater
than ten spaces shall be provided with interior landscaping in compliance with
§
5.02, subsection F.
      6.   Standards for plant material. Proposed plant materials shall comply
with the standards set forth in §
5.04.
      7.   Treatment of existing plant material. In instances where healthy
plant material exists on the site prior to its development , the township may
permit substitution of such plant material in place of the requirements set
forth previously, provided such substitution is in keeping with the spirit and
intent of this article and the Ordinance in general, subject to the regulations
in §
5.06.
      8.   Variation from specific requirements. The Township Board , upon
receiving a recommendation from the Planning Commission , may allow variation
from the specific requirements set forth herein, upon finding that the
substitute landscaping is in keeping with the spirit and intent of this
article, and has equal landscape value as the required landscaping . In
evaluating landscape values, the Township Board and Planning Commission shall
consider preservation of natural features, aesthetic qualities, numbers of
plants, and similar considerations.
   I.   Open space requirements. Planned developments containing a residential
component shall provide and maintain usable open space that is accessible to
all residents, which shall comply with the following requirements:
      1.   A minimum of 33% of the gross area of the site or portion thereof
that is designated for residential use shall be set aside for such common open
space . The boundaries of the gross site area shall encompass buildings , roads
, sidewalks, landscaping , natural areas , water bodies, and other features
that are an integral part of the residential development plan.
      2.   Reduction in lot area below the minimum lot area specified by the
underlying zoning shall be set aside and reserved as permanent open space to
the maximum feasible extent, recognizing that a portion of the parcel must be
set aside for roads , stormwater detention, and other facilities.
      3.   Open space shall be located on the parcel to meet the following
objectives:
         a.   To preserve distinctive natural features and rural
characteristics.
         b.   To preserve farm lands.
         c.   To minimize impact from development on wetlands , rivers, and
other sensitive environmental areas.
         d.   To maintain open, rural character along main roads .
      4.   No more than 25% of the required open space shall be used for active
recreation facilities, such as swimming pools , tennis courts, trails etc.
      5.   Any pervious land area that is available for the common use of all
residents may be included as required open space , except as follows:
         a.   No more than 25% of the required usable open space shall include
the area of any water bodies or wetlands which are covered only periodically
with standing water (such as hardwood swamps or “wet” meadows). Required usable
open space shall not include the area of any designated wetland that is covered
by water or muck such that it is not a suitable environment for walking or
similar passive leisure pursuits.
         b.   Required usable open space shall not include the area of any
public or private road , the area of any easement providing access to the site,
the area of any commercial recreation use (such as a golf course ), or the area
of any required setbacks .
      6.   The required open space shall be set aside by the developer through
an irrevocable conveyance, such as deed restrictions or covenants that run with
the land or through a conservation easement , whereby all rights to develop the
land are conveyed to a land conservation organization or other public body,
assuring that the open space will be developed according to the site plan. Such
conveyance shall:
         a.   Indicate the proposed use(s) of the required open space .
         b.   Indicate how the leisure and recreation needs of all segments of
the population residing in or using the planned development will be
accommodated.
         c.   Provide for the privately owned open space to be maintained by
private property owners with an interest in the open space .
         d.   Provide maintenance standards and a maintenance schedule.
         e.   Provide notice of possible assessment to the private property
owners by the Township of Williamstown for the cost of maintenance of the open
space in the event that it is inadequately maintained and becomes a public
nuisance or in the event that other public facilities are not maintained.
         f.   Be recorded with the Ingham County Register of Deeds to provide
record notice of the restrictions to all persons having an interest in the
property contained in the planned development .
      7.   Notwithstanding the requirements cited above, open space may be
redeveloped for another purpose subject to the following conditions:
         a.   The redevelopment of open space shall require an amendment to the
planned development plan in accordance with the procedures in §
29.04, and shall therefore constitute an amendment to the Zoning Ordinance
which shall be subject to the right of petition and referendum by the electors
of the township , as provided for by current Michigan law.
         b.   Redevelopment of open space shall not be permitted for the first
25 years after the date of the initial approval of the planned development plan
by the Township Board . Commencing on the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
initial approval, and at every subsequent 25-year interval thereafter, there
shall be a one-year period during which proposals to redevelop the open space
may be submitted for review and action by the township . Proposals to redevelop
may not be submitted at any other time except during these one year periods.
         c.   In the event that a proposal to redevelop open space is properly
submitted during an appropriate one-year time frame, the township shall proceed
with review and shall take action on the proposal even if the review process
extends beyond the one year period.
         d.   Proposals to redevelop open space shall require the written
consent of at least 90% of all persons having an interest in the property
contained in the planned development at the time the proposal is submitted.
         e.   The overall density of residential development proposed for
redeveloped open space shall not exceed the density that could be achieved with
the underlying zoning that was in place at the time the original planned
development plan was adopted (see §
25.03(C) and definition of “underlying zoning ” in §
1.03).
         f.   These provisions for redevelopment of open space may be included
in the conveyance described in the preceding subsection (I.6).
   J.    Frontage and access. 
      Planned developments shall front onto a paved road and the main means of
access to the development shall be via the paved road . The nearest edge of any
entrance or exit drive shall be located no closer than 400 feet from any street
or road intersection (as measured from the nearest intersection right of way
line).
      Each residential lot shall have frontage on, and each residential
dwelling unit shall have direct access to, an approved public road . Individual
residential dwelling units in a planned development shall not have direct
access onto a major thoroughfare , collector road , or state trunkline. The
planned development should be designed so that through-traffic, including
traffic generated by commercial uses within the planned development , is
discouraged from traveling on residential streets .
   K.   Natural features. The development shall be designed to promote
preservation of natural resources and features. If natural animal or plant
habitats of significant value exist on the site, the Planning Commission or
Township Board may require that the planned development plan preserve the areas
in a natural state and adequately protect them as open space preserves or
passive recreation areas. One hundred percent of any preserved natural area may
be counted toward meeting the requirements for open space , as long as the
requirements of §
25.03(I)(5.a.) are met.
   L.   Pedestrian access. Sidewalks shall be provided along all collector and
arterial roads within the planned development . The Township Board , upon
recommendation from the Planning Commission , may waive the requirements for
sidewalks if pathways or another means of pedestrian circulation are provided
through the development .
   M.   Special use standards. Proposed uses that are permitted under
conventional zoning subject to special land use approval shall comply with the
development standards for such uses as set forth in §
29.03 of the Zoning Ordinance and in the regulations for each district. In
evaluating such uses, the Planning Commission and Township Board shall consider
the standards for granting special land use approval for special uses in §
29.03 of the Zoning Ordinance. The Township Board , upon recommendation from
the Planning Commission , may waive, modify, or expand upon the development
standards for such uses, upon making the determination that such action would
result in higher quality development within the context of the proposed planned
development . Even if a special land use is included in a proposed planned
development project, planned development review procedures in this article
shall supersede and replace the special land use review procedures in §
29.03.
   N.   Additional considerations. The Planning Commission and Township Board
shall take into account the following considerations, which may be relevant to
a particular project: perimeter setbacks and berming; thoroughfare , drainage,
and utility design; underground installation of utilities; the extent to which
sidewalks, trails, open space , playgrounds and other areas used by pedestrians
are insulated from roads , drives, and parking areas used by vehicles;
achievement of an integrated development with respect to signage, lighting,
landscaping , and building materials; and, noise reduction and visual screening
mechanisms, particularly in cases where nonresidential uses adjoin
residentially used or zoned property.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 25.04 PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS.
   The approval of a planned development application shall require an amendment
to the Zoning Ordinance to revise the zoning map and designate the subject
property as “PD, Planned Development .” Approval granted under this article,
including all aspects of the final plan and conditions imposed on it, shall
constitute an inseparable part of the zoning amendment.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 25.05 REVIEW AND APPROVAL STANDARDS.
   In considering any application for approval of a planned development plan,
the Planning Commission and Township Board shall make their determinations on
the basis of the standards for planned development approval set forth in §
29.04, as well as the following standards and requirements:
   A.   Conformance with the planned development concept. The overall design
and all uses proposed in connection with a planned development shall be
consistent with and promote the intent of the planned development concept, as
well as with specific project design standards set forth herein.
   B.   Compatibility with adjacent uses. The proposed planned development
shall set forth specifications with respect to height, setbacks , density ,
parking, circulation, landscaping , views, and other design and layout features
which exhibit due regard for the relationship of the development to surrounding
properties and the uses thereon. In determining whether this requirement has
been met, consideration shall be given to:
       1.   The bulk , placement, and materials of construction of proposed
structures .
      2.   The location and screening of vehicular circulation and parking
areas in relation to surrounding development .
      3.   The location and screening of outdoor storage , outdoor activity or
work areas, and mechanical equipment in relation to surrounding development .
      4.   The hours of operation of the proposed uses.
      5.   The provision of landscaping and other site amenities.
   C.   Public services. The proposed planned development shall not exceed the
capacity of existing and available public services, including but not
necessarily limited to utilities, public roads , police and fire protection
services, and educational services, unless the proposal contains an acceptable
plan for providing necessary services or evidence that such services will be
available by the time the planned development is completed.
   D.   Impact of traffic. The planned development shall be designed to
minimize the impact of traffic generated by the proposed development on
surrounding uses. In determining whether this requirement has been met,
consideration shall be given to:
      1.   Access to major thoroughfares .
      2.   Estimated traffic to be generated by the proposed development and
the potential increase in traffic congestion.
      3.   Proximity and relation to intersections.
      4.   Adequacy of driver site distances.
      5.   Location of and access to off-street parking.
      6.   Required vehicular turning movements.
      7.   Provisions for pedestrian traffic.
      8.   Proposals to alleviate traffic congestion, traffic safety concerns,
and other traffic impacts.
   E.    Protection of natural environment. The proposed planned development
shall be protective of the natural environment, and shall be in compliance with
all applicable environmental protection laws and regulations.
   F.   Compatibility with the Master Plan . The proposed planned development
shall be consistent with the general principles and objectives of the adopted
Township Master Plan .
   G.   Compliance with applicable regulations. The proposed planned
development shall be in compliance with all applicable federal, state, and
local laws and regulations, including but not necessarily limited to special
land use standards as noted in §
29.03 and applicable general provisions in
Article 2.00 of the Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 25.06 PHASING.
   Where a project is proposed for construction in phases, the project shall be
so designed that each phase, when completed, shall be capable of standing on
its own in terms of the presence of services, facilities, and open space , and
shall contain the necessary components to insure protection of natural
resources and the health, safety, and welfare of the users of the planned
development and the residents of the surrounding area.
   In addition, proposed phasing shall comply with the following requirements:
   A.   Coordination of residential and nonresidential components. 
      In developments which include residential and nonresidential components,
the residential component shall be completed at the same rate or prior to the
nonresidential component. For example, if 50% of the nonresidential component
is proposed to be completed in a certain phase, then at least 50% of the
residential component should be completed in the same phase. One hundred
percent of the residential component shall be completed prior to the final
phase of nonresidential construction. The construction of roads , utilities,
and other infrastructure shall be considered completion of a residential
component, where the intent is to sell lots or building sites to others who
will construct the housing units.
      The purpose of this provision is to ensure that planned developments are
constructed in an orderly manner and, to ensure that the planned development
approach is not used as a means of circumventing restrictions on the location
or quantity of certain types of land use. For purposes of carrying out this
provision, the percentages shall be approximations as determined by the
Planning Commission based on the floor area and land area allocated to each
use. Such percentages may be varied should the Township Board , upon
recommendation from the Planning Commission determine that the applicant has
presented adequate and effective assurance that the residential component or
components of the project shall be completed within the specified period.
   B.   Commencement of construction. 
      Construction of any facility may commence at any time following site plan
approval per §
29.02, provided that construction shall be commenced for each phase of the
project within 24 months of the schedule set forth on the approved plan for the
planned development . However, the applicant may submit a revised phasing plan
for review and approval by the Planning Commission . The applicant shall also
submit a statement indicating the conditions which made the previous phasing
plan unachievable. Once construction of a planned development has commenced,
approval of a revised phasing plan shall not be unreasonably withheld or
denied, provided that the revised phasing does not materially change the
integrity of the approved planned development proposal.
      In the event that construction has not commenced within the required time
period and a revised phasing plan has not been submitted, the township may
initiate proceedings to amend the zoning classification of the undeveloped
portion of the site. For the purposes of this section, “commencement of
construction” shall mean sustained progress resulting in, by way of example,
construction of utilities, roads , foundations, or similar substantial
improvements.
   C.   First phase projects. Notwithstanding the above provisions, if proposed
as a part of the planned development , sewer and water treatment facilities
shall be completed in the first phase.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
ARTICLE 25.50
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT CLUSTER ZONING OPTION
§ 25.51 INTENT.
   The Planned Development Cluster Zoning Option provides an opportunity to
address unmet needs for single-family detached and two-family housing units at
a higher density than permitted elsewhere in the Township , subject to specific
eligibility criteria and design requirements. Consistent with the Township
Master Plan, developments permitted under these regulations are intended to be
appealing walkable residential environments located close to the City of
Williamston. Planned Development Cluster Zoning Option proposals are subject to
the same review and approval procedures, phasing, and penalties and enforcement
criteria as the Planned Development Zoning District.
   The planned development approach encourages the use of land in accordance
with its character and adaptability; conserves natural resources, natural
features and energy; encourages innovation in land use planning; provides
attainable housing options, traffic circulation and recreational opportunities
for the people of this township ; ensures compatibility of design and use
between neighboring properties; and encourages development that is consistent
with the Township's Master Plan.
   The provisions of this Article are not intended as a device for ignoring the
Zoning Ordinance and specific standards set forth therein, or the planning upon
which it has been based. To that end, provisions of this Article are intended
to result in land development substantially consistent with the zoning
standards generally applied to the proposed uses, allowing for modifications
and departures from generally applicable standards in accordance with
guidelines in this Article to insure appropriate, fair, and consistent decision
making.
(Ord. passed 6-9-2021)
§ 25.52 ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA.
   To be eligible for planned development approval, the applicant must
demonstrate that the following criteria will be met:
   A.   Recognizable benefits. The planned development  must result in a
recognizable and substantial benefit to the ultimate users of the project and
to the community and shall result in a higher quality of development  than
could be achieved under conventional zoning.
   B.   Minimum size. 
      1.   The minimum size of a planned development shall be ten acres of
contiguous land. However, in the interest of maximizing the use of Planned
Development Cluster Zoning Option as a tool to promote high quality planning
and development , the Township Board , upon recommendation from the Planning
Commission , may permit a smaller planned development if:
         a.   The proposed project has unique characteristics and benefits;
and/or
         b.   The parcel in question has unique characteristics that
significantly impact development , such as unusual topography, tree stands,
wetlands , poor soil conditions on portions of the parcel , water courses,
unusual shape or proportions, or utility easements which cross the parcel .
      2.   In such case, the applicant shall submit a letter to the township
requesting a waiver of the minimum planned development size requirements. The
request shall be submitted prior to submittal of a site plan and application
for planned development approval. The Planning Commission shall review the
request and make a recommendation to the Township Board . The Township Board
shall make the final decision concerning a request to waive the planned
development size requirements.
   C.   Use of public services. The proposed cluster development  must be
serviced by public water and sanitary sewer utilities. For example, areas
encompassed by Act 425 Agreements between the City of Williamston and
Williamstown Township are eligible for consideration.
   D.   Compatibility with Master Plan . The proposed development  shall not
have an adverse impact upon the Master Plan  for the township . Notwithstanding
this requirement, the township  may approve a planned development  proposal
that includes uses which are not called for on the Future Land Use Map,
provided that the Planning Commission  and Township Board  determine that such
a deviation from the Future Land Use Map is justified in light of the current
planning and development  objectives of the township .
   E.   Economic impact. The proposed development  shall not result in an
unreasonable negative economic impact upon surrounding properties.
   F.   Unified control.
      1.   The proposed development shall be under single ownership or control
such that there is a single person or entity having responsibility for
completing the project, or assuring completion of the project, in conformity
with this Article.
      2.   The applicant shall provide legal documentation of single ownership
or control in the form of agreements, contracts, covenants, and deed
restrictions which indicate that the development can be completed as shown on
the plans, and further, that all portions of the development that are not to be
maintained or operated at public expense will continue to be operated and
maintained by the developers or their successors. These legal documents shall
bind all development successors in title to any commitments made as a part of
the documents. This provision shall not prohibit a transfer of ownership or
control, provided notice of such transfer is given to the Township Clerk.
   G.   Preservation of natural features and rural character. The proposed
development  shall preserve natural features and the rural character of the
township to the maximum extent feasible. In the case of single-family
residential development , this may be accomplished by implementing principles
of "rural cluster zoning" and "rural open space environment".
(Ord. passed 6-9-2021)
§ 25.53 PROJECT DESIGN STANDARDS.
   Proposed planned developments shall comply with the following project design
standards:
   A.   Location. Planned Development  Cluster Zoning developments may be
located in districts zoned for single family use (AG-C, AG-SF, RE, RR, R-1-S,
and R-1), subject to review and approval as provided for herein.
   B.   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in a Planned
Development  Cluster Zoning Development:
      1.   Single family detached and two-family housing units.
      2.   A community building, pool, or other amenities for the residents of
the development.
      3.   Attached accessory structures .
   Such uses shall be allowed subject to the following conditions:
      4.   There shall be a reasonably harmonious relationship between the
location of buildings on the site relative to buildings on lands in the
surrounding area.
      5.   The mix of uses and the arrangement of those uses within a planned
development shall not impair the public health, safety, welfare, or quality of
life of residents or the community.
   C.   Residential density. Residential density is limited by the dimensional
requirements contained herein provided the Planning Commission  and Township
Board  determine that the following criteria are met:
      1.   The planned development shall exhibit extraordinary design
excellence, examples of which include, but are not limited to: innovative
energy efficient design; provision of additional open space above the required
amount; added improvements to assure vehicular and pedestrian safety; or, added
landscaping or other site features to assure a long-term aesthetically pleasing
appearance.
      2.   The planned development shall include public facilities, such as
wastewater collection and treatment and public water system, to enhance the
long-term viability of the project and allow for more efficient use of the
land.
      3.   The proposed arrangement of uses and residential densities within
the planned development shall enhance the compatibility of proposed development
with existing or planned land use on adjacent land.
      4.   The planned development shall implement design approaches to achieve
or preserve a Rural Open Space Environment, if feasible.
   D.   Dimensional standards.
      1.   Setbacks . Planned Development Cluster Zoning proposals shall comply
with the following minimum yard setback requirements:
                                                              Minimum Setback
Along perimeter adjacent to collector or arterial public road 50 ft.
Along perimeter, but not adjacent to a road                   35 ft.
Along an internal collector or local road                     25 ft.
Along an internal thoroughfare road                           50 ft.
Between parking lot and property line
   Adjacent to collector or arterial road                  50 ft.
   Not fronting on collector or arterial road              20 ft.
 
   Modification to these yard setback requirements may be approved by the
Township Board , upon recommendation from the Planning Commission , upon making
the determination that other setbacks would be more appropriate because of the
topography, existing trees and other vegetation, proposed grading and
landscaping , or other existing or proposed site features.
      2.   Lot size and lot frontage. The minimum lot size shall be 9,600
square feet and the minimum lot  frontage shall be 75 feet. However, minimum
lot  sizes and lot  frontages may be reduced if the Planning Commission  and
Township Board  determine that all of the following conditions have been met:
         a.   The site plan shall comply with all other dimensional
requirements.
         b.   The overall permitted density of development shall be based on a
lot size of 9,600 square feet.
         c.   Any reduction in lot size shall result in an equivalent increase
in common open space .
         d.   Reduction in lot size shall not diminish the overall quality of
design.
   E.   Distances between buildings . Buildings within a planned development
shall comply with the following spacing requirements:
      1.   Any detached single-family structure shall be located at least 20
feet from any other detached single-family structure .
      2.   The minimum rear yard setback and minimum lot size for detached
single family structures and accessory structures thereto in a planned
development shall be based on good planning and design principles, taking into
account the degree of compatibility between adjoining uses, sensitivity to the
characteristics of the site, the need for free access for emergency vehicles,
the need for adequate amounts of light and air between buildings , and the need
for proper amounts of open space for the exclusive use of residents on the
site.
      Modification to these building spacing requirements may be approved by
the Township Board , upon recommendation from the Planning Commission , upon
making the determination that other building spacing requirements would be more
appropriate because of the design and orientation of buildings .
   F.   Buildings requirements. Buildings within a Planned Development  Cluster
Zoning development shall comply with the following building  requirements:
      1.   Maximum building height: two stories.
      2.   Minimum net floor area per unit: 600 square feet.
      3.   Maximum net floor area per unit: 1,500 square feet.
      4.   Maximum building footprint of principal building: 900 square feet.
      5.   Maximum accessory building footprint: 576 square feet.
      6.   Accessory buildings shall be attached to the principal building .
      7.   Each residence shall have a front porch that extends across at least
50% of the building front.
      8.   If buildings face an interior common feature such as a courtyard,
the minimum building  setbacks are as follows: front setback , 15 feet; side
setbacks ten feet; and rear setback ten feet.
      9.   At least 35% of the development's residential units must be
universally designed.*
      10.   Homes shall be physically equipped to facilitate broadband
connectivity if and when available.
      * Universal design is design that is usable by all people, to the
greatest extent possible, without the need for adaptation or specialized
design. Something that is universally designed will work for as many people as
possible, regardless of struggles with: 1) upper body movement, strength, and/
or sensation; 2) lower body movement strength and/or sensation; 3) balance; 4)
vision; 5) hearing; 6) cognition and memory; 7) activity tolerances; 8) speech
and/or communication; 9) chemical sensitivities; 10) sensory tolerance; 11)
need for caregiver assistance; and 12) extremes in height and weight.
   G.   Design guidelines.
      1.   Exterior materials. The following list contains permitted exterior
materials. Alternative exterior materials may be proposed for approval by the
Planning Commission , provided such materials are comparable in quality and
durability to those in the list.
         a.   Siding: vinyl, Hardiplank or similar siding.
         b.   Full brick exterior on the front elevation (generally, the
elevation facing the road).
         c.   At a minimum brick shall be provided to the bottom of the first
floor on the sides and rear with siding above the brick.
         d.   Windows. Wood, vinyl clad wood, or vinyl.
         e.   Aluminum gutters, downspouts, and flashing shall be permitted.
         f.   Texture 1-11 and aluminum siding are prohibited.
         g.   Garage doors. Garage doors shall be panelized steel, panelized
aluminum, or wood.
      2.   Driveways and sidewalks. Driveways  and sidewalks shall be
constructed of concrete or durable pervious pavement.
      3.   Roof material and pitch. Roof material shall be at least 30-year
three-tab asphalt shingle or better. No single level flat roofs are permitted
on the main body of any dwelling or other structure , except that flat roofs
may be installed for Florida rooms, porches, or patios, if they are
architecturally compatible with the rest of the dwelling unit. The roof pitch
for the main body of the dwelling on the front, sides, and rear elevations
shall be five on 12 or steeper.
   H.   Parking and loading. Planned developments  shall comply with the
parking and loading requirements specified in Article
4.00 of the Zoning Ordinance.
   I.   Landscaping . Planned developments  shall comply with the following
landscaping requirements:
      1.   General site requirements. All unpaved portions of the site that are
not left in a natural state shall be planted with grass, ground cover,
shrubbery, or other suitable live plant material, which shall extend to any
abutting road shoulder or curb edge. Seeded areas shall be watered and
fertilized regularly to provide a healthy lawn within 90 days of planting.
      2.   Landscaping adjacent to roads . Frontage on collector or arterial
roads in Planned Development  Cluster Zoning developments  shall comply with
the requirements for landscaping adjacent to roads in §
5.02, subsection B.
      3.   Berm requirements. Wherever front, side, or rear yards adjacent to
public rights-of-way are used for parking, a berm may be required to screen the
parking from view of the road . The berm shall be a minimum of two feet in
height and shall be planted in accordance with the previous requirements for
landscaping adjacent to roads .
      4.   Screening. Screening in the form of a landscaped  berm , greenbelt,
wall or fence shall be required wherever a Planned Development  Cluster Zoning
development abuts a commercial, office, or industrial use. A landscaped  berm
or greenbelt is preferred rather than a wall or fence by itself. Depending on
the design, a wall or fence with some landscaping could be found to be equally
desirable.
      Landscaped screening shall comply with the requirements in §
5.02, subsection E. If a wall or fence is used instead of landscaping, the
following requirements shall be complied with:
         a.   Location. Required obscuring walls or fences shall be placed
inside and adjacent to the lot line except where underground utilities
interfere with placement of the wall or fence at the property line , in which
case the wall or fence shall be placed on the utility easement line located
nearest the property line .
         b.   Time of construction. Wherever construction of an obscuring wall
or fence is required adjacent to residentially zoned or used property, the wall
or fence shall be installed prior to the beginning of site grading and general
construction, except where such activity would result in damage to the wall or
fence .
         c.   Corner clearance. No wall or fence shall be erected that will
obstruct the view of drivers in vehicles approaching an intersection of two
roads or the intersection of a road and a driveway.
         d.   Wall specifications. Required walls shall be constructed of
masonry material that is architecturally compatible with the materials used on
the facade of the principal structure on the site, such as face brick,
decorative block, or poured concrete with simulated brick or stone patterns.
         e.   Fence specifications. Fences used for screening shall be
constructed of redwood, cedar, or No. 1 pressure-treated wood. Chain link
fences shall not be permitted for screening purposes.
         f.   Height requirements. Walls or fences used for screening shall be
a minimum of 4.5 feet in height.
      5.   Parking lot landscaping . Off-street parking areas containing
greater than ten spaces shall be provided with interior landscaping in
compliance with §
5.02, subsection F.
      6.   Standards for plant material. Proposed plant materials shall comply
with the standards set forth in §
5.04. Additionally, 35% of the proposed plant materials must be native to
Michigan.
      7.   Treatment of existing plant material. In instances where healthy
plant material exists on the site prior to its development , the township may
permit substitution of such plant material in place of the requirements set
forth previously, provided such substitution is in keeping with the spirit and
intent of this Article and the Ordinance in general, subject to the regulations
in §
5.06.
      8.   Variation from specific requirements. The Township Board , upon
receiving a recommendation from the Planning Commission , may allow variation
from the specific requirements set forth herein, upon finding that the
substitute landscaping  is in keeping with the spirit and intent of this
Article, and has equal landscape  value as the required landscaping . In
evaluating landscape  values, the Township Board and Planning Commission shall
consider preservation of natural features, aesthetic qualities, numbers of
plants, and similar considerations.
   J.   Open space requirements. Planned Development Cluster Zoning
developments shall provide and maintain usable open space that is accessible to
all residents, which shall comply with the following requirements:
      1.   A minimum of 50% of the gross area of the site or portion thereof
that is designated for residential use shall be set aside for common open space
. The Planning Commission and Township Board may allow a reduction in the open
space requirements if the development contains some combination of features
that will make it environmentally sustainable, such as electric vehicle
charging stations, renewable energy sources, LEED certification, public transit
access, and permeable pavements, provided that common open space after such
reduction shall encompass at least 33% of the gross area of the site. The
boundaries of the gross site area shall encompass buildings , roads ,
sidewalks, landscaping , natural areas, water bodies, and other features that
are an integral part of the residential development plan.
      2.   Open space shall be located on the parcel to meet the following
objectives:
         a.   To preserve distinctive natural features and rural
characteristics.
         b.   To preserve farmlands.
         c.   To minimize impact from development on wetlands , rivers, and
other sensitive environmental areas.
         d.   To maintain open, rural character along main roads .
      3.   No more than 25% of the required open space shall be used for active
recreation facilities, such as swimming pools, tennis courts, trails etc.
      4.   Any pervious land area that is available for the common use of all
residents may be included as required open space , except as follows:
         a.   No more than 25% of the required usable open space shall include
the area of any water bodies or wetlands which are covered only periodically
with standing water (such as hardwood swamps or "wet" meadows). Required usable
open space shall not include the area of any designated wetland that is covered
by water or muck such that it is not a suitable environment for walking or
similar passive leisure pursuits.
         b.   Required usable open space shall not include the area of any
public or private road , the area of any easement providing access to the site,
the area of any commercial recreation use (such as a golf course), or the area
of any required setbacks .
      5.   The required open space shall be set aside by the developer through
an irrevocable conveyance, such as deed restrictions or covenants that run with
the land or through a conservation easement , whereby all rights to develop the
land are conveyed to a land conservation organization or other public body,
assuring that the open space will be developed according to the site plan. Such
conveyance shall:
         a.   Indicate the proposed use(s) of the required open space .
         b.   Indicate how the leisure and recreation needs of all segments of
the population residing in or using the planned development will be
accommodated.
         c.   Provide for the privately-owned open space to be maintained by
private property owners with an interest in the open space .
         d.   Provide maintenance standards and a maintenance schedule.
         e.   Provide notice of possible assessment to the private property
owners by the Township of Williamstown for the cost of maintenance of the open
space in the event that it is inadequately maintained and becomes a public
nuisance or in the event that other public facilities are not maintained.
         f.   Be recorded with the Ingham County Register of Deeds to provide
record notice of the restrictions to all persons having an interest in the
property contained in the Planned Development .
      6.   Notwithstanding the requirements cited above, open space may be
redeveloped for another purpose subject to the following conditions:
         a.   The redevelopment of open space shall require an amendment to the
Planned Development plan in accordance with the procedures in §
29.04, and shall therefore constitute an amendment to the Zoning Ordinance
which shall be subject to the right of petition and referendum by the electors
of the township , as provided for by current Michigan law.
         b.   Redevelopment of open space shall not be permitted for the first
25 years after the date of the initial approval of the Planned Development plan
by the Township Board . Commencing on the 25th anniversary of the initial
approval, and at every subsequent 25 year interval thereafter, there shall be a
one year period during which proposals to redevelop the open space may be
submitted for review and action by the township . Proposals to redevelop may
not be submitted at any other time except during these one year periods.
         c.   In the event that a proposal to redevelop open space is properly
submitted during an appropriate one year time frame, the township shall proceed
with review and shall take action on the proposal even if the review process
extends beyond the one year period.
         d.   Proposals to redevelop open space shall require the written
consent of at least 90% of all persons having an interest in the property
contained in the planned development at the time the proposal is submitted.
         e.   The overall density of residential development proposed for
redeveloped open space shall not exceed the density that could be achieved with
the underlying zoning that was in place at the time the original planned
development plan was adopted (see §
25.03(C) and definition of "underlying zoning" in §
1.03).
         f.   These provisions for redevelopment of open space may be included
in the conveyance described in the preceding subsection (I.6).
   K.   Frontage and access. Planned developments shall front onto a paved
collector or arterial road and the main means of access to the development
shall be via the paved road . The nearest edge of any entrance or exit drive
shall be located no closer than 400 feet from any street or road intersection
(as measured from the nearest intersection right-of-way line).
      Each residential lot shall have frontage on, and each residential
dwelling unit shall have direct access to, an approved public local road.
Individual residential dwelling units in a planned development shall not have
direct access onto an arterial road, collector road, or state trunkline. The
planned development should be designed so that through-traffic is discouraged
from traveling on residential streets.
   L.   Natural features. The development  shall be designed to promote
preservation of natural resources and features. If natural animal or plant
habitats of significant value exist on the site, the Planning Commission or
Township Board  may require that the planned development  plan preserve the
areas in a natural state and adequately protect them as open space  preserves
or passive recreation areas. One hundred percent (100%) of any preserved
natural area may be counted toward meeting the requirements for open space , as
long as the requirements of subsection (I)(5.a.) of this section are met.
   M.   Pedestrian access. Sidewalks shall be provided along all local,
collector and arterial roads within the Planned Development Cluster Zoning
development. The Township Board , upon recommendation from the Planning
Commission , may waive the requirements for sidewalks if pathways or another
means of pedestrian circulation are provided through the development .
   N.   Special use standards. Proposed uses that are permitted under
conventional zoning subject to special land use approval shall comply with the
development  standards for such uses as set forth in §
29.03 of the Zoning Ordinance and in the regulations for each district. In
evaluating such uses, the Planning Commission and Township Board  shall
consider the Standards for Granting Special Land Use Approval for Special Uses
in §
29.03 of the Zoning Ordinance. The Township Board , upon recommendation from
the Planning Commission , may waive, modify, or expand upon the development
standards for such uses, upon making the determination that such action would
result in higher quality development  within the context of the proposed
planned development . Even if a special land use is included in a proposed
planned development  project, planned development  review procedures in this
Article shall supersede and replace the special land use review procedures in §
29.03.
   O.   Additional considerations. The Planning Commission and Township Board
shall take into account the following considerations, which may be relevant to
a particular project: perimeter setbacks and berms ; thoroughfare, drainage and
utility design; underground installation of utilities; the extent to which
sidewalks, trails, open space , playgrounds and other areas used by pedestrians
are insulated from roads , drives, and parking areas used by vehicles;
achievement of an integrated development  with respect to signage, lighting,
landscaping and building materials; and, noise reduction and visual screening
mechanisms, particularly in cases where a planned development  adjoins
residentially used or zoned property.
(Ord. passed 6-9-2021)
ARTICLE 26.00
M-43 CORRIDOR OVERLAY ZONE
§ 26.01 FINDINGS.
   A primary function of the M-43 state highway is to move traffic through the
township and to points beyond. As the primary east-west arterial road for the
township , a high percentage of the traffic has its origin and/or destination
in the township . Thus, M-43 has a secondary function to provide access to
adjacent and nearby properties.
   Continued development along the M-43 corridor will increase traffic volumes
and introduce additional conflict points which could erode traffic operations
and increase the potential for crashes. Numerous published studies document the
relationship between the design of road systems and traffic operations and
safety. Those studies and experiences of other communities demonstrate that
regulation of the number and placement of access points (driveways and side
street intersections) can preserve the capacity of a road and reduce the
potential for crashes. The standards herein are based on recommendations
published by various national and Michigan road agencies. The recommendations
were refined during preparation of the M-43/M-52 Access Management Plan.
   Williamstown Township finds that special access standards are needed along
the M-43 corridor based upon the following findings:
   (a)   The combination of roadway design, traffic speeds, current and
projected traffic volumes, traffic crashes and other characteristics
necessitate special access standards.
   (b)    Studies by transportation organizations in Michigan and nationally
have found a direct correlation between the number of access points and the
number of crashes.
   (c)   The standards are based upon considerable research and recommendations
by the Michigan Department of Transportation (MDOT).
   (d)    Preservation of roadway capacity through access management protects
the substantial public investment in the roadway system and helps avoid the
need for costly reconstruction, which disrupts business operations and traffic
flow.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 26.02 PURPOSE.
   The MDOT has jurisdiction within the highway ’s right-of-way , while the
township has authority for land use and site plan decisions within individual
parcels along the highway . These access management standards were created to
help ensure a collaborative process between the MDOT and the township on access
decisions along M-43 to implement the recommendations of the M-43/M-52 Access
Management Plan.
   Among the specific purposes of this Corridor Overlay Zoning District are to:
   (a)    Preserve the capacity of M-43 by limiting and controlling the number,
location, and design of access points and requiring alternate means of access
through shared driveways , service drives , and access off of cross streets in
certain locations;
   (b)   Encourage efficient flow of traffic by minimizing the disruption and
conflicts between through traffic and turning movements;
   (c)    Improve safety and reduce the potential for crashes;
   (d)    Avoid the proliferation of unnecessary curb cuts and driveways , and
eliminate or reconfigure existing access points that do not conform to the
standards herein, when the opportunities arise;
   (e)   Implement the recommendations of the M-43/M-52 Access Management Plan;
   (f)    Require coordinated access among adjacent lands where possible;
   (g)    Address situations where existing development within the corridor
area does not conform to the standards of this overlay district;
   (h)    Identify additional submittal information and review procedures
required for parcels that front along M-43;
   (i)    Avoid the need for unnecessary and costly road reconstruction, which
disrupts business operations and traffic flow;
   (j)    Ensure efficient access by emergency vehicles;
   (k)   Improve safety for pedestrians and other non-motorized travelers by
reducing the number of conflict points at access crossings;
   (l)    Establish standards that treat all properties in a fair and uniform
manner;
   (m)   Provide landowners with reasonable access , even though the access may
be restricted to a shared driveway or service drive or via a side street , or
the number and location of access points may not be the arrangement most
desired by the landowner or applicant;
   (n)    Promote a coordinated development review process for the township
with the Michigan Department of Transportation (MDOT) and the Ingham County
Department of Transportation and Roads (ICDTR); and
   (o)    Require proposed parcels to be accessible prior to approval of land
division, as required by the Land Division Act.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 26.03 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, as used in this article, shall have the meaning set
forth in this section.
   ACCESS . A means to provide vehicular or pedestrian entrance to or exit from
a lot or parcel .
   ACCESS MANAGEMENT. Controlling vehicular access so as to balance the need to
provide reasonable access to property with the need to maintain safety,
capacity, and speed on the adjoining road .
   ACCESS POINT. A means of obtaining access to a lot or parcel . An access
point may be an individual driveway , a shared access with an adjacent use, or
access via service drive or frontage road .
   CORRIDOR PLAN. The M-43/M-52 Access Management Plan, which was completed in
the spring of 2003, and which contains the analysis, findings, and
recommendations that serve as the basis of the regulations in this
Article 26.00.
   DRIVEWAY. An “access point ” designed to provide traffic movement directly
from a road or highway to adjoining property. A SHARED DRIVEWAY is one that
serves two or more contiguous properties.
   NONCONFORMING ACCESS. Characteristics of access to a property that existed
prior to the effective date of this
Article 26.00 and that do not conform to the requirements of this Article.
   PEAK HOUR. The hour of highest volume of traffic entering and exiting a site
in the morning (a.m.) or afternoon (p.m.).
   REASONABLE ACCESS. The minimum number of direct and indirect access points
necessary to provide safe ingress and egress between a parcel and a public road
, consistent with the purpose of this
Article 26.00, Public Act 200 of 1969, being M.C.L.A. §§ 247.321 through
247.329, as amended, and other applicable state laws. REASONABLE ACCESS does
not necessarily mean direct access .
   ROAD . A way for vehicular traffic, including the entire area within the
right-of-way , whether designated as a “street ,” “highway ,” “thoroughfare ,”
“avenue,” “boulevard,” “lane,” “cul-de-sac,” or by some other term.
   ROAD, ARTERIAL . A road serving large volumes of traffic, traveling 45 miles
per hour or faster, typically involving a high proportion of long distance
trips and through traffic, but which may provide access to abutting properties.
   ROAD, COLLECTOR. A road that provides access to abutting properties and
which connects development  roads , collector roads , and local roads to
arterial roads .
   ROAD, LOCAL. A road that is intended to provide access to abutting
properties, accommodate lower traffic volumes, and provide mobility within a
neighborhood.
   SERVICE DRIVE. A private drive that is located on private property and is
intended to provide traffic movement between adjoining lots or parcels .
SERVICE DRIVES are generally parallel to the front property line and may be
located in front of, adjacent to, or behind the principal buildings . A
frontage road is a  SERVICE DRIVE that located at the front of a lot or parcel
.
   SIGHT DISTANCE. The distance that a driver of a stopped vehicle can see
along a road when deciding whether to enter onto or cross the road . Safe SIGHT
DISTANCE  is the minimum sight distance necessary to perceive and react to an
oncoming vehicle, and to turn onto to the road and accelerate to the posted
speed before being reached by an oncoming vehicle.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 26.04 APPLICABILITY.
   The standards in this article shall apply to all lots with frontage along M-
43 and along intersecting roads with 350 feet of the M-43 right-of-way . The
standards herein apply in addition to, and simultaneously with, the other
applicable regulations of the Zoning Ordinance. Permitted and special land uses
on land in the Overlay Zone shall be subject to regulations in the applicable
zoning district designated on the Zoning Map, and shall meet the following
additional provisions:
   (a)    The number of access points shall be the fewest needed to allow
motorists reasonable access to each site.
   (b)    Spacing between intersections and driveways shall meet the M-43
access management standards and MDOT’s guidelines.
   (c)    Provision shall be made to share access with adjacent uses, either
now or in the future. Written shared access and maintenance agreements shall be
created, which shall state that township approval shall be required to modify
the agreements, and which shall be recorded with the county.
   (d)    No building or structure shall be erected or enlarged unless the M-43
access management regulations are met and maintained.
   (e)    No subdivision or site condominium project shall be approved unless
in compliance with the access spacing standards set forth herein. Compliance
with this
Article 26.00 shall be required to demonstrate that a lot is accessible as
required under the Land Division Act (Public Act 288 of 1967, being M.C.L.A. §§
560.101 through 560.293, as amended).
   (f)    Any change in use that requires site plan review per §
29.02 shall demonstrate compliance with the standards herein. Site plan
information shall be submitted to the MDOT to determine if a new access permit
is required.
   (g)   For building or parking lot expansions or changes in use, the Planning
Commission shall determine the extent of upgrades to bring the site into
compliance with the access standards. In making its decision, the Planning
Commission shall consider the existing and projected traffic conditions, sight
distance limitations, site topography and natural features, impacts on internal
site circulation, and recommendations from the MDOT. Required improvements may
include removal, rearrangement or redesign of site access points .
   (h)    The standards herein were developed collaboratively between the
township , MDOT and ICRC. Where conflict occurs, the more restrictive standards
shall apply.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 26.05 ADDITIONAL SITE PLAN INFORMATION.
   In addition to the information required for site plan review pursuant to §
29.02, the following information shall be provided with any application for
site plan or special land use review.
   (a)    Existing access points on the subject site and within 500 feet on
both sides of M-43, and along both sides of any intersecting roads , shall be
shown on the site plan, aerial photographs, plat, or survey.
   (b)   The applicant shall submit evidence indicating that applicable
township , ICDTR, and MDOT sight distance requirements will be met.
   (c)   Dimensions between proposed and existing access points .
   (d)    Where shared access is proposed or required, a shared access and
maintenance agreement shall be submitted for approval by the township . Once
approved, this agreement shall be recorded with the Ingham County Register of
Deeds.
   (e)    Dimensions shall be provided for driveways , including width, radii
of driveway returns and other points of curvature, throat length, and length of
any deceleration lanes or tapers. Driveway pavement markings and signs shall
also be shown on the plan.
   (f)    The site plan shall illustrate the route and dimensioned turning
movements of expected emergency vehicle, truck, tanker, delivery vehicle, waste
removal vehicle, and similar vehicle traffic. The plan should confirm that
routing the vehicles will not disrupt traffic flow at the access points or
impede maneuvering or parking within the site.
   (g)   Traffic impact study. A traffic impact study is a study which assesses
the effects that a particular development ’s traffic will have on the
surrounding transportation network. A traffic impact study will vary in range
and complexity depending on the type and size of the proposed development .
Such a study will determine the potential need for transportation improvements
due to the changes in projected traffic and traffic movements. Submittal of a
traffic impact study may be required for any use that would be expected to
generate 100 or more vehicle trips during any peak hour , or 1,000 or more
vehicle trips daily, or where modifications from the generally applicable
access spacing standards are proposed. The traffic impact study shall be
prepared by an individual who is a member of the Institute of Transportation
Engineers with demonstrated experience in production of such studies. The
methodology and analysis of the study shall be in accordance with accepted
principles as described in the handbook “Evaluating Traffic Impact Studies, a
Recommended Practice for Michigan,” developed by the MDOT and other Michigan
transportation agencies. The township or MDOT may require calculations or
micro-scale modeling to illustrate future operations at the access points and
nearby intersections and to evaluate various access alternatives.
   (h)   Review coordination. The applicant shall provide correspondence to
demonstrate that the preliminary site plan has been submitted to the MDOT or
ICDTR, as applicable, for their review and comment. Any correspondence from the
MDOT on the general access design and geometrics shall be considered during the
township ’s review processes. The township may request attendance of
representatives of the MDOT or ICDTR at coordination meetings. Once a plan or
proposal has been approved by the township , the applicant shall request an
access permit from MDOT or the ICDTR. The approval of a plan or proposal does
not negate the responsibility of an applicant to subsequently secure access
permits from the MDOT or ICDTR.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 26.06 ACCESS MANAGEMENT STANDARDS.
   Access points (not including driveways that serve a single-family home, two-
family home, or essential service) shall comply with the following standards.
The spacing standards specified in this section apply to existing and proposed
roads and driveways , with the exception of single-family residential driveways
. If there is a change in use from single-family residential to another use,
the existing access point shall be brought into compliance with the
requirements of this section, where feasible.
   A.    One access point permitted. Each lot shall be permitted one access
point . This access point may be an individual driveway , a shared access with
an adjacent use, or access via a service drive or frontage road subject to the
standards that follow. An individual driveway may be permitted where the
standards of this Article are met, provided that such driveway is located to
facilitate shared access by adjacent parcels .
   B.    Shared access  easement . The location of the access point shall
comply with the standards of this section and shall provide the opportunity for
shared access with adjoining lots , where applicable. Each lot developed under
this Ordinance shall be required to grant shared access  easements to adjoining
lots to allow for future shared access . Where a proposed parking lot is
located adjacent to the parking lot of a similar use, there shall be a
vehicular connection where feasible.
   C.   New driveway permit. A new driveway may be permitted by the Planning
Commission upon finding the conditions (l) or (2), below exist. The additional
driveway may be required to be along a side street or a shared access with an
adjacent site.
      1.    The site has adequate frontage to meet the spacing standards
between driveways specified herein, and the new driveway will not prevent
adjacent lands from complying with the access spacing standards when such lands
develop or redevelop in the future; or
      2.   A traffic impact study, prepared in accordance with accepted
practices as described in this Ordinance, demonstrates the site will generate
over 300 trips in a peak hour or 3,000 trips daily, or 400 and 4,000
respectively if the site has access to a traffic signal, and the traffic study
demonstrates the new driveway will provide improved traffic conditions (e.g.,
less congestion, safer ingress/egress) and will not negatively impact through
traffic flow.
   D.    Driveway spacing. Driveways shall be separated from other driveways
along the same side of the public street the distances specified in Table 1
(measured from centerline to centerline as shown in the figure), based on the
posted speed limit. Required spacing along M-43 is greater than on other roads
, consistent with MDOT access guidelines, because M-43 is intended to primarily
accommodate through traffic, rather than provide access to properties. For the
purposes of subsections D, F, and G, driveways that serve a single or two-
family residence shall be disregarded.
Table 1
Minimum Spacing Between Driveways
Located on the Same Side of M-43
Posted Speed Driveway Spacing
(mph)        (in feet) *
Table 1
Minimum Spacing Between Driveways
Located on the Same Side of M-43
Posted Speed Driveway Spacing
(mph)        (in feet) *
25           130
30           185
35           245
40           300
45           350
50+          455
 
*Unless greater spacing is required by MDOT or ICDTR or is required to meet
other standards herein.
   E.   Service to adjoining sites. Where feasible, access points shall be
located to ensure the adjacent site( s) can also meet the access location
standards.
   F.   Alignment of driveways on opposite sides of road . Driveways shall
either be aligned directly across from driveways on the opposite side of the
street or offset the distance indicated in Table 2, measured centerline to
centerline. The Planning Commission may reduce the offset to not less than 150
feet where the offsets are aligned to not create left-turn conflicts.
Table 2
Spacing Between Driveways on
Opposite Sides of M- 43
Posted Speed Driveway Spacing
(mph)        (in feet) *
Table 2
Spacing Between Driveways on
Opposite Sides of M- 43
Posted Speed Driveway Spacing
(mph)        (in feet) *
25           255
30           325
35           425
40           525
45           630
50+          750
 
*   Unless greater spacing is required by MDOT or ICDTR, or is required to meet
other standards herein.
   G.   Driveway spacing from intersections. Spacing of driveways from
intersections shall comply with the distances specified in Table 3 (measured
from pavement edge to pavement edge as shown in the figure).
 
Table 3
Minimum Driveway spacing from Intersections *
                                       Minimum Spacing for Minimum Spacing for
Location of Access  Type of            a Full Movement     a Driveway
Point               Intersecting Road  Driveway **         Restricting Left-
                                                           turns
Along M-43          Another arterial   300                 125
                    Collector or local 200                 125
Along a county road M-43               Ingham County Department of
                                       Transportation and Roads
*    Unless greater spacing is required by MDOT or ICDTR, or is required to
meet other standards herein.
**    Greater spacing may be required based upon the posted speed of the road
and the spacing distances required by Table 1.
   H.   Service drives . Where direct access consistent with the previous
standards cannot be achieved, access should be via a shared driveway or service
drive , and/or a side street . The Planning Commission may require a front or
rear service drive where such a facility can provide access to signalized
locations, or where such a facility can minimize the number of driveways , and
provide safer ingress and egress .
   I.   Shared access with public or private roads . Where a new public or
private road is proposed to intersect with M-43, the road shall be designed to
facilitate shared access with adjacent parcels . Where a private road is
proposed to adjoin a side lot line , an access  easement shall be granted to
allow the adjoining parcel to have driveway  access to the road . The township
may require construction of stub roads to allow future shared and lateral cross
access to adjoining lots .
   J.    Service drive standards. Where the Planning Commission determines that
reducing the number of driveways may have a beneficial impact on traffic
operations and safety while preserving the property owner’s right to reasonable
access , a shared driveway , or front or rear service drive connecting two or
more lots or uses may be required. In particular, these facilities may be
required where recommended in the M-43/M-52 Access Management Plan or Township
Master Plan ; near existing traffic signals or near locations having potential
for future signalization; along major arterial roadways with high traffic
volumes; and along segments having high accident rates; and where there is
limited sight distance . Service drives shall be constructed in accordance with
the following standards:
      1.    Service drives shall generally be parallel with or perpendicular to
the front property line and may be located either in front of, adjacent to, or
behind, principal buildings . In considering the most appropriate alignment for
a service drive , the Planning Commission shall consider the setbacks of
existing buildings , anticipated traffic flow for the site, and the M-43
Corridor Plan .
      2.    The service drive shall be within an access  easement permitting
traffic circulation between properties. This easement shall be at least 24 feet
wide and recorded with the Ingham County Register of Deeds. The required width
shall remain free and clear of obstructions, unless otherwise approved by the
Planning Commission . Each property owner shall be responsible for maintenance
of the easement and service drive on the owner’s property.
      3.    Service drives shall be set back as far as reasonably possible from
the intersection of the access  driveway with the public street (see figure). A
minimum of 20 feet shall be maintained between the public street  right-of-way
and the pavement of the frontage road . A minimum of 60 feet of throat depth
shall be provided at the access point , measured between the public street
 right-of-way and the pavement of the parallel section of the service road .
      4.    Service drives shall have a minimum pavement width of 20 feet and
shall be constructed with the curb and gutter in accordance with public street
standards. The Planning Commission may modify these standards based upon site
conditions, anticipated traffic volumes, and anticipated types of traffic.
      5.    Service drives are intended to be used exclusively for circulation,
not as parking maneuvering aisles. The Planning Commission may require the
posting of “no parking” signs along the service drive . However, one-way or
two-way service drives constructed with additional width for parallel parking
may be allowed if it can be demonstrated through a traffic impact study that
parking along the service drive will not significantly affect the capacity,
safety or operation of the service drive .
      6.    The site plan shall indicate the proposed elevation of the service
drive at the property line and the township shall maintain a record of all
service drive elevations so that grades between adjoining sites can be
coordinated.
      7.    The alignment of the service drive can be refined to meet the needs
of the site and anticipated traffic conditions, provided the resulting terminus
allows the drive to be extended through the adjacent site(s). This may require
use of aerial photographs, property line maps, topographic information, and
other supporting documentation
      8.   Where it is not possible to develop a separate service drive (for
example, on shallow sites or on redevelopment sites), the Planning Commission
may require a drive connecting parking lots.
   K.   Temporary direct access . Where the Planning Commission determines that
shared access is needed, but it is not yet available, temporary direct access
may be permitted, provided the plan is designed to accommodate a future service
drive , and a written agreement is submitted that the temporary access will be
removed by the applicant when the alternative access becomes available. This
may require posting of a financial performance guarantee .
   L.    Safe sight distance . Driveways shall be located to provide safe sight
distance , as determined by the applicable road agency.
   M.   Interference with municipal facilities. No driveway shall interfere
with municipal facilities such as street lights or traffic signal poles, signs
, fire hydrants, crosswalks, bus loading zones, utility poles, fire alarm
supports, drainage structures , or other necessary street  structures , unless
the applicant makes provisions for relocation of such facilities.
   N.    Timing of improvements. Road or intersection control or driveway
design improvements shall be made to improve overall traffic operations prior
to the project completion or occupancy of the first building .
   O.    Subdivision and condominium  roads. Roads to serve new subdivision or
condominiums shall comply with the driveway spacing requirements in the
previous subsections D through G.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 26.07 NONMOTORIZED PATHWAYS.
   The Planning Commission may require the construction of a nonmotorized
pathway along M-43. All nonmotorized pathways shall be constructed in
accordance with the specifications of the township and the MDOT. On each site
there shall be a pedestrian connection between the nonmotorized pathway and the
entrance to the building , with safe delineation of pedestrian and vehicular
circulation areas.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 26.08 APPLICATION TO EXISTING SITES AND MODIFICATION OF STANDARDS.
   A.    Modifications by Planning Commission. Given the variation in physical
conditions along the corridor, modifications to the requirements herein may be
permitted by the Planning Commission as part of the site plan review process,
upon a finding that the following conditions apply:
      1.    Practical difficulties exist on the site that make compliance
unreasonable (because of, for example sight distance limitations, topography,
wetlands , drains or water bodies, woodlands that will be preserved, existing
development , existing non-conforming width, unique site configuration or
shape), or existing off-site access points make it impractical to fully comply
with the standards.
      2.    The use involves an access improvement to an existing site or a new
use that will not generate any more traffic than the previous use, or there is
only one access point that is not being changed.
      3.   The proposed modification is consistent with the general intent of
the preceding standards, the recommendations of the M-43/M-52 Access Management
Plan, and MDOT guidelines, and both the township and MDOT staffs support the
proposed access design.
      4.    If deemed necessary by the Planning Commission , a traffic study by
a qualified traffic engineer may be required to verify that the proposed
modifications will improve traffic operations and safety along M-43, and are
not simply for the convenience of the development .
      5.    Indirect or shared access has been provided to the extent
practical.
   B.    Temporary driveway . The Planning Commission may require a temporary
driveway for a set period of time or until an adjacent site develops allowing
for shared access in accordance with this ordinance. The Planning Commission
may require that a performance guarantee be provided to ensure the removal of
the driveway upon expiration of the temporary driveway permit.
   C.    Appeals. The decision of the Planning Commission may be appealed to
the Zoning Board of Appeals . In consideration of this variance , the ZBA shall
also apply the standards in this article in addition to the other variance
criteria.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
ARTICLE 27.00
MU, MIXED USE OVERLAY DISTRICT
§ 27.01 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   The Mixed Use Overlay District is intended to promote the development of a
pedestrian oriented, mixed-use district in which a variety of complementary
retail, commercial, office , civic, and residential uses are permitted.
   The Mixed Use Overlay District is further intended to:
   A.   Encourage innovative, neotraditional mixed-use development .
   B.   Reduce sprawl and segregation of land use and encourage more efficient
use of land and public services by promoting a compact settlement pattern and
mixed use.
   C.   Discourage the development of businesses that contribute to traffic
congestion and/or disrupt the pedestrian environment, such as drive-in and
drive-through businesses, automobile service stations , and new and used
vehicles sales or service establishments.
   D.   Encourage shared parking facilities, rather than separate off-street
parking facilities for each individual use.
   E.   Promote the creation of urban places which are oriented to pedestrians,
thereby promoting citizen security and social interaction.
   F.   Reinforce physical, visual, and spatial features through the consistent
use of urban design standards. Such design standards shall harmoniously relate
the design features of structures and developments to each other, resulting in
a coherent overall pattern of development .
   G.   Discourage businesses that create objectionable noise, odors, or glare.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 27.02 APPLICABILITY OF OVERLAY ZONING CONCEPT.
   The Mixed Use Overlay District is a mapped zoning district that imposes a
set of requirements in addition to those of the underlying zoning district . In
this case, the underlying zoning districts initially are R-1, One-Family
Residential, B-2, Commercial Center, RM-1, Multiple-Family Residential, and I-
1, Light Industrial.
   In an area where an overlay zone is established, the property is placed
simultaneously in the two zones, and the property may be developed only under
the applicable conditions and requirements of both zones. It is intended that
existing uses maintain conformity with underlying zoning standards. Any
expansion or renovation of existing uses must comply with underlying zoning
standards. Any redevelopment or new development shall conform to the Mixed Use
Overlay District standards. In the event there is a conflict between the
requirements of the two zones, the requirements of the Mixed Use Overlay
District shall govern.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 27.03 CREATION OF MIXED USE OVERLAY DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   The Mixed Use Overlay District boundaries shall be as established on the
Official Zoning Map. Mixed Use Overlay Districts may be established or amended
according to the Zoning Ordinance procedures set forth in §
29.06.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 27.04 PERMITTED USES AND STRUCTURES.
   A.   Principal uses and structures. In all areas zoned Mixed Use Overlay
District, no building shall be erected , used, or structurally altered, nor
shall the land or premises be used in whole or in part, except for one or more
of the following principal permitted uses :
      1.   Multiple-family housing, which may be in the form of townhouses ,
apartments , brownstone apartments , or similar configuration. Business and
office uses may occupy a building used for residential purposes, provided that:
         a.   No business or office use shall be located on the same floor that
is used for residential purposes.
         b.   No floor may be used in whole or in part for business or office
use on a floor located above a floor used for residential purposes.
         c.   Where there are nonresidential and residential uses in a building
, the residential uses shall be provided with separate, private entrances.
         d.   Minimum open space . Thirty percent of net parcel area, at least
50% of which shall be usable recreation area.
      2.   Bed and breakfast establishments , containing ten or fewer units.
      3.   Trade schools and colleges .
      4.   Business establishments that perform services on the premises, such
as, but not limited to: banks and other financial institutions (not including
drive-through), insurance offices, real estate offices, and travel agencies.
      5.   Churches and other places of worship.
      6.   Clubs , fraternal organizations , and lodge halls.
      7.   Dry cleaning establishments (not to exceed 4,000 square feet),
dealing directly with the consumer, but not including drive-through facilities.
Dry cleaning plants serving more than the establishment on site shall be
prohibited.
      8.   Financial institutions.
      9.   Funeral and interment services.
      10.   Generally recognized retail businesses that supply commodities on
the premises and occupy 10,000 square feet or less of net floor area , such as,
but not limited to: stores selling groceries, meats, fruits and produce, dairy
products, baked goods, and other specialty food products, drugs, dry goods,
flowers, clothing, notions, furniture, and hardware.
      11.   Hotels .
      12.   Medical laboratories.
      13.   Medical offices, occupying 10,000 square feet or less of net floor
area .
      14.   Housing for the elderly.
      15.   Indoor commercial recreational facilities , such as health clubs ,
hardball and racquetball facilities, pool and billiard establishments, tennis,
archery, and similar facilities.
      16.   Newspaper offices.
      17.   Nursing and convalescent homes , subject to the provisions in §
8.02, subsection S.
      18.   Offices of an executive, administrative, or professional nature,
occupying 10,000 square feet or less of net floor area .
      19.   Outdoor theater , plazas, parks, and public gathering places.
      20.   Personal service shops, occupying 4,000 square feet or less of net
floor area , including, but not limited to: repair shops (such as watch, radio,
television, shoe repair, and home appliance), tailor and dressmaking shops,
beauty and barber shops, and photographic studios.
      21.   Public and quasi-public uses such as municipal offices, court
houses, public off-street parking, libraries, museums, and public safety
facilities.
      22.   Research and development businesses, occupying 20,000 square feet
or less of net floor area .
      23.   Retail sales in which both a workshop and retail outlet or showroom
are required, such as, but not limited to establishments for plumbers,
electricians, interior decorators, upholsterers, printers, and photographers,
subject to the following provisions:
         a.   Not more than 80% of the total useable floor area shall be used
for service, repair or processing functions, and
         b.   Retail or showroom functions shall be located in the portion of
the building where the customer entrance is located.
      24.   Residential care facilities.
      25.   Standard restaurants (except drive-ins and drive-throughs), taverns
and bars, where the patrons are served while seated within the building
 occupied by the establishment.
      26.   Take-out food and beverage sales when accessory to a full-service
restaurant , provided that the area occupied by the take-out service shall not
exceed 25% of the net floor area of the principal use .
      27.   Theaters , assembly halls, community centers, or similar places of
assembly.
      28.   Outdoor cafes, outdoor eating areas.
      29.   Essential services , subject to the provisions in §
2.16.
      30.   Adult foster family homes , family child day care homes, child
foster family group homes , any of which shall have a capacity of no more than
six.
      31.   Brewpub s, subject to the requirements of §
8.02, subsection NN.
      32.   Uses and structures accessory to the above, subject to the
provisions in §
2.03.
   B.   Special uses. The following uses may be permitted by the Township Board
, subject to the conditions specified for each use; review and approval of the
site plan by the Planning Commission and Township Board ; any special
conditions imposed by the Planning Commission or Township Board that are
necessary to fulfill the purposes of this Ordinance; and, the procedures and
requirements in §
29.03.
      1.   New single-family detached dwelling units . (Special use approval
shall not be required for expansion or renovation of a single-family dwelling
in existence at the time of adoption of this Article, provided that such
expansion or renovation is in compliance with the adopted Building Code.)
      2.   Veterinary  office or clinics providing medical, surgical, and
grooming services for small animals.
      3.   Wireless communication facilities on monopoles, subject to the
requirements in §
8.02, subsection V.
      4.   Adult foster care large group homes and adult foster care congregate
facilities.
      5.   Microbreweries , subject to the requirements in §
8.02, subsection NN.
   C.   Uses not permitted. 
      1.   All types of drive-through or drive-in facilities shall be not be
permitted in the MU, Mixed Use Overlay District.
      2.   Uses having outside storage shall be prohibited.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013; Ord. 56, passed 8-13-2014)
§ 27.05 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   Buildings and uses in the Mixed Use Overlay District, except for single-
family detached dwellings , shall comply with the following requirements.
   A.   Building entrances. The main public entrance of the structure shall
face Grand River Avenue. If the site is on a corner, it may have its main
entrance oriented to either street . In no case shall the main public entrance
open directly onto a parking lot. No overhead doors are permitted facing a
street .
   B.   Façade design. All building facades that face a street shall conform
with the following design criteria:
      1.   Windows. All building facades visible from the street shall have
windows with transparent, non-reflective glass, with the following
requirements:
         a.   First floor. Minimum 30% of facade, 70% maximum.
         b.   Second floor and above. Minimum 20% of facade, 60% maximum.
         c.   Butt-joint glazing is prohibited. A butt-joint is a joint formed
by two pieces of glass united end to end without overlapping.
         d.   Windows on the first floor shall be a minimum of two feet above
the finished floor level.
      2.   Exterior building materials. Traditional building materials, such as
masonry, stone, brick, or wood, shall be used as the predominant exterior
building materials for all new construction, renovations, and additions. Plain
concrete block, plain concrete, corrugated metal, plywood, and vinyl siding and
sheet pressboard may only be used as secondary exterior finish materials,
provided they cover no more than 10% of the surface area. Foundation material
may be plain concrete or plain concrete block when the foundation material does
not extend more than two feet above grade . Cement-based finishes, cement
plaster, and Exterior Insulation Finish System (E.I.F.S.) are permitted only if
used a minimum of ten feet above grade , where they will be less susceptible to
damage. The selection of exterior building materials shall contribute to the
traditional design and character of the building .
      3.   Architectural guidelines. Traditional architecture is favored in the
Mixed Use Overlay District, rather than radical design themes, structures and
roof forms, which would draw unnecessary attention to the buildings . Building
facades that incorporate canopies or walls with mock gables must provide a roof
component to provide depth and give a more authentic appearance.
   C.   Side or rear facade design. Wherever a side or rear facade is visible
from a public street , or if parking is located at the side or rear of a
building , the facade shall be designed to create a pleasing appearance, in
accordance with the following design criteria:
      1.   Materials and architectural features similar to those present on the
front of the building shall be used on the side or rear facade.
      2.   Dumpster and service areas shall be completely screened with a
landscape hedge, a fence , a wall, or a combination thereof.
      3.   Open areas shall be landscaped with lawn, ground cover, ornamental
shrubs, and trees, provided that sufficient light penetrates into the space.
   D.   Awnings. Awnings shall be permitted on buildings as follows:
      1.   All awnings must be made from canvas fabric or similar water-proof
material, rather than metal, aluminum, plastic, or rigid fiberglass. However,
awnings that are a permanent part of the building architecture may be
constructed of metal, wood, or other traditional building materials where they
will add diversity and interest to the facade, and only if the design and
materials are consistent with the overall design of the building .
      2.   All awnings shall be attached directly to the building , rather than
supported by columns or poles.
   E.   Lighting. 
      Exterior lighting shall comply with the requirements in §
2.12. Lighting must be placed and shielded so as to direct the light onto the
site and away from adjoining properties. The lighting source shall not be
directly visible from adjoining properties. Floodlights, unshielded wall pack
units, other types of unshielded lights, and lights where the lens is visible
outside of the light fixture shall be prohibited. Traditional-style lighting
fixtures may be used if such fixtures are similar in appearance to existing
traditional-style fixtures in downtown Williamstown.
      Sidewalks and parking areas shall be properly lit to facilitate the safe
movement of pedestrians and vehicles and provide a secure environment. In
parking areas, the light intensity shall average a minimum of 1.0 foot candle,
measured five feet above the surface. In pedestrian areas, the light intensity
shall average a minimum of 2.0 foot candles, measured five feet above the
surface. The maximum average light intensity shall be ten footcandles.
   F.   Parking. Parking and parking lot design shall comply with the following
standards, in addition to the provisions of
Article 4.00.
      1.   No new parking lot shall be created nor any existing parking lot
expanded in front of a building unless the Planning Commission determines that
parking in front of the building would be acceptable for either of the
following reasons:
         a.   Front yard parking is required to maintain the continuity of
building  setbacks in the block while making efficient use of the site; or
         b.   Front yard parking is required for the purposes of traffic safety
and to minimize driveway  curb cuts where the new parking lot is proposed to
connect with one or more parking lots on adjoining parcels .
         Unless the Planning Commission determines that parking in front is
permissible, new or expanded parking lots on the interior of the lots shall be
located to the rear or side of the buildings , accessed by means of common
driveways , preferably from side streets or lanes. Parking lots shall be small
in scale where possible, and connected with parking lots on adjacent
properties. Cross-access easements for adjacent lots with connected parking
lots shall be required. Common, shared parking facilities are encouraged.
Required parking may be accommodated off-site in common, shared parking
facilities.
      2.   In order to maximize the amount of land area left for landscaping
and open space , paving shall be confined to the minimum area necessary to
comply with the parking requirements of
Article 4.00.
      3.   The parking lot layout shall take into consideration pedestrian
circulation. Pedestrian crosswalks shall be provided, where necessary and
appropriate, shall be distinguished by textured paving and shall be integrated
into the pedestrian network system. Pavement textures shall be required on
pedestrian access ways, and are strongly encouraged elsewhere in the parking
lot, as surfacing materials, or when used as accents.
      4.   Surface parking lots shall be screened from the street with a three-
foot high red or brown brick wall, with a continuous row of deciduous trees
along the street , or a wrought iron fence with a hedge between the fence and
the street .
   G.   Front building  setback and landscaping . The minimum front setback
shall be five feet and the maximum front setback shall be 15 feet. Structures
shall be provided with landscaping along their foundations. The landscaped area
must be at least three feet in depth and must be planted with at least one
shrub per three lineal feet of foundation. For each 100 square feet of hard-
surfaced area between the building and the street lot line as least one of the
following amenities must be provided: a bench or other seating, a tree, or a
landscape planter.
   H.   Service access. A service alley or designated loading space shall be
reserved at the rear of the building .
   I.   Signs . One wall sign shall be permitted per face of a building or
storefront, plus each business shall be permitted one pedestrian-oriented blade
sign (maximum of three square feet in area) that projects over the sidewalk.
One wall or projecting sign is permitted, provided it does not exceed one and
one-half square feet per lineal foot of building frontage, with a maximum of 48
square feet. Roof signs , plastic panel signs , box signs , pole signs ,
portable signs , fluorescent-colored signs , and billboards are not permitted.
Outline tubing signs (neon signs ) shall be permitted as window signs only.
   J.   Sidewalks and sidewalk displays.
      1.   An eight-foot wide concrete sidewalk shall be required along the
front of every parcel for all development that requires site plan review. The
sidewalk shall be located in the road  right-of-way , abutting the right-of-way
line.
      2.   Sidewalk displays shall be permitted directly in front of an
establishment, provided at least five feet of clearance is maintained along
pedestrian circulation routes.
         a.   Display cases shall be located against the building wall and
shall not be more than two feet deep. Display cases shall not exceed more than
two feet into the sidewalk. The display area shall not exceed 50% percent of
the length of the store front.
         b.   Display cases shall be permitted only during normal business
hours, and shall be removed at the end of the business day. Cardboard boxes
shall not be used for sidewalk displays.
         c.   Sidewalk displays shall maintain a clean, litter-free and well-
kept appearance at all times and shall be compatible with the colors and
character of the storefront from which the business operates.
   K.   Courtyards and plazas. Exterior public and semi-public spaces, such as
courtyards or plazas, shall be designed for function, to enhance surrounding
buildings and provide amenities for users, in the form of textured paving,
landscaping , lighting, street trees, benches, trash receptacles, and other
items of street furniture, as appropriate. Courtyards shall have recognizable
edges defined on at least three sides by buildings , walls, elements of
landscaping , and elements of street furniture, in order to create a strong
sense of enclosure.
   L.   Mechanical equipment. 
      All air conditioning units, HVAC systems, exhaust pipes or stacks,
elevator housing and satellite dishes and other telecommunications receiving
devices shall be thoroughly screened from view from the public right-of-way and
from adjacent properties, by using walls, fences , roof elements, penthouse-
type screening devices, or landscaping .
      Fire escapes shall not be permitted on a building ’s front facade. In
buildings requiring a second means of egress pursuant to the local building
codes, internal stairs or other routes of egress shall be used.
   M.   Security gates. Solid metal security gates or solid roll-down metal
windows shall be prohibited. Link or grill type security devices shall be
permitted only if installed from inside, within the window or door frames; or,
if installed on the outside, if the coil box is recessed and concealed behind
the building wall. Security grills shall be recessed and concealed during
normal business hours. Models that provide a sense of transparency, in light
colors, are encouraged. Other types of security devices fastened to the
exterior walls are prohibited.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 27.06 AREA, HEIGHT, BULK, AND PLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   Buildings and uses in the Mixed Use Overlay District are subject to the
area, height, bulk , and placement requirements in
Article 28.00, Schedule of Regulations.
   The following chart summarizes the regulations in
Article 28.00, but the user is cautioned to refer to
Article 28.00 for more detailed information and explanatory notes.
 
Minimum Lot Area  None specified
Minimum Lot Width None specified
Maximum Height    3 stories, 40 feet
Setbacks
   Front       Minimum: 5 feet
                  Maximum: 15 feet
   Side        See footnote (a)
   Rear        20 feet - See footnote (b)
 
(a)   The side yard  setback shall be zero except under the following
circumstances:
   (i)   Where a larger setback is required by the Building Code.
   (ii)   On interior side yards , the minimum side setback shall be 15 feet if
structures facing the interior side lot line contain windows or other openings.
(An interior side yard abuts the side or rear lot line of another parcel . An
exterior side yard abuts a street or alley .)
   (iii)   A landscape buffer having a minimum width of ten feet shall be
provided adjacent to a residential district, and no structures , off-street
parking, or loading shall be located within the buffer. The landscaping within
the buffer shall comply with the standards for screening in §
5.02, subsection E.
(b)   A landscape buffer having a minimum width of ten feet shall be provided
adjacent to a residential district, and no structures , off-street parking, or
loading shall be located within the buffer. The landscaping within the buffer
shall comply with the standards for screening in §
5.02, subsection E.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 27.07 SITE PLAN REVIEW.
   Site plan review and approval is required for all uses in accordance with §
29.02.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
ARTICLE 28.00
SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS
§ 28.01 INTENT AND SCOPE OF REQUIREMENTS.
   The purpose of this Article is to establish regulations governing lot size,
required yards , setbacks , building height , and development  density for each
zoning district . No building shall be erected , nor shall an existing building
be altered, enlarged, or rebuilt, nor shall any open space surrounding any
building be encroached upon or reduced in any manner, except in conformity with
the regulations established for the district in which the building or use is
located. A portion of a lot used to comply with the regulations in this Article
with respect to one building or use shall not be simultaneously used to comply
with the regulations with respect to another building or use.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 28.02 SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL STRUCTURES.
   All buildings , uses, and parcels of land shall comply with the regulations
set forth in the following Schedule of Regulations and footnotes thereto.
FOR PRINCIPAL STRUCTURES
         Lot Minimum     Maximum Height  Minimum Required Setback  
                         of Structure b (In Feet) d, e, j
                                                                    Min.
                                                                    Usable Max.
         Area                                  Each                 Floor  Coverage
District (sq.ft.) Width  Stories Feet    Front Side Rear Driveway cArea   of Lot by
         a, nn    (feet)                 Yard  Yard Yard            Per    All
                                                                    Unit   Buildings
                                                                    (sq.   (%)
                                                                    ft.)
             Lot Minimum     Maximum Height  Minimum Required Setback  
                             of Structure b (In Feet) d, e, j
                                                                        Min.
                                                                        Usable Max.
             Area                                  Each                 Floor  Coverage
District     (sq.ft.) Width  Stories Feet    Front Side Rear Driveway cArea   of Lot by
             a, nn    (feet)                 Yard  Yard Yard            Per    All
                                                                        Unit   Buildings
                                                                        (sq.   (%)
                                                                        ft.)
                                                   10
R-1, One-    20,000 z 100 z  2 ½    35      25 f, g,   35   4          900    20%
Family                                       g, z  h,   g, z
                                                   i, z
R-1-                                               10
S Suburban   40,000 k 120 k  2 ½    35      25 f, k,   35 g 4          900 k  20%
Residential                                  g     g,
                                                   h, i
RR, Rural    90,000   240    2 ½ q  35 q    50 g  30   35   10 aa      900    15%
Residential                                        g, i g
RE, Rural    5 acres  300    2 ½ q  35 q    50 g  30   40   10  aa     900    10%
Estates                                            g, i g
AG-SF,                                             30
Agricultural 10 acres 300    2 ½ q  35 q    50 g  g, i 40 g 10  aa     900    10%
Small Farms
RM-1,                                              50   50
Multiple-    Footnote 200    3       35      50 m, m,   m,   10         p      25%
Family       1                               n     n, o n, o
Residential
AG-C,        40 acres                              50
Commercial   ll       330    2 ½ q  35 q    50 g  g, i 50 g 10  aa     900    10%
Agricultural
OS-1, Office 20,000   100    2       35      45 t  10   20   10         --     --
                                                   r, n r, n
B-1, Limited                                       20   20
Business     40,000   200    2       35      45 t  r,   r, n 10         --     --
                                                   n, s
B-2,                                               20
Commercial   40,000   200    2       35      45 t  i,   20   10         --     --
Center                                             n,   r, n
                                                   r, s
                                                   40   40
I-1, Light   90,000   300    2       40      75 v  i,   u,   10         --     --
Industrial                                         n,   n, w
                                                   u, w
PD, Planned  x        x      x       x       x     x    x    x          x      x
Development
GD, Green
Zone Planned y        y      y       y       y     y    y    y          y      y
Development
MU, Mixed    oo       oo     oo      oo      oo    oo   oo   oo         oo     oo
Use Overlay
 
SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS FOR ACCESSORY BUILDINGS  bb
         Maximum Height of Structure  b, Minimum Required Setback
         jj                               (In Feet) ii
                                          Front     Each Side Rear Yard Maximum
District Stories Feet                     Yard  cc Yard  cc  cc      Lot
                                                                        Coverage
             Maximum Height of Structure  b, Minimum Required Setback
             jj                               (In Feet) ii
                                              Front     Each Side Rear Yard Maximum
District     Stories Feet                     Yard  cc Yard  cc  cc      Lot
                                                                            Coverage
R-1, One-    1       14                       dd        10 g, h,  10 ff     kk
Family                                                  i, hh
R-1-S,                                                  10 g, h,
Suburban     1       14                       dd        i, k, hh  10 ff     kk
Residential
RR, Rural    2 ½ q  35 q                     200 ee    30 i      10        kk
Residential
RE, Rural    2 ½ q  35 q                     200 ee    30 i      10        kk
Estates
AG-SF,
Agricultural 2 ½ q  35 q                     200 ee    30 i      10        kk
Small Farms
RM-1,
Multiple-    3       35                       200 ee    50 hh     10 hh     kk
Family
Residential
AG-C,
Commercial   2 ½ q  35 q                     ff        50 g, i   10        kk
Agricultural
OS-1, Office 2       35                       45 gg     10        10        kk
B-1, Limited 2       35                       45 gg     20 r, s   10        kk
Business
B-2,
Commercial   2       35                       45 gg     10 i, s   10        kk
Center
I-1, Light   2       40                       75 gg     10 i, u   10        kk
Industrial
PD, Planned  x       x                        x         x         x         x
Development
GD, Green
Zone Planned y       y                        y         y         y         y
Development
MU, Mixed    oo      oo                       oo        oo        oo        oo
Use Overlay
 
FOOTNOTES TO THE SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS
[a]   Lot Area. “Net Lot Area ,” as defined in §
1.03, shall be used to determine compliance with lot area requirements.
Regardless of the minimum lot size specified in the Schedule of Regulations, no
new parcel shall be created unless the applicant demonstrates that the parcel
has adequate usable land area, such that the parcel can be built upon or used
in compliance with Zoning Ordinance standards. In determining whether this
criterion has been met, issues that shall be taken into consideration include,
but are not necessarily limited to the following:
   (1)   Each parcel shall either be served by a public sanitary sewer and
wastewater treatment system or be capable of being served by an on-site sewage
disposal system, such as a septic system, approved by the Ingham County Health
Department;
   (2)   Each parcel shall either be served by a public water system or shall
be capable of obtaining adequate potable water from an on-site well approved by
the Ingham County Health Department;
   (3)   Unusual topography which may prevent use of portions of a parcel ;
   (4)   Presence of easements or rights-of-way that restrict use of a parcel ;
   (5)   Wetlands , surface water, or floodplains that restrict or prevent use
of portions of a parcel ;
   (6)   Soils that are incapable of supporting a foundation for a building ;
and
   (7)   The shape of a parcel and/or building footprint with respect to
minimum practical dwelling unit dimensions.
      Nothing in items (1) and (2) in the above list shall obligate the
township to provide public sanitary sewers, wastewater treatment, or public
water utilities.
      A portion of each lot may be occupied by wetlands , ponds, lakes , or
floodplains , provided that if such features are present, the proposed lot
shall have a minimum of 40,000 square feet of contiguous, accessible, buildable
area , unencumbered by such features.
[b]   Exceptions to Height Standards. The height standards shall not apply to
certain structures listed in §
2.16.
[c]   Driveway  Setbacks. Driveway  setback requirements only apply to rear and
side property lines .
[d]   Setback from Water Bodies. A minimum 60-foot setback shall be maintained
from any lake , pond, other open body of water, or wetland , unless a larger
setback is required by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ).
This requirement shall apply to all principal, accessory, and other structures
, including roads and drainage.
[e]   Measurement of Setbacks. Required front setbacks shall be measured from
the existing right-of-way line.
[f]   Modifications to Front Setback Requirements. Where at least 40% of the
lots within a block on the same side of the street within a subdivision are
developed with buildings having an average front yard with a variation in depth
of not more than six feet, the average setback of said lots shall apply to new
construction on vacant lots in the block ; provided, that in no instance shall
a front yard greater than 50 feet or less than 25 feet be required.
[g]   Minimum Setbacks for Nonresidential Uses. Permitted nonresidential uses
shall comply with the setback requirements set forth in
Article 8.00 for specific uses. Where setback requirements are not specified in
Article 8.00, permitted nonresidential uses shall comply with the minimum
setback requirements set forth in the Schedule of Regulations, except that the
side yard shall not be less than 20 feet.
[h]   Existing Lots Having a Width of Less Than 70 Feet. For existing lots of
less than 70 feet in width, each side yard may be reduced to not less than 10%
of the width of the lot , provided that no side yard shall be less than five
feet in width.
[i]   Setback on Side Yards Facing a Street. On corner lots there shall be
maintained a front yard along each street frontage.
[j]   Parking Setbacks. Off-street parking shall comply with the requirements
in §
4.01, subsection B.
[k]   Minimum Requirements for Two-Family Dwellings. Two-family dwellings in
the R-1-S district shall comply with the following requirements:
      Minimum Lot Area: 60,000 sq. ft.
      Minimum Lot Width : 180 ft.
      Minimum Floor Area: 700 sq. ft.
      Minimum Side Yard  Setback : 15 ft.
[l]   Minimum Lot Area in Multiple-Family Districts. Sufficient lot area shall
be provided to comply with the standards in §
8.03, subsection B.
[m]   Building  Setbacks in Multiple-Family Districts. The minimum distance
between any two multiple-family structures  erected on the same lot or parcel
shall be determined in accordance with §
8.03, subsection B.
[n]   Parking Setback Adjacent to a Residential District. Off-street parking
shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from any residential district boundary.
[o]   Parking Setback in Multiple-Family Districts. Off-street parking lots in
the RM-1 District shall comply with the requirements in §
4.01, subsection B.
[p]   Minimum Floor Area in the RM-1 District.
 
Number of Bedrooms Required Floor Area (sq. ft.)
0                  500
1                  500
2                  700
3                  900
4                  1,000
Each additional    100
 
[q]   Exceptions to Height Standards for Agricultural Uses. The maximum height
of permitted accessory farm buildings that are essential and customarily used
in agricultural operations associated with a bona-fide farm (as defined in §
1.03) shall be 45 feet, except that the maximum height of silos shall be 100
feet, provided that all such accessory farm buildings shall be located at least
100 feet from any residential dwelling other than the dwelling on the lot or
parcel where the accessory farm buildings are located.
[r]   Minimum Setback Adjacent to a Residential Use. Buildings in commercial
and office districts shall be set back a minimum of 30 feet from any
residential district boundary.
[s]   Side Yard  Setback in Certain Commercial Areas. The interior side yard
may be reduced to zero where there is party wall construction if such party
wall is composed of fireproof materials and provided further that such party
wall contains no windows, doors, or other openings. However, if the adjoining
property is used for residential purposes, a 30-foot wide side yard  setback
shall be provided.
[t]   Front Setback Where a Service Drive is Required. The front yard  setback
shall be a minimum of 52 feet on parcels where a front service drive is
required.
[u]   Minimum Setback Adjacent to a Residential Use. Buildings in industrial
districts shall be set back a minimum of 75 feet from any residential district
boundary.
[v]   Front Yard  Setback in Industrial Parks. In industrial park subdivisions
that are designed so that lots face each other or both sides of an internal
road , the minimum front yard  setback shall be 40 feet, provided that the
required front yard is landscaped in accordance with §
5.03, and does not contain any parking or loading facilities.
[w]   Setback Requirements for Outside Storage. If permitted, outside storage
in an industrial district shall comply with the requirements in §
22.03.
[x]   Planned Development Regulations. See
Article 25.00 and §
29.04 for development standards in the PD, Planned Development District.
[y]   Green Zone Planned Development Regulations. See
Article 29.00 for development standards in the GD, Green Zone Planned
Development District.
[z]   In the absence of public sanitary sewer service and waste water
treatment, development in the R-1 District shall comply with the minimum lot
area, lot width , and setback requirements specified for the R-1-S District.
[aa]   Driveways shall be set back four feet in residential developments
developed under the Open Space Preservation Option.
[bb]   Accessory Building Standards. See §
2.03 for additional regulations regarding accessory buildings and structures .
[cc]   Attached Accessory Buildings. Unless otherwise specified, accessory
buildings that are attached to the principal building shall be considered a
part of the principal building for the purposes of determining conformance with
dimensional requirements [see §
2.03(B)].
[dd]   Detached Accessory Buildings in Front Yard. Detached accessory buildings
are not permitted in the front yard of the R-1 and R-1-S Districts.
[ee]   Detached Accessory Buildings in Front Yard. Detached garages, pole
barns, and other accessory buildings may be permitted in the front yard of
single-family residences in the RM-1 District and in the front yard of RR, RE,
and AG-SF districts, subject to §
2.03(C)(1).
[ff]   Accessory Farm Buildings. The provisions concerning size, height, and
location shall not apply to accessory farm buildings , subject to §
2.03(A)(8) and §
8.02(N)(4).
[gg]   Permitted Accessory Buildings in Commercial and Industrial Districts.
Buildings for parking attendants, guard shelters, gate houses, and transformer
pads may be permitted in the front and side yards of commercial and industrial
districts, subject to Planning Commission approval.
[hh]   Setback Increase Based on Height. The side and rear yard  setbacks shall
be increased by one foot for every foot in height that an accessory building
exceeds 14 feet in the R-1 and R-1-S districts and for single-family detached
housing in the RM-1 District.
[ii]   Distance from Other Buildings. Detached accessory buildings shall be
located at least ten feet from any building on the site.
[jj]   Exceptions to Height Standards. Antennae and wind generators shall
comply with the height standards specified in §§
2.16 and 2.22.
[kk]   Maximum Lot Coverage - Accessory Buildings. Accessory buildings and
structures shall be included in computations to determine compliance with
maximum lot coverage standards. In addition, detached accessory buildings shall
comply with the requirements in §
2.03(C)(3).
[ll]   Lot Size in AG-C District. Creation of lots or parcels that are less
than 40 acres may be permitted in the following instances:
   a.   When the lot or parcel that is less than 40 acres is an entire quarter-
quarter section or a half of a half of a quarter section; or
   b.   When the land division creating the new lot or parcel would permit use
of the land in accordance with the purposes of the Commercial Agricultural
District (see §
18.01) and with the Township Master Plan , and where the existing parent parcel
being divided is between 74 and 80 acres. In this instance, a lot or parcel
being created through land division may be as small as 35 acres.
[mm]   Dwelling units on lots created after adoption of this regulation shall
be set back a minimum of 175 feet from any railroad right-of-way .
[nn]   The purposes of the minimum lot area standards are to achieve adequate
open space around and between dwelling units , achieve building  development
that is proportional to the size of the lot , provide adequate land on each lot
to allow development without the need for variances , preserve the character of
the neighborhood and surrounding area, and maintain privacy on each building
 lot . This can be accomplished on lots meeting the minimum area standards that
are nearly rectangular in shape, but is more difficult to accomplish on
irregularly-shaped lots such as those with more than four sides and/or those
where a portion of the required lot area is located in one or more appendages
or extensions off of the main buildable portion of the lot (such as T-shaped or
L-shaped lots ).
   Consequently, any proposal to create a new lot ten acres or smaller in area
shall not be permitted if the lot (a) has more than four sides, and (b) is
irregularly shaped as a result of an appendage or extension and (c) has less
than the minimum lot area required if the area of the appendage or extension is
not included in the lot area calculation.
[oo]   Mixed Use Overlay District Regulations. See
Article 27.00 for development standards in the MU, Mixed Use Overlay District.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
ARTICLE 29.00
GENERAL PROCEDURES AND RELATED STANDARDS
§ 29.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this article is to provide procedures and related standards
for the processing of all requests for township action or review under the
provisions of this Ordinance.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 29.02 SITE PLAN REVIEW PROCESS.
   A.   Intent. The site plan review procedures, standards, and required
information in this section are intended to provide a consistent and uniform
method of review of proposed development plans, to ensure full compliance with
the regulations and standards contained in this Ordinance and other applicable
ordinances and laws, including the Michigan Building Code, as amended, to
achieve efficient use of the land, to protect natural resources , and to
prevent adverse impact on adjoining or nearby properties. It is the intent of
these provisions to encourage cooperation and consultation between the township
and applicant so as to facilitate development in accordance with the township
’s land use objectives.
   B.   Site plan required.
      1.   Site plan required. Except as provided in the following subsection
B.2, the development of any new use, the construction of any new structures ,
any change of an existing use of land or structure , and all other building or
development activities shall require site plan approval pursuant to this
section. For example, site plan review shall be required for any of the
following activities:
         a.   Erection, moving, relocation, conversion, or structural
alteration to a building or structure to create additional floor space, other
than a single-family or two-family dwelling .
         b.   Any development which would, if approved, provide for the
establishment of more than one principal use on a parcel , such as, for
example, a single-family site condominium or similar project where a parcel is
developed to include two or more sites for detached single-family dwellings .
         c.   Development of all non-single-family residential uses permitted
in single-family districts and in agricultural districts.
         d.   Any change in use that could affect compliance with the standards
set forth in this Ordinance, other than for single-family residential uses.
         e.   Expansion or paving of off-street parking involving five or more
spaces and/or a change in circulation or access for other than a single-family
dwelling .
         f.   Any excavation , filling , soil removal, mining or landfill , or
creation of ponds, except as otherwise specified in subsection B.2, item c.
         g.   The development or construction of any accessory uses or
structures , except for uses or structures that are accessory to a single-
family or two-family dwelling .
         h.   Any use or development for which submission of a site plan is
required by the provisions of this Ordinance.
      2.   Site plan not required. Notwithstanding the preceding subsection 1,
site plan approval is not required for the following activities:
         a.   Construction, moving, relocating, or structurally altering a
single- or two-family home, including any customarily incidental accessory
structure .
         b.   Development of a principal permitted agricultural use, or the
construction, moving, relocation, or structural alteration of permitted
agricultural structures , including any customarily incidental accessory
structures .
         c.   Any excavation , filling , soil removal, mining, or creation of
ponds that is less than one-half acre in area and less than 50 cubic yards ,
provided that such activity is normally and customarily incidental to single-
family and agricultural uses described in this subsection for which site plan
approval is not required.
   C.   Site plan review applications and procedures.
      1.   Optional pre-application conference. In order to facilitate
processing of a site plan in a timely manner, the applicant may request a pre-
application site plan conference with the Township Supervisor or Planner. The
purpose of such a conference is to provide information and guidance to the
applicant that will assist in preparation of the site plan. The applicant need
not present drawings or site plans at a pre-application conference, but even if
drawings or site plans are presented, no formal action shall be taken on a site
plan at a pre-application conference.
   At any time during the course of preparation of a site plan prior to
submission of a formal application, the township shall upon request provide
information concerning the Zoning Ordinance procedures and standards.
      2.   Optional conceptual review by Planning Commission or Township Board
.  
         An applicant may file a written request of conceptual review of a
preliminary site plan by the Planning Commission or Township Board to evaluate
the following:
         a.   Relationship of the site to nearby properties;
         b.   Density ;
         c.   Adequacy of landscaping , open space , vehicular drives, parking
areas, drainage, and proposed utilities; and
         d.   Conformance with township  development policies and standards.
         Conceptual review fees shall be paid according to the fee schedule
established by the Township Board .
         No formal action shall be taken on a site plan submitted for
conceptual review, and neither the applicant nor the Planning Commission or
Township Board shall be bound by any comments or suggestions made during the
course of the conceptual review.
      3.   Submission of site plan for formal review. In order to initiate
formal review by the Planning Commission and Township Board , the applicant is
required to submit the following materials to the Williamstown Township Hall:
         a.   One completed and signed copy of the application for site plan
review.
         b.   Three individually folded copies and one digital copy in pdf
format of the site plan.
         c.   Proof that the plan has been submitted for review to all
appropriate affected governmental agencies, including but not limited to the
Ingham County Department of Roads, County Drain Commission, County Health
Department, Michigan Department of Transportation (if located on Grand Avenue),
Michigan Department of Environment, Great Lakes, and Energy, Northeast Ingham
Emergency Service Authority (NIESA), and any other agencies deemed appropriate
by the Planning Commission or Township Board .
         d.   The required review fee.
   These materials shall be submitted to the township no later than noon 21
calendar days prior to the Planning Commission or Township Board meeting at
which the review is requested.
      4.   Distribution of plans. Upon submission of all required application
materials, the site plan proposal shall be placed on the next open Planning
Commission agenda for preliminary review. The site plans and application shall
be distributed to appropriate township officials for review, including, as
deemed necessary, the Township Planner and/or Engineer .
      5.   Review by Township Planner. The Township Planner shall review the
plans to determine compliance with the Zoning Ordinance, and shall submit a
written report, which shall identify issues which must be resolved as well as
all required revisions necessary to obtain site plan approval.
   D.   Review and final action.
      1.   Initial review. At the first regular meeting at which a site plan
proposal is considered, the Planning Commission shall identify major issues
that must be resolved and other revisions necessary to obtain site plan
approval.
      2.   Public hearing. Site plans involving uses that are subject to
special land use approval may require a public hearing. After payment of
appropriate fees, the Planning Commission will set the date of the public
hearing, subject to the requirements in §
29.03.
      3.   Request for revisions. Upon preliminary review of the site plan
proposal, the Planning Commission may require the applicant to complete
revisions and submit the plans for engineering review prior to formal action
being taken. The applicant shall be given the opportunity to revise the plans
and submit revised plans for further review. All required revisions must be
completed or the site plan will not be put on the agenda for final review.
      4.   Submission of plans for final review. Three individually folded
copies and one digital copy of the revised plan in pdf format shall be
submitted for final review at least 21 calendar days prior to the Planning
Commission meeting at which review is requested. The revised plan shall be
distributed to appropriate township officials for review.
      5.   Planning Commission final review and recommendation.
         The Planning Commission shall review the site plan proposal together
with any public hearing findings and any requested reports and recommendations
from the Building Inspector, Township Planner , and other reviewing agencies.
The Planning Commission shall then make a recommendation to the Township Board
, based on the requirements and standards of this Ordinance. The Planning
Commission may recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial, or they
may table the proposal, as noted below.
         In the context of an overall site plan, the Planning Commission may
find that it would be appropriate to modify the specific requirements of the
Ordinance, so as to best satisfy the standards for site plan approval in
subsection F. Accordingly, in the course of recommending approval or approval
with conditions, the Planning Commission may allow modifications to the
specific zoning standards that deal with sidewalk location; exterior lighting
type, height, or intensity; dumpster location; number and location of parking
spaces ; landscaping and screening requirements; loading zone location; and,
fence and wall height and location. Justification for all such modifications
shall be set forth in the Planning Commission meeting minutes.
         a.   Approval. Upon determination that a site plan is in compliance
with the standards and requirements of this Ordinance and other applicable
ordinances and laws, the Planning Commission shall recommend approval.
         b.   Approval subject to conditions. Upon determination that a site
plan is in compliance except for minor modifications, the Planning Commission
may recommend that the Township Board impose reasonable conditions upon the
approval of the site plan. The conditions for approval shall be identified and
the applicant shall be given the opportunity to correct the site plan. The
conditions may include the need to obtain variances or obtain approvals from
other agencies.
         If a plan is subsequently approved by the Township Board subject to
conditions, the applicant shall submit a revised plan with a revision date,
indicating compliance with the conditions. The applicant must re-submit the
site plan to the Township Board for final approval after conditions have been
met, unless the Township Board waives its right to review the revised plan, and
instead authorizes the Township Supervisor or the Building Inspector to review
and approve the site plan after all required conditions have been addressed.
The Township Board may also require the Township Supervisor or the Building
Inspector to submit the revised plan to the Planner and/or Engineer for review
and approval.
         c.   Denial. Upon determination that a site plan does not comply with
the standards and regulations set forth in this article or elsewhere in this
Ordinance, or requires extensive revision in order to comply with said
standards and regulations, the Planning Commission shall recommend denial.
         d.   Tabling. Upon determination that a site plan is not ready for
approval or rejection, or upon a request by the applicant, the Planning
Commission may table consideration of a site plan until a later meeting.
      6.   Township Board action. Following receipt of the Planning Commission
’s recommendation, the application shall be placed on the agenda of the next
scheduled Township Board meeting, unless otherwise requested by the applicant
in writing and approved by the Township Board . The Township Board shall review
the final plan, together with the findings of the Planning Commission , and any
reports and recommendations from the Building Inspector, Township Planner , and
other reviewers. In the case of a condominium project, the master deed and
condominium bylaws shall also be subject to Township Board review and approval.
The Township Board may table consideration of a site plan. However, upon
completion of its review, the Township Board shall approve, approve with
conditions, or deny a site plan proposal in accordance with the guidelines
described previously in §
29.02, subsection D.5. An applicant shall have a maximum of two years from the
date of submittal of a site plan for formal review to achieve final Township
Board approval. If approval is not achieved within this period, the application
becomes null and void and a new application is required to pursue site plan
review further.
      7.   Recording of site plan review action. 
         Each action taken with reference to a site plan review shall be duly
recorded in the minutes of the Planning Commission or Township Board as
appropriate. The grounds for action taken upon each site plan shall also be
recorded in the minutes.
         After final action has been taken on a site plan and all steps have
been completed, three copies of the application and plans shall be marked
APPROVED or DENIED, as appropriate, with the date that action was taken. One
marked copy will be returned to the applicant and the other two copies will be
kept on file in the Township Hall. Furthermore, the township shall file with
the Ingham County Register of Deeds, an affidavit of site plan and/or special
use approval, with conditions of approval.
      8.   Procedure after site plan approval. 
         a.   Application for building permit. 
            Following final approval of the site plan and the engineering
plans, the applicant may apply for a building permit. It shall be the
responsibility of the applicant to obtain all other applicable township ,
county, state, or federal permits prior to issuance of a building permit.
            A building permit for a structure in a proposed condominium project
shall not be issued until evidence of a recorded Master Deed has been provided
to the township . However, the Building Official may issue permits for site
grading, erosion control, installation of public water and sewage facilities,
and construction for roads prior to recording the Master Deed. No permit issued
or work undertaken prior to recording the Master Deed pursuant to this section
shall grant any rights or any expectancy interest in the approval of the Master
Deed.
         b.   Expiration of site plan approval. If construction has not
commenced, or if the project has commenced but has not made reasonable
progress, within 12 months after final approval of the site plan, the site plan
approval expires and a new application for site plan review shall be required.
However, the applicant may apply in writing to the Township Board for an
extension of site plan approval, whereupon the Township Board may seek the
Planning Commission ’s recommendation. The Township Board may grant one or more
extensions of up to 12 months upon request from the applicant prior to
expiration of the previousapproval and provided that it finds that the approved
site plan adequately represents current conditions on and surrounding the site
and provided that the site plan conforms to current Zoning Ordinance standards.
         c.   Application for certificate of occupancy. Following completion of
site work and building construction, the applicant may apply for a certificate
of occupancy or a temporary certificate of occupancy from the Building
Inspector in accordance with the procedures set forth in §
29.07. It shall be the applicant’s responsibility to obtain these required
certificates prior to any occupancy of the property.
         d.   Property maintenance after approval. 
            It shall be the responsibility of the owner of a property for which
site plan approval has been granted to maintain the property in accordance with
the approved site design on a continuing basis until the property is razed, or
until new zoning regulations supersede the regulations upon which site plan
approval was based, or until a new site design is approved. Any property owner
who fails to so maintain an approved site design shall be deemed in violation
of the use provisions of this Ordinance and shall be subject to the same
penalties appropriate for a use violation.
            With respect to condominium projects, the Master Deed shall contain
provisions describing the responsibilities of the condominium association,
condominium owners, and public entities, with regard to maintenance of the
property in accordance with the approved site plan on a continuing basis. The
Master Deed shall further establish the means of permanent financing for
required maintenance and improvement activities which are the responsibility of
the condominium association. Failure to maintain an approved site plan shall be
deemed in violation of the use provisions of this Ordinance and shall be
subject to the same penalties appropriate for a use violation.
         e.   Monuments requirements for condominium projects. All condominium
projects shall be marked with monuments as required by condominium rules
promulgated to the Michigan Department of Commerce, Corporation and Securities
Bureau, and as may also be required by the Township Engineer pursuant to
engineering standards enforced by the Township of Williamstown.
         f.   Recorded and as-built condominium documents. Upon approval of the
site plan for a condominium project involving new construction, the condominium
project developer or proprietor shall furnish the township with the following:
            (1) One copy of the recorded Master Deed; and
            (2) One copy of any condominium bylaws and restrictive covenants.
            (3)   One copy of the recorded condominium subdivision plan
(Exhibit B of the Master Deed).
               Upon completion of the project, the condominium project
developer or proprietor shall furnish the township with two copies of an “as
built survey”.
               The as-built survey shall be reviewed by the Township Engineer
for compliance with township Ordinances. Fees for this review shall be
established by the Township Board .
      9.   Site plan violation. In the event that construction is not in
compliance with the approved plans, the Building Inspector shall issue a “stop
work” order until corrective action is taken or a revised site plan is
submitted for township review, following the normal site plan review procedures
in §
29.02. If the builder or developer fails to take corrective action or pursue
approval of an amended site plan, the Building Inspector may issue a citation,
after which the Township Board may commence and pursue appropriate action in a
court having jurisdiction.
      10.   Modification to approved plan. Minor modifications to an approved
site plan may be reviewed by the Township Building Inspector or Township
Engineer .
         a.   Minor modification defined. Minor modifications are changes that
do not substantially affect the character or intensity of the use, vehicular or
pedestrian circulation, drainage patterns, the demand for public services, or
the danger from hazards. Examples of minor modifications include:
            1)   An addition to an existing commercial or industrial building
that does not increase or decrease the floor space by more than 25% or 2,000
square feet, whichever is less.
            2)   Re-occupancy of a vacant building that has been unoccupied for
less than 12 months.
            3)   Changes to building height that do not add an additional
floor.
            4)   Alterations or modifications involving less than five parking
spaces .
               The construction of a new building or structure , adding or
deleting parking or the addition of curb cuts onto a public road are examples
of modifications which are not considered minor.
         b.   Determination of minor modification. The Building Inspector shall
determine if the proposed modifications are minor in accordance with the
guidelines in this section. In order to make the determination, the Building
Inspector shall solicit comments and recommendations from the Township
Supervisor, Planner, Engineer, and public safety officials.
         c.   Modifications not deemed “minor.” If the modifications are not
deemed minor by the Building Inspector, or if the Building Inspector finds (in
the Building Inspector’s sole discretion and professional opinion) that there
are characteristics of the site plan that warrant Planning Commission review,
the full review and approval by the Planning Commission and Township Board
shall be required. Planning Commission and Township Board review and approval
shall be required for all site plans that involve a request for a variance , a
special land use , a proposal that involves a discretionary decision, or a
proposal that involves a nonconforming use or structure .
         d.   Recording of action. Each action related to modification of a
site plan shall be duly recorded in writing on a copy of the approved plan, and
shall be kept on file at Township Hall. The Planning Commission and Township
Board shall be advised of all minor site plan modifications approved by the
Building Inspector and such modifications shall be noted on the site plan and
in the minutes of the Planning Commission and Township Board .
   E.   Required information on site plans. The following information shall be
included on all site plans, where applicable:
      1.   Application form. The application form shall contain the following
information:
         a.   Applicant’s name and address.
         b.   Name, address, and signature of property owner, if different from
applicant.
         c.   Common description of property and complete legal description
including the tax identification number.
         d.   Dimensions of land and total acreage.
         e.   Existing zoning of applicant’s parcel and surrounding land.
         f.   Existing use of the applicant’s parcel .
         g.   Proposed use of land and name of proposed development , if
applicable.
         h.   Proposed buildings to be constructed, including square feet of
gross and usable floor area.
         i.   Proof of property ownership.
         j.   Number of permanent employees, if applicable.
         k.   Names, addresses, and telephone numbers of engineers, attorneys,
architects, and other professionals associated with the project.
         l.   Review comments and/or approvals from county, state, and federal
agencies. Copies of letters or approval forms should be submitted with the site
plan application.
      2.   Descriptive and identification data. Site plans shall consist of an
overall plan for the entire development , drawn to a scale of not less than one
inch = 20 feet for property less than one acre, one inch = 30 feet for property
larger than one acre but less than three acres, and one inch = 50 feet for
property larger than three acres, unless another scale is approved by the
Building Inspector. Sheet size shall be at least 24 inches by 36 inches. The
following descriptive and identification information shall be included on site
plans:
         a.   Applicant’s name and address, and telephone number.
         b.   Title block indicating the name of the development .
         c.   Scale.
         d.   Northpoint.
         e.   Dates of submission and revisions (month, day, year).
         f.   Location map drawn to scale with northpoint.
         g.   Legal and common description of property, including acreage.
         h.   The dimensions of all lots and property lines , showing the
relationship of the site to abutting properties. If the site is a part of a
larger parcel the plan should indicate the boundaries of total land holding.
         i.   A schedule for completing the project, including the phasing or
timing of all proposed developments .
         j.   Identification and seal of the architect, engineer, land
surveyor, or landscape architect who prepared or supervised and approved the
plan.
         k.   Written description of proposed land use.
         l.   Zoning classification of applicant’s parcel and all abutting
parcels .
         m.   Proximity to driveways serving adjacent parcels .
         n.   Proximity to section corner and major thoroughfares .
         o.   Notation of any variances that have or must be secured.
         p.   Net acreage (minus rights-of-way ) and total acreage, to the
nearest 1/10 acre.
      3.   Site data.
         a.   Existing lot lines , building lines , structures , parking areas,
and other improvements on the site and within 100 feet of the site.
         b.   Front, side, and rear setback dimensions.
         c.   Topography on the site and within 100 feet of the site at two-
foot contour intervals, referenced to a U.S.G.S. benchmark.
         d.   Existing and proposed site features, including buildings ,
roadway widths and names, and parking areas.
         e.   Existing structures within 50 feet of the subject property.
         f.   Dimensions and centerlines of existing and proposed roads and
road  rights-of-way , and acreage of proposed roads and road  rights-of-way .
         g.   Acceleration, deceleration, and passing lanes, where required.
         h.   Proposed vehicular circulation system, including location of
driveway entrances, roads , and on-site driveways .
         i.   Typical cross-section of proposed roads and driveways .
         j.   Location of existing drainage courses, floodplains , lakes and
streams, with elevations, and acreage of bodies of water.
         k.   Boundaries of all wetland areas, with sufficient dimensions
between various points on the wetland boundary and buildings , property lines ,
or other features to allow accurate portrayal of the wetlands . The acreage
shall be provided separately for all wetlands , and wetlands regulated by the
state shall be identified. Wetlands staking and identification shall be done by
a qualified wetlands expert. If deemed necessary because of site or soil
conditions or because of the scope of the project, a detailed hydrology study
may be required.
         l.   Location of existing and proposed interior sidewalks and
sidewalks in the right-of-way .
         m.   Exterior lighting locations and method of shielding lights from
shining off the site.
         n.   Trash receptacle locations and method of screening, if
applicable.
         o.   Transformer pad location and method of screening, if applicable.
         p.   Parking spaces , typical dimensions of spaces, indication of
total number of spaces, drives, and method of surfacing.
         q.   Information needed to calculate required parking in accordance
with Zoning Ordinance standards.
         r.   The location of lawns and landscaped areas, including required
landscaped greenbelts .
         s.   Landscape plan, including location, size, type, and quantity of
proposed shrubs, trees, and other live plant material.
         t.   Location, sizes, and types of existing trees five inches or
greater in diameter, measured at one foot off the ground, before and after
proposed development .
         u.   Cross-section of proposed berms .
         v.   Location and description of all easements for public rights-of-
way , utilities, access, shared access, and drainage.
         w.   Designation of fire lanes.
         x.   Loading/unloading area.
         y.   The location of any outdoor storage of materials and the manner
by which it will be screened.
         z.   Indicate locations of steep slopes .
      4.   Building and structure details.
         a.   Location, height, and outside dimensions of all proposed
buildings or structures .
         b.   Indication of the number of stores and number of commercial or
office units contained in the building , if applicable. If the site plan
involves an existing nonresidential building , then a list of all tenants shall
be provided. No new tenants shall be allowed to occupy the building until the
site plan is fully implemented.
         c.   Building floor plans.
         d.   Total floor area.
         e.   Location, size, height, and lighting of all proposed signs .
         f.   Proposed fences and walls, including typical cross-section and
height above the ground on both sides.
         g.   Building facade elevations, drawn to a scale of one inch equals
four feet, or another scale approved by the Building Official and adequate to
determine compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance. Elevations of
proposed buildings shall indicate type and color of exterior building
materials, roof design, projections, canopies, awnings and overhangs, screen
walls and accessory buildings , and any outdoor or roof-located mechanical
equipment, such as air conditioning units, heating units, and transformers.
      5.   Information concerning utilities, drainage, and related issues.
         a.   Schematic layout and description of existing and proposed
sanitary sewers, sewage treatment systems, and/or septic systems; water mains,
well sites, and water service leads; hydrants that would be used by public
safety personnel to service the site; storm sewers and drainage facilities,
including the location of retention/detention facilities; and the location of
gas, electric, and telephone lines.
         b.   Layout and description of telecommunications infrastructure.
         c.   Indication of site grading and drainage patterns.
         d.   Types of soils and location of floodplains and wetlands , if
applicable.
         e.   Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures.
         f.   Proposed finish grades on the site, including the finish grades
of all buildings , driveways , walkways, and parking lots.
         g.   Assessment of potential impacts from the use, processing, or
movement of hazardous materials or chemicals, if applicable.
         h.   Assessment of potential impact on groundwater, including but not
limited to quality, quantity, and recharge.
         i.   All utilities shall be located underground within the boundaries
of a proposed development , including but not limited to gas, electric,
telephone, and cable television service leads.
      6.   Information concerning residential development .
         a.   The number, type, and location of each type of residential unit
(one bedroom units, two bedroom units, etc.)
         b.   Density calculations by type of residential unit (dwelling units
per acre).
         c.   Lot coverage calculations.
         d.   Floor plans of typical buildings with square feet of floor area.
         e.   Garage and carport locations and details, if proposed.
         f.   Pedestrian circulation system.
         g.   Location and names of roads and internal drives with an
indication of how the proposed circulation system will connect with the
existing adjacent roads .
         h.   Community building locations, dimensions, floor plans, and facade
elevations, if applicable.
         i.   Swimming pool fencing detail, including height and type of fence
, if applicable.
         j.   Location and size of recreation open areas.
         k.   Indication of type of recreation facilities proposed for
recreation area.
         l.   If common area or community buildings are proposed, then the site
plan should indicate the responsibilities of the subdivision or condominium
association, property owners, or other public entity, with regard to
maintenance of the common areas or community property on a continuing basis.
      7.   Information applicable to mobile home parks .
         a.   Location and number of pads for mobile homes .
         b.   Distance between mobile homes .
         c.   Proposed placement of mobile home on each lot .
         d.   Average and range of size of mobile home lots .
         e.   Density calculations (dwelling units per acre).
         f.   Lot coverage calculations.
         g.   Garage and carport locations and details, if proposed.
         h.   Pedestrian circulation system.
         i.   Location and names of roads and internal drives.
         j.   Community building location, dimensions, floor plans, and facade
elevations, if applicable.
         k.   Swimming pool fencing detail, including height and type of fence
, if applicable.
         l.   Location and size of recreation open areas.
         m.   Indication of type of recreation facilities proposed for
recreation area.
      8.   Additional information.
         a.   Information related to condominium  development . The following
information shall be provided with all site plans involving condominium
 development :
            1.   Condominium documents, including the proposed Master Deed,
condominium bylaws, and condominium subdivision plan (Exhibit B of the Master
Deed).
            2.   Condominium subdivision plan requirements, as specified in the
condominum rules promulgated by the Department of Licensing and Regulatory
Affairs, Bureau of Commercial Services and Corporations, or successor agency.
         b.   Items not applicable. If any of the items listed are not
applicable to a particular site, the following information should be provided
on the site plan, or accompanying the site plan:
            1.   A list of each item considered not applicable.
            2.   The reason(s) why each listed item is not considered
applicable.
         c.   Other data which may be required. Other data may be required if
deemed necessary by the township administrative officials, Planning Commission
, or Township Board to determine compliance with the provisions in this
Ordinance. Such information may include traffic studies, market analysis,
environmental assessment and evaluation of the demand on public facilities and
services.
   F.   Standards for site plan approval. The following criteria shall be used
as a basis upon which site plans will be reviewed and approved:
      1.   Adequacy of information. The site plan shall include all required
information in sufficiently complete and understandable form to provide an
accurate description of the proposed uses and structures .
      2.   Site design characteristics. All elements of the site design shall
be harmoniously and efficiently organized in relation to topography, the size
and type of parcel , the character of adjoining property, and the type and size
of buildings . The site shall be developed so as not to impede the normal and
orderly development or improvement of surrounding property for uses permitted
by this Ordinance.
      3.   Appearance. Landscaping , earth berms , fencing, signs , walls, and
other site features shall be designed and located on the site so that the
proposed development is aesthetically pleasing and harmonious with nearby
existing or future developments .
      4.   Compliance with district requirements. The site plan shall comply
with the district requirements for minimum floor space, height of building ,
lot size, open space , density and all other requirements set forth in the
schedule of regulations (
Article 28.00) unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance.
         a.   Site condominiums . 
            In the case of site condominiums , these regulations shall be
applied by requiring the site condominium unit to be equal in size to the
minimum lot size and lot width requirements for the district in which the
project is located. The site condominium unit shall be at least equivalent to
the minimum lot area requirements.
            In addition, site condominium projects shall comply with all
applicable design standards which have been developed for similar types of
development in the township , as described in the Zoning Ordinance and other
applicable local, county, and state ordinances, laws, and regulations,
including but not necessarily limited to requirements for streets , blocks ,
lots , utilities, and storm drainage. These requirements and specifications are
hereby incorporated and are made a part of this Ordinance by reference.
         b.   Detached condominiums . 
            In the case of detached condominiums , these regulations shall be
applied by requiring that the detached condominium units comply with the
requirements governing minimum distance between buildings , attachment of
buildings , and other applicable requirements for the district in which the
project is located. Proposed detached condominium projects shall not exceed the
maximum permitted density for the district in which the project is located, as
determined on the basis of minimum lot size standards in
Article 28.00.
            Detached condominium projects shall comply with all applicable
design standards which have been developed for similar types of development in
the township , as described in the Zoning Ordinance and other applicable local,
county, and state ordinances, laws and regulations, including but not
necessarily limited to requirements for streets , blocks , lots , utilities,
and storm drainage. These requirements and specifications are hereby
incorporated and are made a part of this Ordinance by reference.
      5.   Preservation of natural areas . The landscape shall be preserved in
its natural state as much as possible, by minimizing tree and soil removal
alteration to the natural drainage course and the amount of cutting, filling ,
and grading.
      6.   Privacy. The site design shall provide reasonable visual and sound
privacy. Fences , walls, barriers, and landscaping shall be used, as
appropriate if permitted, for the protection and enhancement of property and
the safety and privacy of occupants and uses.
      7.   Emergency services. The site plan shall comply with requirements
requested by NIESA and other emergency service providers. All buildings or
groups of buildings shall be so arranged as to permit convenient and direct
emergency vehicle access.
      8.   Ingress and egress . Every structure or dwelling unit shall be
provided with adequate means of ingress and egress via public streets and
walkways.
      9.   Pedestrian circulation. Each site plan shall provide a pedestrian
circulation system that is insulated as completely as is reasonably possible
from the vehicular circulation system.
      10.   Vehicular and pedestrian circulation layout. The arrangement of
public and common ways for vehicular and pedestrian circulation shall respect
the pattern of existing or planned streets or pedestrian or bicycle pathways in
the vicinity of the site. The width of streets and drives shall be appropriate
for the volume of traffic they will carry. In order to insure public safety and
promote efficient traffic flow and turning movements, the applicant may be
required to limit street access points or construct a secondary access road .
      11.   Drainage. Appropriate measures shall be taken to insure that the
removal or drainage of surface waters will not adversely affect adjoining
properties or the capacity of the public or natural storm drainage system.
Provisions shall be made for a feasible storm drainage system, the construction
of stormwater facilities, and the prevention of erosion. Surface water on all
paved areas shall be collected at intervals so that it will not obstruct
vehicular or pedestrian traffic and will not create nuisance ponding in paved
areas. Final grades may be required to conform to existing and future grades of
adjacent properties. Grading and drainage plans shall be subject to review by
the Township Engineer .
      12.   Soil erosion and sedimentation. The proposed development shall
include measures to prevent soil erosion and sedimentation during and upon
completion of construction, in accordance with current county and township
standards.
      13.   Exterior lighting. Exterior lighting shall be designed so that it
is deflected away from adjoining properties and so that it does not impede
vision of drivers along adjacent streets .
      14.   Public services. Adequate services and utilities, including water,
sewage disposal, sanitary sewer, and stormwater control services, shall be
available or provided, and shall be designed with sufficient capacity and
durability to properly serve the development . All streets and roads , water,
sewer, and drainage systems, and similar facilities shall conform to the design
and construction standards of the township .
      15.   Screening. Off-street parking, loading and unloading areas, outside
refuse storage areas, and other storage areas that are visible from adjacent
homes or from public roads , shall be screened by walls or landscaping of
adequate height and shall comply with
Articles 5.00 and
6.00 of this Ordinance.
      16.   Danger from hazards. 
         The level of vulnerability to injury or loss from incidents involving
hazardous materials or processes shall not exceed the capability of the
township to respond to such hazardous incidents so as to prevent injury and
loss of life and property. In making such an evaluation, the township shall
consider the location, type, characteristics, quantities, and use of hazardous
materials or processes in relation to the personnel, training, equipment, and
materials, and emergency response plans and capabilities of the township .
      Sites which include storage of hazardous materials or waste, fuels, salt,
or chemicals shall be designed to prevent spills and discharge of polluting
materials to the surface of the ground, groundwater, or nearby water bodies.
      17.   Health and safety concerns. Any use in any zoning district shall
comply with applicable federal, state, county, and local health and pollution
laws and regulations with respect to noise; dust, smoke, and other air
pollutants; vibration; glare and heat; fire and explosive hazards; gases;
electromagnetic radiation; radioactive materials; and, toxic and hazardous
materials.
      18.   Sequence of development . All development phases shall be designed
in logical sequence to insure that each phase will independently function in a
safe, convenient, and efficient manner without being dependent upon subsequent
improvements in a later phase or on other sites.
      19.   Coordination with adjacent sites. All site features, including
circulation, parking, building orientation, landscaping , lighting, utilities,
common facilities, and open space shall be coordinated with adjacent
properties.
      20.   Characteristics of the soils. Soils shall have the physical,
chemical, and engineering properties necessary to support the development being
proposed. By way of example, consideration shall be given to the capability of
soils to support septic tank absorption fields or other type of proposed
sanitary sewage treatment, the capability of the soils to support the type of
proposed structure , and the potential impact that anticipated modifications to
soils would have on ground or surface water quality.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013; Ord. passed 9-8-2021)
§ 29.03 SPECIAL LAND USES.
   A.   Intent. The procedures and standards in this section are intended to
provide a consistent and uniform method for review of proposed plans for
special land uses (sometimes also referred to as special uses). Special land
uses are uses, either public or private, which possess unique characteristics
and therefore cannot be property classified as a permitted use in a particular
zoning district (see Definitions,
Article 1.00). This article contains standards for review of each special land
use proposal individually on its own merits to determine if it is an
appropriate use for the district and specific location where it is proposed.
   B.   Procedures and requirements. Special land use proposals shall be
reviewed in accordance with the procedures in §
27.02 for site plan review, except as follows:
      1.   Public hearing required. A public hearing shall be scheduled by the
Township Administration and held by the Planning Commission before a decision
is made on a special land use request. The public hearing shall be noticed
following the procedures listed in §
29.11.
      2.   Planning Commission final action. The Planning Commission shall
review the application for special land use in accordance with the procedures
in §
29.02, together with the public hearing findings and reports and
recommendations from the Building Inspector, Township Planner , Township Public
Safety Officials, Township Engineer , and other reviewers. The Planning
Commission shall then make a recommendation to the Township Board , based on
the requirements and standards of this Ordinance. The Planning Commission may
recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial as follows:
         a.   Approval. Upon determination by the Planning Commission that the
final plan for special land use is in compliance with the standards and
requirements of this Ordinance and other applicable ordinances and laws, the
Planning Commission shall recommend approval.
         b.   Approval with conditions. The Planning Commission may recommend
that the Township Board impose reasonable conditions upon the approval of a
special land use , to the extent authorized by law, for the purposes of
insuring that public services and facilities affected by the proposed
development will be capable of accommodating increased public service loads
caused by the development , protecting the natural environment and conserving
natural resources and energy, insuring compatibility with adjacent uses of
land, and promoting the use of land in a socially and economically desirable
manner. Conditions imposed shall be designed to protect natural resources and
the public health, safety, and welfare of individuals in the development and
those immediately adjacent, and the community as a whole. Conditions imposed
shall also be necessary to meet the intent and purpose of this Ordinance.
         c.   Denial. Upon determination by the Planning Commission that a
special land use proposal does not comply with the standards and regulations
set forth in this Ordinance, or otherwise would be injurious to the public
health, safety, welfare, and orderly development of the township , the Planning
Commission shall recommend denial.
      3.   Township Board action required. The Planning Commission shall
transmit its recommendation, together with reports and public hearing findings
to the Township Board for final action. The Township Board shall base its
decision solely on the requirements and standards of this Ordinance. The
Township Board is authorized to approve, approve with conditions, or deny a
special land use proposal as follows:
         a.   Approval. Upon determination that a special land use proposal is
in compliance with the standards and requirements of this Ordinance and other
applicable ordinances and laws, approval shall be granted.
         b.   Approval with conditions. The Township Board may impose
reasonable conditions with the approval of a special land use . The conditions
may include provisions necessary to insure that public services and facilities
affected by a proposed special land use or activity will be capable of
accommodating increased service and facility loads generated by the new
development , to protect the natural environment and conserve natural resources
and energy, to insure compatibility with adjacent uses of land, and to promote
the use of land in a socially and economically desirable manner. Conditions
imposed shall meet all of the following requirements:
            1.   Conditions shall be designed to protect natural resources ,
the health, safety, welfare, and social and economic well being of those who
will use the land use or activity under consideration, residents and landowners
immediately adjacent to the proposed land use or activity, and the community as
a whole.
            2.   Conditions shall be related to the valid exercise of the
police power, and purposes which are affected by the proposed use of activity.
            3.   Conditions shall be necessary to meet the intent and purpose
of the Zoning Ordinance, related to the standards established in the Ordinance
for the land use or activity under consideration, and necessary to insure
compliance with those standards.
         c.   Denial. Upon determination by the Township Board that a special
land use proposal does not comply with the standards and regulations set forth
in this Ordinance, or otherwise will be injurious to the public health, safety,
welfare, and/or orderly development of the township , a special land use
proposal shall be denied.
      4.   Recording of Planning Commission and Township Board action. Each
action taken with respect to a special land use shall be duly recorded in the
minutes of the Planning Commission or Township Board , as appropriate. The
minutes shall record the findings of fact relative to each special land use
proposal, the grounds for the action taken, and any conditions imposed in
conjunction with approval.
      5.   Effect of approval. Upon approval, a special land use shall be
deemed a conforming use permitted in the district in which it is proposed,
subject to any conditions imposed and final approval of the site plan. Such
approval shall affect only the lot or portion thereof on which the proposed use
is located. Such approval shall remain valid regardless of change of ownership.
      6.   Zoning Board of Appeals authority. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall
not have the authority to consider an appeal of a decision concerning a special
land use proposal. The ZBA shall have the authority to consider variances
associated with a special land use that relate to setbacks and dimensional
requirements.
      7.   Application for a building permit. Prior to issuance of a building
permit, the applicant shall submit proof of the following:
         a.   Final approval of the special land use application.
         b.   Final approval of the site plan.
         c.   Final approval of the engineering plans.
         d.   Acquisition of all other applicable township , county, or state
permits.
      8.   Expiration of special land use approval. If construction has not
commenced, or if the project has commenced but has not made reasonable progress
within 12 months after final approval, the approval becomes null and void and a
new application for special land use approval shall be required. However, the
applicant may apply in writing to the Township Board for an extension of
special land use approval, whereupon the Township Board may seek the Planning
Commission ’s recommendation. The township may grant one or more extensions of
up to 12 months, upon request from the applicant prior to expiration of the
previous approval and provided that it finds that the approved special land use
plan conforms to current Zoning Ordinance standards.
      9.   Modification to approved special land use . Special land use
approved in accordance with provisions of this section may subsequently be
modified, subject to the following requirements:
         a.   Modifications that do not change the nature of the use or that do
not affect the intensity of use may be reviewed and approved following normal
site plan review procedures described in §
29.02. In evaluating change in intensity of use, the Planning Commission and
Township Board shall consider the extent of increase of vehicular or pedestrian
traffic, the change in demand for public services, extent to which the total
floor area occupied by the proposed use will increase, increased demand for
parking, off-site impacts from noise, fumes, drainage, etc., and similar
considerations.
         b.   Modifications that change the nature of the use or that result in
an increase in the intensity of the use shall be reviewed in the same manner as
a new special land use proposal, following the procedures in this section.
      10.   Special land use violation. In the event that construction or
subsequent use is not in compliance with the approved special land use
application, the Building Inspector shall issue a “stop work” order or similar
notice until corrective action is taken or a revised special land use
application is submitted for township review, following the normal special land
use review procedures in §
27.03. If the builder, developer, or current user fails to take corrective
action or pursue approval of an amended plan, the Building Inspector may
commence enforcement action outlined in §
29.10, Violations and Penalties. Such action may include issuance of a
municipal civil infractions ticket and pursuit of corrective action and
penalties under the Municipal Civil Infractions Ordinance.
      11.   Performance guarantee . The Planning Commission or Township Board
may require that a performance guarantee be deposited with the township to
ensure faithful completion of the improvements, in compliance with §
2.18.
   C.   Standards for granting special land use approval. Approval of a special
land use proposal shall be based on the determination that the proposed use
will be consistent with the intent and purposes of this Ordinance, will comply
with all applicable requirements of this Ordinance, including site plan review
criteria set forth in §
29.02, applicable site development standards for specific uses set forth in
Article 8.00, and the following standards:
      1.   Compatibility with adjacent uses. The proposed special land use
shall be designed, constructed, operated, and maintained to be compatible with
uses on surrounding land. The site design of the proposed special land use
shall minimize the impact of site activity on surrounding properties. In
determining whether this requirement has been met, consideration shall be given
to:
         a.   The location and screening of vehicular circulation and parking
areas in relation to surrounding development .
         b.   The location and screening of outdoor storage , outdoor activity
or work areas, and mechanical equipment in relation to surrounding development
.
         c.   The hours of operation of the proposed use. Approval of a special
land use may be conditioned upon operation within specified hours considered
appropriate to ensure minimal impact on surrounding uses.
         d.   The bulk , placement, and materials of construction of the
proposed use in relation to surrounding uses.
         e.   Proposed landscaping and other site amenities. Additional
landscaping over and above the requirements of this Ordinance may be required
as a condition of approval of a special land use .
      2.   Compatibility with the Master Plan. The proposed special land use
shall be consistent with the general principles and objectives of the
Township’s Master Plan and shall promote the intent and purpose of this
Ordinance.
      3.   Public services. The proposed special land use shall be located so
as to be adequately served by essential public facilities and services, such as
highways , streets , police and fire protection, drainage systems, water and
sewage facilities, and schools, unless the proposal contains an acceptable plan
for providing necessary services or evidence that such services will be
available by the time the special land use is established.
      4.   Impact of traffic. The location of the proposed special land use
within the zoning district shall minimize the impact of the traffic generated
by the proposed use. In determining whether this requirement has been met,
consideration shall be given to the following:
         a.   Proximity and access to major thoroughfares .
         b.   Estimated traffic generated by the proposed use.
         c.   Proximity and relation to intersections.
         d.   Adequacy of driver sight distances.
         e.   Location of and access to off-street parking.
         f.   Required vehicular turning movements.
         g.   Provisions for pedestrian traffic.
      5.   Detrimental effects. The proposed special land use shall not involve
any activities, processes, materials, equipment, or conditions of operation,
and shall not be located or designed so as to be detrimental or hazardous to
persons or property or to public health, safety, and welfare. In determining
whether this requirement has been met, consideration shall be given to the
level of traffic, noise, vibration, smoke, fumes, odors, dust, glare, and
light.
      6.   Isolation of existing uses. The location of the proposed special
land use shall not result in a small residential area being substantially
surrounding by nonresidential development , and further, the location of the
proposed special land use shall not result in a small nonresidential area being
substantially surrounded by incompatible uses.
      7.   Based on need. The Planning Commission and Township Board shall find
that a need for the proposed use exists in the community at the time the
special land use application is considered.
      8.   Economic well-being of the community. The proposed special land use
shall not be detrimental to the economic well-being of those who will use the
land, residents, businesses, landowners, and the community as a whole.
      9.   Compatibility with natural environment. The proposed special land
use shall be compatible with the natural environment and conserve natural
resources and energy.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013; Ord. passed - - )
§ 29.04 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS.
   A.   Intent.
      The procedures and standards in this section are intended to provide a
uniform method for review of planned development proposals. These procedures
and standards are intended to assure full compliance with the standards
contained in this Ordinance, particularly
Article 25.00, and other applicable local ordinances and state and federal
laws.
      The approval of a planned development application shall require an
amendment to the Zoning Ordinance to revise the zoning map and designate the
subject property as “PD, Planned Development .” Approval granted under this
article, including all aspects of the final plan and conditions imposed on it,
shall constitute an inseparable part of the zoning amendment.
   B.   Summary of review procedures. A summary of the steps involved in the
review of planned development applications follows:
Review Procedures Zoning Ordinance Section
                                                                 Zoning
Review Procedures                                                Ordinance
                                                                 Section
Step 1   Optional pre-application conference                  29.04 (D)
Step 2   Submit conceptual review application                 29.04 (E)
Step 3   Planning Commission and Township Board conceptual    29.04 (E)
review
Step 4   Submit Phase 1 application                           29.04 (F)
Step 5   Public hearing                                       29.04 (F3)
Step 6   Planning Commission Phase 1 review                   29.04 (F4)
Step 7    Submit Phase 2 (final) review application           29.04 (G)
Step 8   Planning Commission final review and action          29.04 (G2)
Step 9   Submit proposal to County Coordinating Committee (if 29.04 (H)
required)
Step 10   Township Board final review and action              29.04 (I)
 
   A detailed explanation of the review procedures follows:
   C.   General application requirements. The application for planned
development shall be made on the forms and according to the guidelines approved
by the Planning Commission . The application shall be submitted to the
Williamstown Township Hall and shall be accompanied by all required fees and
documents as specified herein. The applicant or a designated representative
shall be present at all scheduled review meetings or consideration of the plan
may be tabled due to lack of representation.
   D.   Pre-application conference. 
      In order to facilitate review of a planned development proposal in a
timely manner, the applicant may request an informal pre-application conference
with members of the Planning Commission and/or Township Board and/or Township
Planning staff. The purpose of such a conference is to provide information and
guidance to the applicant that will assist in preparation of the application
and supporting materials.
      The applicant shall present at such a conference or conferences, at
minimum, a sketch plan of the proposed planned development , plus a legal
description of the property in question; the total number of acres in the
project; a statement of the approximate number of residential units and the
approximate number of acres to be occupied by each type of use; the number of
acres to be preserved as open or recreational space; and, all known natural
resources and natural features to be preserved.
      No formal action shall be taken at a pre-application conference. There
shall be no fee for a pre-application conference. At any time during the course
of preparation of plans prior to submission of a formal application, the
township shall upon request provide information concerning Zoning Ordinance
procedures and standards.
   E.   Conceptual review. Planned development projects are required to undergo
a conceptual review process in order to facilitate a complete and thorough
review prior to approval. This requirement is deemed necessary because planned
development projects are generally large or complex projects with higher
intensity development that could have a major impact on surrounding land uses
and significantly affect the health, safety, and general welfare of township
residents.
      1.   Conceptual review procedure. All planned development projects shall
undergo a conceptual review, which shall be undertaken by the Planning
Commission and the Township Board at public meetings held pursuant to all
applicable notice requirements. The Planning Commission and Township Board may
meet jointly to complete the conceptual review. No formal action shall be taken
on a plan submitted for conceptual review. Upon completion of the conceptual
review by the Planning Commission and Township Board , the minutes of the
conceptual review meetings shall be prepared and be made available during the
formal consideration of the proposal.
      2.   Information required for conceptual review. The information required
for conceptual review shall be provided according to the requirements of §
29.04(N) of this Ordinance and shall be submitted to the Township Hall at least
21 calendar days prior to the meeting for conceptual review.
      3.   Effect of conceptual review. The conceptual review shall not
constitute any form of approval of the planned development or the site plan.
The process is intended to facilitate final review and to give the applicant an
indication of the issues and concerns that must be resolved prior to final
approval of the site plan for the planned development project.
   F.   Phase 1 Review. Planned development projects shall undergo a two-step
plan review and approval process. The procedures for Phase 1 review are
outlined in this subsection. The Phase 1 site plan shall be subject to the site
plan review requirements in §
29.02 of this Ordinance, where applicable, as well as the additional
requirements in this section.
      1.   Information required for preliminary plan review. The information
required for preliminary plan review shall be provided according to the
requirements of §
29.04(N). The applicant shall submit three individually folded copies and one
digital copy and supporting materials. These materials shall be submitted to
the township no later than noon 21 calendar days prior to the Planning
Commission meeting at which the review is requested.
      2.   Professional review. The Planning Commission may request
professional review of the preliminary plans by appropriate agencies or
consultants, such as the Township Planner and Engineer . If such review is
requested, the designated agencies or consultants shall prepare and transmit
reports to the Planning Commission stating their findings and conclusions and
any recommended changes or revisions. The township shall require the applicant
to pay the cost of any such review fees.
      3.   Public hearing. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing
on any planned development proposal before it is approved.
         a.   Scheduling a public hearing. The Planning Commission shall
schedule a public hearing after any designated agencies or consultants have
completed their review and submitted their findings concerning the proposed
project.
         b.   Notice requirements. Notice of the public hearing shall be
published in a newspaper which circulates in the township , and sent by mail or
personal delivery to the owners of property for which approval is being
considered, to all persons to whom real property is assessed within 500 feet of
the boundary of the property in question, and to the occupants of all
structures within 500 feet. Such notice shall be given not less than five days
nor more than 15 days before the public hearing scheduled. Such notification
shall be made in accordance with the provisions of Section 103 of Michigan
Public Act 110 of 2006, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3101 through 125.3702, as
amended. Accordingly, the notice shall:
            1)   Describe the nature of the planned development project
requested;
            2)   Indicate the property which is the subject of the request;
            3)   State when and where the planned development project will be
considered and the public hearing will be held; and
            4)   Indicate when and where written comments will be received
concerning the request.
      4.   Planning Commission Phase 1 review. Following the public hearing,
the planned development proposal and plan shall be reviewed by the Planning
Commission in relation to applicable standards and regulations, compliance with
the planned development regulations, and consistency with the intent and spirit
of this Article.
         a.   Phase 1 approval by the Planning Commission . Based on the
standards and requirements set forth in this Ordinance and in this section, the
Planning Commission shall grant Phase 1 approval, preliminarily approve subject
to conditions, or deny the proposed planned development project and site plan.
         b.   Effect of Phase 1 approval or denial.
            A Phase 1 approval shall mean that the planned development project
and plan meet the requirements of this Ordinance. Subject to any conditions
imposed by the Planning Commission as part of its motion, Phase 1 approval
assures the applicant that the Planning Commission will grant final approval
if:
            1)   All state and county approvals are obtained;
            2)   No unresolved negative comments are received by any
governmental agencies or public utilities; and
            3)   All federal, state, and local laws and ordinances are met.
            An unresolved negative comment shall be one that indicates that
existence of a condition which is contrary to the requirements of this
Ordinance or other applicable ordinances or laws, where such requirement has
not been waived or dismissed as a result of an approval by the Planning
Commission and Township Board .
            A denial shall mean that the proposed project and plan does not
meet the requirements of this Ordinance. Any denial shall specify the reasons
for denial and those requirements of the Ordinance that are not met. In the
event that the applicant submits a revised plan after the Planning Commission
has issued a denial, the revised plan shall be considered a new case, which
shall begin at the first stage of the review process. In order to initiate such
review, the applicant shall be required to submit a new review fee.
            If the Planning Commission determines that revisions are necessary
to bring the planned development proposal into compliance with applicable
standards and regulations, the applicant shall be given the opportunity to
submit a revised Phase 1 plan. Following submission of a revised plan, the
planned development proposal shall be placed on the agenda of the next
scheduled meeting of the Planning Commission for further review and possible
action.
      5.   State and county approval. 
         a.   All planned development projects shall require the review and
approval of the agencies listed below prior to final site plan approval. The
township may accept a tentative or preliminary approval or a statement from the
agency detailing the conditions under which final approval will be granted,
provided that such approval or statement provides reasonable assurance to the
township that the development complies with the standards of the agencies
having jurisdiction.
            1)   The Ingham County Department of Transportation and Roads or,
if any part of the project includes or abuts a state highway or includes
streets or roads that connect with or lie within the right-of-way of a state
highway , the Michigan Department of Transportation;
            2)   The Ingham County Drain Commission;
            3)   The Ingham County Health Department and the Michigan
Department of Environmental Quality shall approve the fresh water system and
the waste water disposal system;
            4)   The Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ), if
wetlands or other site features are under the jurisdiction of the MDEQ; and
            5)   Other agencies that have review and approval authority over
any aspect of the project.
         In the event that negative comments are received from any of these
agencies, the Planning Commission shall consider the nature of such comments
with respect to Ordinance requirements, conditions on the site, response from
the applicant, and other factual data related to the issue or concern. Negative
comments shall not automatically result in denial of the plan, but every effort
shall be made to resolve any issues or concerns cited by these agencies prior
to taking action on the plan.
         b.   In addition to the specific required approvals, all planned
development project site plans shall have been submitted to the Michigan
Department of Environmental Quality each of the public utilities serving the
site, and any other state agency designated by the Planning Commission , for
informational purposes. The Planning Commission shall consider any comments
made by these agencies prior to final site plan approval.
   G.   Planning Commission Phase 2 (final) review and recommendation. Phase 2
or final approval shall be considered by the Planning Commission upon the
receipt of all the information required for Phase 2 or final review in §
29.04, subsection N.
      1.   Submission of revised site plan. The applicant shall submit three
individually folded copies and one digital copy of the revised site plans and
supporting materials. These materials shall be submitted to the township no
later than noon 21 calendar days prior to the Planning Commission or Township
Board meeting at which the review is requested.
      2.   Final approval by Planning Commission . The Planning Commission
shall review the application for planned development , together with the public
hearing findings and any requested reports and recommendations from the
Building Official , Township Planner , Township Public Safety officials,
Township Engineer , and other reviewing agencies. The Township Attorney shall
review and comment on the proposed planned development agreement and all
related documents. Based on its review of the proposed plans and supporting
documentation, the Planning Commission shall make findings of fact with respect
to compliance with the standards and criteria in this Ordinance. The Planning
Commission shall then set forth its findings and recommendation in a written
report to the Township Board , based on the requirements and standards of this
Ordinance. The Planning Commission may recommend approval, approval with
conditions, or denial as follows:
         a.   Approval. Upon determination by the Planning Commission that the
final plan for planned development is in compliance with the standards and
requirements of this Ordinance, including §§
25.02, 25.03, and 25.05, and other applicable ordinances and laws, the Planning
Commission shall recommend approval.
         b.   Approval with conditions. 
            The Planning Commission may recommend that the Township Board
impose reasonable conditions upon the approval of a planned development , to
the extent authorized by law, for the purposes of insuring that public services
and facilities affected by the proposed development will be capable of
accommodating increased public service loads caused by the development ,
protecting the natural environment and conserving natural resources and energy,
insuring compatibility with adjacent uses of land, and promoting the use of
land in a socially and economically desirable manner. Conditions imposed shall
be designed to protect the natural resources and the public health, safety, and
welfare of individuals in the development and those immediately adjacent, and
the community as a whole. Conditions imposed shall also be necessary to meet
the intent and purpose of this Ordinance and the standards set forth in §§
25.02, 25.03, and 25.05. In the event that the planned development is approved
subject to specified conditions, such conditions shall become a part of the
record of approval, and such conditions shall be modified only as provided in §
29.04(O).
            Where construction is not proposed to begin immediately, or where a
project is proposed for construction in phases, the Planning Commission may
recommend that final approval be granted subject to subsequent review and
approval of detailed site plans for each facility or phase, in accordance with
§
29.02, provided that:
            1)   The location and approximate size of such buildings shall be
shown on the overall plan for the planned development ;
            2)   Detailed site plans for such buildings shall be submitted for
review and approval in accordance with the site plan review requirements in §
29.02; and
            3)   Phasing requirements in §
25.06 shall be complied with.
         c.   Denial. Upon determination by the Planning Commission that a
planned development proposal does not comply with the standards and regulations
set forth in this Ordinance, including §§
25.02, 25.03, and 25.05, or otherwise would be injurious to the public health,
safety, welfare, and orderly development of the township , the Planning
Commission shall recommend denial.
      3.   Transmittal of findings to Township Board . The Planning Commission
shall prepare and transmit a report to the Township Board stating its
conclusions and recommendation, the basis for its recommendation, and any
recommended conditions relating to an affirmative decision.
   H.   Submission to County Coordinating Committee. Following the public
hearing, the proposal shall be submitted to the Ingham County Coordinating
Committee for review and recommendation if such review is required. If such
review is required and a recommendation from the County Coordinating Committee
has not been received within 30 days, it shall be presumed that the county has
waived its right for review.
   I.   Township Board action required. Following receipt of the Planning
Commission ’s report, the application shall be placed on the agenda of the next
scheduled Township Board meeting. The Township Board shall review the final
plan and proposed planned development agreement, together with the findings of
the Planning Commission , and, if requested, any reports and recommendations
from consultants and other reviewing agencies. Following completion of its
review, the Township Board shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny a
planned development proposal in accordance with the guidelines described
previously in §
29.04, subsection G2.
      1.   Planned development agreement. If the Township Board approves the
planned development proposal, the township and applicant shall execute the
planned development agreement, which shall be recorded in the office of the
Ingham County Register of Deeds. Final approval of the planned development plan
shall become effective upon recording of the agreement.
      2.   Effect of approval. Approval of a planned development proposal shall
constitute an amendment to the Zoning Ordinance. All improvements and use of
the site shall be in conformity with the planned development amendment and any
conditions imposed. Notice of the adoption of the amendment shall be published
in accordance with the requirements set forth in this Ordinance. The applicant
shall record an affidavit with the Register of Deeds containing the legal
description of the entire project, specifying the date of approval, and
declaring that all future improvements will be carried out in accordance with
the approved planned development unless an amendment thereto is adopted by the
township upon request of the applicant or his or her successors.
   J.   Recording of Planning Commission and Township Board action. Each action
taken with reference to a planned development shall be duly recorded in the
minutes of the Planning Commission or Township Board as appropriate. The
grounds for the action taken shall also be recorded in the minutes.
   K.   Zoning Board of Appeals - review not required. Upon receiving
recommendations from the Planning Commission , the Township Board has the
flexibility to modify standards, provided such modifications achieve
recongizable benefits and higher quality development . The Zoning Board of
Appeals has no authority to review such modifications.
   L.   Completion of site design.
      Following final approval of the planned unit development proposal, a
building permit may be obtained for the entire project or specific phases
provided that final site plan approval for the project or the phase, as
applicable, has been obtained in accordance with §
29.02, and provided further that the engineering plans for the project or the
phase, as applicable, have been approved by the Township Engineer and Building
Inspector. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to obtain all other
applicable township , county, or state permits prior to issuance of a building
permit.
         Construction shall commence on at least one phase of the project
within 24 months of final approval. The Township Board may consider a 12 month
extension, upon written request from the applicant, if it finds that the
approved site plan adequately represents current conditions on and surrounding
the site. The written request for extension must be received prior to the 24-
month expiration date. In the event that construction has not commenced and a
request for extension has not been received within 24 months, the township may
initiate proceedings to amend the zoning classification of the site to remove
the “PD” classification.
      It shall be the responsibility of the owner of a property for which
approval has been granted to maintain the property in accordance with the
approved planned development amendment on a continuing basis until the property
is razed, or until an amendment to the planned development is approved. Any
property owner who fails to so maintain an approved site design shall be deemed
in violation of the Zoning Ordinance and shall be subject to the penalties
appropriate for such violation.
      Prior to expansion or conversion of a planned development project to
include additional land, site plan review and approval shall be required
pursuant to the requirements of this article and Ordinance.
   M.   Performance guarantee . A performance guarantee shall be deposited with
the township to insure faithful completion of improvements, in accordance with
§
2.18.
   N.   Application data requirements. Applications for planned development
shall include all data requirements specified in this subsection. All
information required to be furnished under this subsection shall be kept
updated until a certificate of occupancy has been issued pursuant to §
29.07 of this Ordinance.
      1.   Requirements for conceptual review. The following information shall
be provided prior to conceptual review, pursuant to §
29.04 (E):
         a.   The name, address, and telephone number of:
            1)   All persons with an ownership interest in the land on which
the planned development project will be located together with a description of
the nature of each entity’s interest (for example, fee owner, optionee, lessee,
or land contract vendee).
            2)   All engineers, attorneys, architects, or registered land
surveyors associated with the project.
            3)   The developer or proprietor of the planned development
project.
         b.   The legal description of the land on which the planned
development project will be developed together with appropriate tax
identification numbers.
         c.   The area of the land (in acres) on which the planned development
project will be developed.
         d.   An overall conceptual land use plan for the planned development ,
drawn to scale. The overall plan shall graphically represent the development
concept using maps and illustrations to indicate each type of use, square
footage or acreage allocated to each use, and approximate locations of each
principal structure and use in the development . The overall plan shall
indicate types of residential use; office , commercial, industrial, and other
nonresidential uses; each type of open space ; community facility and public
areas; and other proposed land uses.
         e.   The conceptual land use plan shall also show the following
information:
            1)   A general location map.
            2)   The vehicular circulation system planned for the proposed
development .
            3)   The location of existing private and public streets adjacent
to the proposed development with an indication of how they will connect with
the proposed circulation system for the new development .
            4)   The approximate layout of dwelling units , parking, open space
, and recreation/park areas.
            5)   Landscaped screening proposed along the perimeter of the
development .
         f.   Approximate number of nonresidential buildings and residential
units to be developed on the subject parcel .
         g.   Topographic survey and soils inventory based on the Ingham County
Soils Survey.
         h.   General locations and approximate dimensions of wetland areas and
significant site features such as tree stands, unusual slopes, streams and
water drainage areas.
         i.   A description of the proposed sewage treatment and water supply
systems. Any proposed sewage treatment plant shall be located internally on the
site or otherwise provided with an ample landscaped buffer so as to minimize
any impact on surrounding properties, particularly adjacent residential
properties.
         j.   A general description of the proposed storm water and drainage
system.
         k.   A map showing existing zoning designations for the subject
property and all land within one quarter mile.
         l.   A map and written explanation of the relationship of the proposed
planned development to the Township’s Master Plan for Future Land Use.
         m.   Maps and written analysis of the significant natural, cultural,
and geographic features of and near the site. Features which shall be
considered include existing vegetation, topography, water courses, wildlife
habitats, streets and rights-of-way , easements , structures , and soils.
         n.   An analysis of the traffic impact of the proposed planned
development on existing and proposed streets shall be required for the
following types of projects.
            1.   Residential projects containing 100 or more dwelling units in
the total project.
            2.   Commercial, office , industrial, warehouse , institutions,
entertainment, and mixed used development proposals involving 100,000 square
feet or more in gross floor area .
            The traffic analysis shall be based on accepted engineering
standards and methods established by the Institute of Transportation Engineers,
Michigan Department of Transportation, and/or Ingham County Department of
Transportation and Roads. The traffic analysis shall address, at a minimum, the
following considerations: estimated 24-hour and peak hour traffic prior to and
after development , percentage and numerical increase in traffic volumes on
adjoining roads , proximity and relationship to intersections, adequacy of
sight distances, required vehicular turning movements, roadway geometrics,
provisions for pedestrian traffic, and adabtability of the development to
nonmotorized transportation. The traffic analysis shall further assess the
degree to which the development will cause an increase in traffic congestion or
traffic safety concerns. The traffic analysis shall indicate road improvements
or modifications necessary to accommodate the traffic generated by the
development .
         o.   An analysis of the fiscal impact (costs and revenues) of the
proposed planned development on Williamstown Township and the school district
in which the development is located. The fiscal impact analysis shall consider
the amount of revenue generated from all sources, including but not limited to
property taxes and state shared revenues. In determining the estimated property
tax revenue, the analysis shall consider the estimated state equalized value of
the development at each stage in relation to the current millage rate of each
taxing jurisdiction. In determining the impact on school costs, the analysis
shall estimate the total number of school-age children living in the
development at each phase, based on regional demographic data or on demographic
data collected by the school district. This information shall be compared with
the average annual cost of education per pupil, based on school budgetary
information. The fiscal impact analysis shall also consider the need for new
school buildings and other capital expenditures to accommodate increased
enrollment. In determining the impact on township costs, the analysis shall
assess the need for additional police, fire, recreation, administrative,
library, or other fiscal impacts.
         p.   Documentation that the applicant has sufficient development
experience to complete the proposed project in its entirety.
         q.   A general schedule for completing the planned development ,
including the phasing or timing of all proposed improvements.
      2.   Requirements for Phase 1 review. In addition to the requirements in
§
29.02 and applicable information specified on the site plan checklist, the
following information shall be included on, or attached to, all planned
development plans submitted for Phase 1 review:
         a.   All preceding information required for conceptual review.
         b.   A detailed overall plan for the planned development which shows
all of the information required on the conceptual land use plan plus the
following:
            1)   Locations and setbacks of each structure and use in the
development . Where construction is proposed to occur in later phases subject
to future detailed site plans, the location and setbacks of the maximum
building footprint shall be shown on the plan.
            2)   Typical layouts and facade design for each type of use or
building . Detailed information, including floor plans, facade elevations, and
other information normally required for site plan review, shall be provided for
buildings which are proposed for construction in the first phase.
            3)   The building footprint of proposed buildings . In the case of
single-family detached development , the plan should indicate the setbacks and
outline of the area within which a house could be constructed on each lot .
            4)   The vehicular circulation system planned for the proposed
development .
            5)   The proposed layout of parking areas, open space , and
recreation/park areas.
            6)   Proposed landscaping and screening, which shall comply with
the requirements in
Article 5.00, unless such requirements have been modified as a result of the
planned development review process.
         c.   The precise number of nonresidential and residential units to be
developed on the subject parcel .
         d.   An environmental analysis of the land, including a hydrology
study, analysis of soil conditions, and analysis of other significant
environmental features. The hydrology study shall consist of information and
analysis in sufficient detail to indicate the impact of the project on surface
water and groundwater.
         e.   Specific locations and dimensions of wetland areas and
significant site features such as tree stands, unusual slopes, streams, and
water drainage areas.
         f.   A complete description of the proposed sewage treatment and water
supply systems, including documentation from a qualified engineer indicating
the feasibility of implementing such systems.
         g.   Preliminary approval by the Ingham County Health Department and/
or Michigan Department of Environmental Quality of the proposed septic system
or sewage treatment system and water system.
         h.   Storm water and drainage system details.
         i.   Location of sidewalks along roads and elsewhere within the
development .
         j.   A specific schedule for completing the planned development ,
including the phasing or timing of all proposed improvements.
      3.   Requirements for Phase 2 (final) review. In addition to the
requirements in §
29.02 and applicable information specified on the Site Plan checklist, the
following information shall be included on, or attached to, all planned
development plans submitted for Phase 2 (final) review:
         1.   All information required for conceptual and Phase 1 review as
specified in §
29.04, subsection N3, previously.
         2.   Detailed site plans for all buildings and uses which the
applicant intends to begin construction on immediately upon final planned
development approval. Where construction is not proposed to begin immediately,
or where a project is proposed for construction in phases, the Planning
Commission may recommend that final approval be granted subject to subsequent
review and approval of detailed site plans for each facility or phase, in
accordance with §
29.02.
         3.   Detailed engineering plans for all portions of the project which
the applicant intends to begin construction on immediately upon final planned
development approval. Where construction is not proposed to begin immediately,
or where a project is proposed for construction in phases, the Planning
Commission may recommend that final approval be granted subject to subsequent
review and approval of detailed engineering plans for each facility or phase.
Such plans shall be prepared in accordance with the township engineering
standards, and shall at minimum include the following:
            a.   Engineering plans for all roads , drive aisles, and paved
areas.
            b.   Site drainage plans, including retention and/or detention
areas.
            c.   Engineering plans for proposed utility systems, including
sanitary sewerage and water systems.
            d.   Plans for controlling soil erosion and sedimentation during
construction.
         4.   Following approval of a planned development proposal and an
amendment to the Zoning Ordinance per §
29.04(I), final site plan and engineering review and approval shall be required
prior to obtaining a building permit and commencement of construction for each
facility or phase.
         5.   A draft planned development Agreement, setting forth the terms
and conditions negotiated and to be agreed to by the applicant and the township
, and upon which approval of the planned development proposal will be based.
The planned development agreement shall, at minimum, include the following:
            a.   A description of the land that is subject to the agreement.
            b.   A description of the permitted uses of the property, the
density or intensity of use, and the maximum height and size of proposed
buildings .
            c.   History of the review procedures and action taken by the
Planning Commission or Township Board .
            d.   List of all plans, documents, and other materials submitted by
the applicant.
            e.   Review and explanation of all special provisions agreed to by
the applicant and township during the course of review of the planned
development proposal.
            f.   An explanation of all public improvements to be undertaken by
the applicant or the township in conjunction with the proposed planned
development project.
            g.   Description of any required dedications and permits.
            h.   Confirmation that the proposed development is consistent with
applicable township ordinances and planning objectives.
            i.   Duration of the planned development agreement, along with
terms under which a termination date may be extended by mutual agreement.
            j.   Applicability of future amendments to the general zoning
regulations to land that is subject to the proposed planned development
agreement.
            k.   Extent to which the planned development plan may be modified
subject to administrative approval, Planning Commission approval, or Township
Board approval.
   O.   Revision to approved plans. 
      1.   General revisions. Approved final plans for a planned development
may be revised in accordance with the procedures set forth in §
29.04.
      2.   Minor changes. Notwithstanding §
29.04, subsection (O)(1), above, minor changes may be permitted by the Planning
Commission following normal site plan review procedures outlined in §
29.02, subject to its finding that:
         a.   Such changes will not adversely affect the initial basis for
granting approval.
         b.   Such minor changes will not adversely affect the overall planned
development in light of the intent and purpose of such development as set forth
in §
25.01.
         Where construction is not proposed to begin immediately, or where a
project is proposed to be constructed in phases, the Township Board may grant
final approval subject to subsequent review and approval of detailed site plans
by the Planning Commission for each facility or phase. Such review shall follow
normal site plan review procedures outlined in §
29.02.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 29.05 VARIANCES AND APPEALS.
   A.   Intent. The purpose of this section is to provide guidelines and
standards to be followed by the Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA) to act on matters
where this Ordinance or state law gives jurisdiction to the ZBA .
   B.   Authority of the Zoning Board of Appeals . 
      1.   General authority. The Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA) shall have the
authority to act on those matters where this Ordinance provides for
administrative review/appeal, interpretation, or special approval/appeal, and
shall have authority to authorize a variance as defined in this Ordinance and
laws of the State of Michigan. Such authority shall be subject to the rules and
standards in this section. The ZBA shall not have the authority to alter or
change zoning district classifications of any property, nor to make any change
in the text of this Ordinance. The ZBA has no authority to grant variances or
overturn decisions involving special land uses or planned developments .
      2.   Administrative review. 
         The ZBA shall have authority to hear and decide appeals where it is
alleged that there is an error in an order, requirement, permit, decision, or
refusal made by an official, board or commission in carrying out or enforcing
any provisions of this Ordinance. Such appeal shall be requested by the
applicant within 30 days of the date of the order, refusal, requirement, or
determination being appealed.
         In hearing and deciding appeals under this subsection, ZBA review
shall be based upon the record of the administrative decision being appealed,
and the ZBA shall not consider new information which had not been presented to
the administrative official, board or commission from whom the appeal is taken.
The ZBA shall not substitute its judgment for that of the administrative
official, board or commission being appealed, and the appeal shall be limited
to determining, based upon the record, whether the administrative official,
board, or commission breached a duty or discretion in carrying out this
Ordinance.
      3.   Interpretation. The ZBA shall have authority to hear and decide
requests for interpretation of the Zoning Ordinance, including the zoning map.
The ZBA shall make such decisions so that the spirit and intent of this
Ordinance shall be observed. Text interpretations shall be limited to the
issues presented, and shall be based upon a reading of the Ordinance as a
whole, and shall not have the effect of amending the Ordinance. Map
interpretations shall be made based upon rules in the Ordinance, and any
relevant historical information. In carrying out its authority to interpret the
Ordinance, the ZBA shall consider reasonable and/or practical interpretations
which have been consistently applied in the administration of the Ordinance.
Prior to deciding a request for an interpretation, the ZBA may confer with
staff and/or consultant to determine the basic purpose of the provision subject
to interpretation and any consequences which may result from differing
decisions. A decision providing an interpretation may be accompanied by a
recommendation for consideration of an amendment of the Ordinance.
      4.   Variances.
         The ZBA shall have authority in specific cases to authorize one or
more dimensional or “non-use” variances from the strict letter and terms of
this Ordinance by varying or modifying any of its rules or provisions so that
the spirit of this Ordinance is observed, public safety secured, and
substantial justice done. A dimensional or non-use variance allows a deviation
from the dimensional (i.e., height, bulk , setback ) requirements of the
Ordinance. A use variance authorizes the establishment of a use of land that is
otherwise prohibited in a zoning district . The ZBA is not authorized to grant
use variances by this Ordinance.
         Such authority shall be exercised in accordance with the following
standards.
         (a)   The ZBA may grant a requested “non-use” variance only upon a
finding that practical difficulties exist and that the need for the variance is
due to unique circumstances peculiar to the property and not generally
applicable in the area or to other properties in the same zoning district . In
determining whether practical difficulties exist, the ZBA shall consider the
following factors:
            (1)   Strict compliance with restrictions governing area, setback ,
frontage, height, bulk , density , or other non-use matters, will unreasonably
prevent the owner from using the property for a permitted purpose or will
render ordinance conformity unnecessarily burdensome.
            (2)   The variance will do substantial justice to the applicant, as
well as to other property owners.
            (3)   A lesser variance than requested will not give substantial
relief to the applicant and/or be consistent with justice to other property
owners.
            (4)   The problem and resulting need for the variance has not been
self-created by the applicant and/or the applicant’s predecessors. (For
example, a variance needed for a proposed lot split would, by definition, be
self-created, so such a variance typically would not be granted.)
         (b)   In all variance proceedings, it shall be the responsibility of
the applicant to provide information, plans, testimony and/or evidence from
which the ZBA may make the required findings. Administrative officials and
other persons may, but shall not be required to, provide information,
testimony, and/or evidence on a variance request.
      5.   Conditions. The ZBA may impose reasonable conditions in connection
with an affirmative decision on an appeal, interpretation, or variance request.
The conditions may include requirements necessary to insure that public
services and facilities affected by a proposed land use or activity will be
capable or accommodating increased service and facility loads caused by the
land use or activity, to protect the natural environment and conserve natural
resources and energy, to insure compatibility with adjacent uses of land, and
to promote the use of land in a socially and economically desirable manner.
Conditions imposed shall meet the following requirements:
         (a)   Be designed to protect natural resources , the health, safety,
and welfare, and the social and economic well-being of those who will use the
land use or activity under consideration, residents and landowners immediately
adjacent to the proposed land use or activity, and the community as a whole.
         (b)   Be related to the valid exercise of the police power, and
purposes which are affected by the proposed use or activity.
         (c)   Be necessary to meet the intent and purpose of the zoning
ordinance, be related to the standards established in the ordinance, be related
to the standards established in the ordinance for the land use or activity
under consideration, and be necessary to insure compliance with those
standards.
         Conditions imposed with respect to the approval of a variance shall be
recorded as part of the ZBA minutes, and shall remain unchanged except upon the
mutual consent of the ZBA and the landowner following notice and hearing as
required in a new case.
   C.   Applications and notices. 
      1.   Application. All applications to the ZBA shall be filed with the
Township Clerk or his or her designee, on forms provided by the township , and
shall be accompanied by the applicable fee established by resolution of the
Township Board . Applications shall include three individually folded and one
digital copy of all plans, studies and other information and data to be relied
upon by the applicant. These materials shall be submitted to the township no
later than 21 days prior to the Zoning Board of Appeals meeting at which the
review is requested.
      2.   Plot plan . 
         A plot plan shall be required with all variance requests. The plan
which shall accompany all variance requests shall be based on a mortgage survey
or land survey prepared by a licensed land surveyor. The plan shall be to scale
and shall include all property lines and dimensions, setbacks and all existing
and proposed structures . Where an application provides a variance sought in
conjunction with a regular site plan review, a site plan prepared according to
§
29.02 shall satisfy the requirements of this section.
         The Zoning Board of Appeals has the authority to require a land survey
prepared by a licensed land surveyor when the ZBA determines it to be necessary
to insure accuracy of the plan.
         The ZBA shall have no obligation to consider and/or grant a request
for relief unless and until a conforming and complete application has been
filed, including relevant plans, studies, and other information.
      3.   Applications involving an appeal of administrative order. In a case
involving an appeal from an action of an administrative official or entity, the
administrative official, or the clerk or secretary of the administrative
entity, as the case may be, upon notice from the Planning Department, shall
transmit to the ZBA copies of all papers constituting the record upon which the
action was taken, together with a letter specifying an explanation of the
action taken.
      4.   Consent of property owner required. Applications to the ZBA shall be
made with the full knowledge and written consent of all owners of the property
in question. This requirement shall include the consent of a land contract
seller to the relief sought by a land contract purchaser.
      5.   Notice. Notice of a public hearing concerning a request for a
dimensional variance shall be given following the procedures of §
29.11. Notice of a public hearing concerning a request for an interpretation of
the zoning ordinance, or an appeal of an administrative decision shall be given
as follows:
         (a)   A notice stating the time, date, and place of the public hearing
shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the township and
sent to the person requesting the interpretation not less than 15 days before
the public hearing.
         (b)   If the request for interpretation or appeal involves a specific
parcel , written notice stating the nature of the request and the time, date,
and place of the public hearing shall be sent by first-class mail or personal
delivery to all persons to whom real property is assessed within 500 feet of
the boundary of the property in question, and to the occupants of all
structures within 500 feet of the boundary of the property in question. If a
tenant’s name is not known, the term “occupant” may be used.
      6.   Stay of proceedings. An appeal shall have the effect of staying all
proceedings in furtherance of the action being appealed unless the officer or
entity from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the ZBA that, by reason of
facts stated in such certification, a stay would in his or her opinion cause
imminent peril to life or property, in which case proceedings shall not be
stayed unless specifically determined by the ZBA , or by a court of competent
jurisdiction.
      7.   Decision by the Zoning Board of Appeals . The concurring vote of a
majority of the membership of the ZBA shall be necessary to reverse any order,
requirement, decision, or determination of an administrative official, board,
or commission made in the administration of this ordinance, to decide in favor
of an applicant on any matter upon which the ZBA is required to pass under this
Ordinance, or to grant a “non-use” variance from the terms of this Ordinance.
   D.   Disposition and duration of approval.
      1.   ZBA powers. The ZBA may reverse, affirm, vary, or modify any order,
requirement, decision, or determination presented in a case within the ZBA ’s
jurisdiction, and to that end, shall have all of the powers of the officer,
board, or commission from whom the appeal is taken, subject to the ZBA ’s scope
of review, as specified in this Ordinance and/or by law. The ZBA may remand a
case for further proceedings and decisions, with or without instructions.
      2.   Decision final. A decision by the ZBA shall be considered final as
of the meeting at which the decision has been made, and the date of such
meeting shall be deemed to be the date of notice of the decision to the
applicant. To the extent that decisions are requested or required to be in
writing, the minutes of the ZBA meeting, and decision, as proposed under
supervision of the secretary, shall constitute the written decision.
      3.   Period of validity. Any decision of the ZBA favorable to the
applicant shall remain valid only as long as the information and data relating
to such decision are found to be correct, and the conditions upon which the
decision was based are maintained. The relief granted by the ZBA shall be valid
for a period not longer than one year, unless otherwise specified by the ZBA ,
and within such period of effectiveness, actual on-site improvement of property
in accordance with the approved plan and the relief granted, under a valid
building permit, must be commenced or the grant of relief shall be deemed void.
      4.   Record of proceedings. 
         The township administrative staff, under the supervision of the
secretary of the ZBA , shall prepare and keep minutes of the ZBA proceedings,
showing the findings, decisions, conditions, if any, and votes of each member
in each case, including a member’s absence or failure to vote. The minutes
shall be within the ultimate authority, and shall be the responsibility, of the
secretary of the ZBA , and shall be subject to approval of the ZBA . To the
extent that a written decision in a case is requested or required, the minutes,
prepared under the supervision of the ZBA secretary, along with the plan
submitted, shall serve as the written decision, even if the minutes are
awaiting final ZBA approval.
         The official records of the ZBA proceedings shall be filed in the
Township Hall and shall be public records.
      5.   Appeal of a ZBA decision. Appeals of a ZBA decision shall be taken
in the manner provided by law.
      6.   New application for variance . If the ZBA denies a request for a
variance , the decision of the ZBA shall not be subject to re-consideration for
a period of one year, whereupon the applicant may submit a new application for
the variance . However, the ZBA may waive the one year period if conditions
upon which their original decision was made change, or if information relating
to their original decision are found to be incorrect or inaccurate.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 29.06 AMENDMENTS.
   A.   Initiation of amendment. The Township Board may amend, supplement, or
change the district boundaries or the regulations herein, pursuant to the
authority and procedures set forth in Michigan Public Act 110 of 2006, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3101 through 125.3702, as amended. Text amendments may be
proposed by any governmental body or any interested person or organization.
Changes in district boundaries may be proposed by any governmental body, any
person having a freehold interest in the subject property, or by the designated
agent of a person having a freehold interest in the property.
   B.   Application for amendment. A petition for an amendment to the text of
this Ordinance or an amendment to change the zoning classification of a
particular property, shall be commenced by filing a petition on the forms
provided by the township and accompanied by the fees specified. The petition
shall describe the proposed amendment and shall be signed by the applicant.
Petitions for rezoning of a specific site shall be accompanied by a plot plan
or survey, which shall contain the following information. These materials shall
be submitted to the township no later than noon 21 calendar days prior to the
Planning Commission or Township Board meeting at which the review is requested,
except when a public hearing is required, in which case the application
materials shall be submitted no later than 21 calendar days prior to the
meeting.
      1.   Applicant’s name, address, and telephone number.
      2.   Scale, northpoint, and dates of submittal and revisions.
      3.   Zoning classification of petitioner’s parcel and all abutting
parcels .
      4.   Existing lot lines , building lines , structures , parking areas,
driveways , and other improvements on the site and within 50 feet of the site.
      5.   Proposed lot lines and lot dimensions, and general layout of
proposed structures , parking areas, driveways , and other improvements on the
site.
      6.   Dimensions, centerlines, and right-of-way widths of all abutting
streets and alleys.
      7.   General location of existing drainage courses, floodplains , lakes
and streams, and woodlots.
      8.   All existing and proposed easements .
      9.   Location of sanitary sewer or septic systems, existing and proposed.
      10.   Location and size of water main, well sites, and building service,
existing and proposed.
   C.   Review procedures. After the completed petition and all required
supporting materials have been received and fees paid, the petition shall be
reviewed in accordance with the following procedures:
      1.   Planning Commission review. The petition shall be placed on the
agenda of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning Commission . The
Planning Commission shall review the petition for amendment in accordance with
the procedures and public hearing and notice requirements set forth in Michigan
Public Act 110 of 2006, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3101 through 125.3702, as
amended, and schedule a public hearing for the request on the next available
Planning Commission agenda. Notice of the public hearing shall be given
following the procedures listed in §
29.11.
      2.   Action by the Planning Commission . 
         Following the hearing on the proposed amendment, the Planning
Commission shall make written findings of fact which it shall transmit to the
Township Board , together with the comments made at the public hearing and its
recommendations.
         If a County Zoning Coordinating Committee has been appointed by the
County Board of Commissioners, the Planning Commission shall also submit the
proposed amendments to the Zoning Coordinating Committee for review and
recommendation, pursuant to § 307(2) of Michigan Public Act 110 of 2006, being
M.C.L.A. § 125.3307, as amended.
      3.   Action by the Township Board. The Township Board may hold additional
hearings if the Board considers it necessary, following the hearing and notice
requirements of Michigan Public Act 110 of 2006, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3101
through 125.3702, as amended. The Township Board may by majority vote of its
membership adopt the proposed amendment, reject the proposed amendment, or
refer the proposed amendment back to the Planning Commission for further review
and recommendation within a specified time period. Thereafter, the Township
Board may either adopt the amendment with or without the recommended revisions,
or reject it.
      4.   Review considerations. The Planning Commission and Township Board
shall at minimum, consider the following before taking action on any proposed
amendment.
         a.   Will the proposed amendment be in accordance with the basic
intent and purpose of the Zoning Ordinance?
         b.   Will the proposed amendment further the comprehensive planning
goals of the township as reflected in the Master Plan ?
         c.   Have conditions changed since the Zoning Ordinance was adopted or
was there a mistake in the Zoning Ordinance that justifies the amendment?
         d.   Will the amendment correct an inequitable situation created by
the Zoning Ordinance, rather than merely grant special privileges?
         e.   Will the amendment result in unlawful exclusionary zoning?
         f.   Will the amendment set an inappropriate precedent, resulting in
the need to correct future planning mistakes?
         g.   If a rezoning is requested, is the proposed zoning consistent
with the zoning classification of surrounding land?
         h.   If a rezoning is requested, could all requirements in the
proposed zoning classification be complied with on the subject parcel ?
         i.   If a rezoning is requested, is the proposed zoning consistent
with the trends in land development in the general vicinity of the property in
question?
         j.   Will the proposed amendment be consistent with the purposes of
this Ordinance and, in particular, will the proposed amendment promote the
public health, safety, and welfare?
      5.   Notice of record of amendment adoption. Following adoption of an
amendment by the Township Board , one notice of adoption shall be filed with
the Township Clerk and one notice shall be published in newspaper of general
circulation in the township within 15 days after adoption, in accordance with
Michigan Public Act 110 of 2006, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3101 through 125.3702,
as amended. A record of all amendments shall be maintained by the Township
Clerk. A master zoning map shall be maintained by the township , which shall
identify all map amendments.
   D.   Referendum. Within 30 days following the passage of the Zoning
Ordinance, a petition signed by a number of qualified and registered voters as
specified in § 402 of Public Act 160 of 2006, being M.C.L.A. § 750.349b, as
amended, may be filed with the Township Clerk requesting submission of an
ordinance or part of an ordinance to the electors for their approval, in
accordance with § 402(2) of Michigan Public Act 110 of 2006, being M.C.L.A. §
125.3402 (2), as amended.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 29.07 CONDITIONAL REZONING.
   A.   Intent. The Planning Commission and Township Board recognize that, in
certain instances, it would be an advantage to the township and to property
owners seeking rezoning if the application for rezoning was accompanied by a
site plan and was subject to certain conditions. Accordingly, it is the intent
of this section of the Zoning Ordinance to provide a conditional rezoning
option to property owners in connection with the submission of an application
for rezoning.
   B.    Definitions. The following definitions shall apply in the
interpretation of this section:
      1.   APPLICANT . The property owner, or a person acting with the written
and signed authorization of the property owner to make application under this
section.
      2.   CONDITIONAL REZONING AGREEMENT (CR AGREEMENT). A written agreement
approved and executed by the township and property owner, incorporating a CR
plan, and setting forth rezoning conditions and any other terms mutually agreed
upon by the parties relative to land for which the township has approved a
conditional rezoning.
      3.   CONDITIONAL REZONING PLAN (CR PLAN). A plan of the property which is
the subject of a conditional rezoning, prepared by a licensed civil engineer or
architect, that shows the location, size, height, design, and other measures or
features of buildings , structures , and improvements on and adjacent to the
property. The details to be offered for inclusion on a CR plan shall be
determined by the applicant, subject to approval of the Township Board after
recommendation by the Planning Commission .
      4.   REZONING CONDITIONS . Conditions proposed by the applicant and
approved by the township as part of an approval under this section, which shall
constitute regulations in connection with the development and use of property
for which conditional approval has been granted. Such rezoning conditions shall
not:
         a.   Authorize uses or developments of greater intensity or density
than are permitted in the district proposed by the rezoning.
         b.   Authorize uses that are not permitted in the district proposed by
the rezoning.
         c.   Permit uses or development expressly or implicitly prohibited in
the CR agreement.
      5.   REZONING . The amendment of this Ordinance to change the zoning map
classification on property from its existing district to a new district
classification.
   C.   Authorization and eligibility. 
      1.   Application for optional conditional rezoning. A property owner
shall have the option of seeking conditional rezoning in connection with
submission of an application seeking rezoning. The conditional rezoning option
shall be selected by filing an application for conditional rezoning review.
Conditional rezoning represents a legislative amendment to the Zoning
Ordinance, pursuant to M.C.L.A. § 125.286i.
      2.   Site-specific regulations. In order to be eligible for review of an
application for conditional rezoning, a property owner must propose a rezoning
of property to a new zoning district classification, and must, as part of such
proposal, voluntarily offer certain site-specific regulations (to be set forth
on a CR plan and in a CR agreement) which are equally or more strict or
limiting than the regulations that would apply to the land under the proposed
zoning district .
   D.   Review and approval procedures. 
      1.   Pre-application meeting. Prior to submitting an application for
conditional rezoning, the applicant shall schedule a pre-application meeting
with the Township Supervisor and Township Planner to review the conditional
rezoning guidelines and expectations. The applicant shall pay the expenses
incurred by the township for this meeting.
      2.   Application. A property owner may submit an application for
conditional rezoning at the time the application for rezoning is filed or at a
subsequent point in the process of review of the proposed rezoning. The
application, which may be amended during the review process, shall include a CR
plan proposed by the applicant and a list of rezoning conditions proposed by
the applicant, recognizing that the rezoning conditions shall not authorize
uses or development not permitted in the proposed zoning district .
      3.   Planning Commission review. After the completed application and all
required supporting materials have been received and fees paid, the petition
shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission in accordance with the procedures
outlined in §
29.07, subsections C.1 and C.2.
         a.   Public hearing. The petition shall be placed on the agenda of the
next regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning Commission . The Planning
Commission shall review the petition for amendment in accordance with the
procedures and public hearing and notice requirements set forth in § 103 and
other applicable sections of Michigan Public Act 110 of 2006, being M.C.L.A. §§
125.3101 through 125.3702, as amended.
         b.   Action by the Planning Commission . Following the hearing on the
proposed amendment, the Planning Commission shall make findings of fact which
it shall transmit to the Township Board , together with the comments made at
the public hearing and its recommendation.
      4.   Township Board consideration. Upon receipt of the recommendation of
the Planning Commission , the Township Board shall deliberate on the proposed
conditional rezoning. If the Township Board determines that it may approve the
conditional rezoning, then the Township Board shall work with the landowner to
clarify tentative conditions so that the applicant (or designee) can develop a
draft CR agreement.
      5.   Township Board action. Upon completion of the CR agreement, the
Township Board , by majority vote of its membership, shall make a final
determination to approve or deny the conditional rezoning.
      6.   Zoning district designation. If approved, the zoning classification
of the rezoned property shall consist of the district to which the property has
been rezoned, accompanied by a reference to “CR, conditional rezoning.” For
example, in the Limited Business District the zoning map designation would be
“B-1/CR” The use of property so designated shall be restricted to the uses
specified in the CR agreement, and no other development or use shall be
permitted.
      7.   Effects of approval. The use of property in question shall conform
with all regulations governing development and use in the zoning district to
which the property has been rezoned, subject to the following:
         a.   Development subject to conditional rezoning requirements.
Development and use of the property shall be subject to the more restrictive
requirements specified on the CR plan, in the rezoning conditions and in the CR
agreement, required as part of the conditional rezoning approval. Such
requirements shall supersede all inconsistent regulations otherwise applicable
under the Zoning Ordinance.
         b.   Site plan review and other approvals required. 
            Approval of the CR plan and agreement confirms only the rezoninig
of the property, subject to any conditions imposed as reflected in the CR plan.
Site plan, special land use , plat, and condominium approval, as appropriate,
shall be required, pursuant to procedures in
Article 29.00, prior to any improvements to the property.
            Any use or development proposed as part of any offer of conditions
that would require a variance under the terms of this Ordinance may only be
commenced if a variance for such use or development is ultimately granted by
the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with the provisions of this
Ordinance.
         c.   Recordation and publication of CR agreement. A conditional
rezoning shall become effective following publication in the manner provided by
law, and, after recordation of the CR agreement, whichever is later.
      8.   Amendment of CR agreement. Amendment of a CR agreement shall be
proposed, reviewed, and approved in the same manner as a new conditional
rezoning application.
      9.   Expiration of CR agreement. The conditional rezoning approval shall
expire following a period of two years from the effective date of the rezoning
unless: 1) approved development of the property commences within such two-year
period and proceeds without delay and in good faith as required by ordinance
toward substantial completion; or 2) the rezoning is extended for good cause by
the Township Board as provided herein.
         a.   Extension of approval. In the event that a development has not
commenced within two years from the effective date of the rezoning, the
Township Board shall initiate reversion of the zoning to its former
classification . However, the land owner may apply to the Township Board for a
one-year extension one time. The request for extension must be submitted to the
Township Clerk before the two-year time limit expires. The land owner must show
good cause why the extension should be granted.
         b.   Reversion of zoning. If approved development and/or use of the
rezoned land does not occur within the time frame specified under Subsection
9.a. above, then the land shall revert to its former zoning classification as
set forth in M.C.L.A. § 125.286i. The reversion process shall be initiated by
the Township Board requesting that the Planning Commission proceed with
consideration of rezoning of the land to its former zoning classification. The
procedure for considering and making this reversionary rezoning shall
thereafter be the same as applies to all other rezoning requests.
      10.   Violations of the CR agreement. If development or actions are
undertaken on or with respect to the property in violation of the CR agreement,
such development or actions shall constitute a nuisance per se. In such case,
the township may issue a stop work order relative to the property and seek any
other lawful remedies. Until curative action is taken to bring the property
into compliance with the CR agreement, the township may withhold, or, following
notice and an opportunity to be heard, revoke permits and certificates, in
addition to or in lieu of such other lawful action to achieve compliance.
      11.   Fees. The applicant shall pay as a fee the expenses incurred by the
township in the review of a conditional rezoning application. An escrow shall
be established in an amount specified by Township Board resolution, and
additional reasonable amounts shall be contributed as required in order to
complete the review and approval process. Any unexpended amounts from such
escrow shall be returned to the applicant.
   E.   Elements of a conditional rezoning application. As an integral part of
the conditional rezoning, the following elements shall be provided by the
applicant for review by the township .
      1.   CR plan. A CR plan, with such detail as proposed by the applicant
and approved by the Township Board in accordance with this section. The CR plan
shall not replace the requirements for site plan, subdivision or condominium
approval, as the case may be.
      2.   Rezoning conditions. Rezoning conditions, which shall not authorize
uses or development not permitted in the proposed zoning district and which
shall not permit uses or development expressly or implicitly prohibited in the
CR agreement. Rezoning conditions may include some or all of the following:
         a.   The location, size, height, and setbacks of buildings ,
structures , and improvements.
         b.   The maximum density or intensity of development (e.g., units per
acre, maximum usable floor area, hours of operation, etc.).
         c.   Measures to preserve natural resources or features.
         d.   Facilities to address storm water drainage and water quality.
         e.   Facilities to address traffic issues, for example, through road
paving or other road improvements.
         f.   Open space preservation provisions.
         g.   Minimum landscaping , buffering, and screening provisions.
         h.   Added landscaping , above and beyond what is required by the
Zoning Ordinance.
         i.   Building design, materials, lighting, and sign criteria.
         j.   Permissible and prohibited uses of the property.
         k.   Provisions to preserve historic farms , barns, and other
buildings to preserve the history of the township .
         l.   Measures to protect the rural view shed, which is an undeveloped
area adjacent to the road  right-of-way , having a depth of at least 200 feet,
where existing natural features, such as wetlands , woodlands, hedgerows,
undulating landforms, and scenic vistas are preserved and incorporated into the
landscape.
         m.   Reclamation and reuse of land, where previous use of land causes
severe development difficulties, or has caused blight.
         n.   Drainage improvements, beyond what is required by ordinance,
using best management practices.
         o.   Such other conditions as deemed important to the development by
the applicant.
      3.   CR agreement. A CR agreement which is voluntarily offered by the
applicant (or designee) shall incorporate the CR plan and set forth the
rezoning conditions, together with any other term mutually agreed upon by the
parties, including the following terms:
         a.   Agreement and acknowledgement that the conditional rezoning was
proposed by the applicant to induce the township to grant the rezoning, and
that the township relied upon such proposal and would not have granted the
rezoning but for the terms in the CR agreement.
         b.   Agreement and acknowledgement that the conditions and CR
agreement are authorized by all applicable state and federal laws and
constitution, and that the CR agreement is valid and was entered into on a
voluntary basis, representing a permissible exercise of authority by the
township .
         c.   Agreement and understanding that the property in question shall
not be developed or used in a manner that is inconsistent with the CR plan and
CR agreement.
         d.   Agreement and understanding that the approval and CR agreement
shall be binding upon and inure to the benefit of the property owner and the
township , and their respective heirs, successors, assigns, and transferees.
         e.   Agreement and understanding that, if a conditional zoning expires
in the manner provided in this section, no development shall be undertaken or
permits for development issued until a new zoning district classification of
the property has been established.
         f.   Agreement and understanding that each of the requirements and
conditions in the CR agreement represents a necessary and reasonable measure
which, when considered with all other conditions and requirements, is roughly
proportional to the increased impact created by the use represented in the
approved conditional rezoning, taking into consideration the changed zoning
district classification and the specific use authorization granted.
         g.   Any other agreement voluntarily proposed by the applicant (or
designee) that is consistent with all applicable state and federal laws and is
agreed to by the township .
   F.   Approval criteria. The applicant shall have the burden of demonstrating
that the following requirements and standards are met by the CR plan, rezoning
conditions, and CR agreement:
      1.   Enhancement of the project area. The Township Board shall determine
that approval of the conditional rezoning shall accomplish the integration of
the proposed land development project with the characteristics of the project
area, and result in an enhancement of the project area, and such enhancement
would be unlikely to be achieved or would not be assured in the absence of the
use of conditional rezoning.
      2.   In the public interest. The Township Board shall determine that, in
considering the site specific land use proposed by the applicant, sufficient
conditions have been included in the CR plan and CR agreement so that it would
be in the public interest to grant the conditional rezoning. In determining
whether approval of a proposal would be in the public interest, the benefits
that would be reasonably expected to accrue from the proposal shall be balanced
against, and be found to clearly outweigh the reasonably foreseeable detriments
thereof, taking into consideration reasonably accepted planning, engineering,
environmental, and other principles.
      3.   Consistency with the Master Plan. The proposed rezoning shall be
consistent with the Master Plan and Future Land Use Map for the township .
      4.   Review considerations. The Planning Commission and Township Board
shall consider the review considerations set forth in §
29.07, subsection C.4.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 29.08 PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES.
   A.   Permits.
      1.   Permit required. A building permit or other appropriate permit shall
be required as follows:
         a.   Prior to the erection, alteration, repair, renovation,
demolition, or removal of any building or structure .
         b.   Prior to the installation, extension, or replacement of plumbing,
electrical, drainage, or similar utility systems.
         c.   Prior to the establishment of a new use, whether the land is
currently vacant or if a change in land use is proposed.
         d.   Prior to any change in use of an existing building or structure
to a different class or type.
         e.   In all other instances specified by the adopted Township Building
Code (for the purpose of this Ordinance, “Building Code” includes related codes
adopted by the township , such as the Electrical and Mechanical Codes).
      2.   Definition of alteration and repair. For the purposes of this
section, the terms “alteration” and “repaired” shall include any changes in
structural parts, stairway, type of construction, type, class or kind of
occupancy, light or ventilation, means of ingress and egress , or other changes
affecting or regulated by the Building Code, the Housing Law of Michigan
(Public Act 167 of 1917, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.401 through 125.543, as
amended), or this Ordinance or other applicable ordinances of the township .
      3.   Application requirements. 
         No permit shall be issued for construction, alteration, or remodeling
of any building or structure until an application has been submitted, showing
that the proposed improvements are in conformance with the provisions of this
Ordinance and with the Building Code.
         Applications for permits required by this section shall be filed with
the Building Inspector. Each application shall be accompanied by a written
detailed explanation of the proposed improvements, and, if applicable,
dimensioned plans drawn to scale. The plans shall be of sufficient detail to
allow the Building Inspector to determine whether the proposed improvements are
in conformance with this Ordinance, the Building Code, and other applicable
laws and ordinances. At minimum, the plans shall illustrate information
requested on the application form or by the Building Inspector.
      4.   Conformity with applicable ordinances and approved plans. 
         Permits shall be issued only if, after thorough inspection of the
application materials and plans, the Building Inspector finds that the proposal
is in conformance with this Ordinance, the adopted Building Code, and other
applicable laws and ordinances, except where the Building Inspector receives
written notice of a variance having been granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals
or Construction Board of Appeals.
         Building permits issued on the basis of plans and application
materials approved by the Building Inspector authorize only the use, layout,
and construction set forth in such plans and application materials. Use,
layout, or construction at variance with approved plans and application
materials shall be deemed in violation of this Ordinance, and subject to
penalties in accordance with §
29.10.
      5.   Expiration of permits. A permit issued for construction, or
remodeling of any building or structure shall be subject to terms of expiration
specified in the adopted Building Code.
      6.   Inspection of completed work. The holder of any permit issued
pursuant to the requirements in this section shall notify the Building
Inspector immediately upon completion of the work authorized by the permit for
a final inspection and to request a certificate of occupancy.
   B.   Certificates of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall be required
prior to occupancy or use or any land, building , or structure . The following
guidelines shall apply to certificates of occupancy:
      1.   General requirements.
         a.   Purpose. The purpose of a certificate of occupancy is to permit
the occupancy or use of land, buildings , or structures , upon first making the
determination that the provisions of this Ordinance have been complied with and
that all outstanding fees have been paid.
         b.   Certificates for new and existing buildings . Certificates of
occupancy shall be issued for new or existing buildings or structures , or
parts thereof, or existing or new uses of land if, after inspection, the
Building Inspector finds that any alterations , extensions, repairs, or new
construction have been completed in conformity with the provisions of this
Ordinance, that the proposed occupancy is fully in compliance with this
Ordinance, and that the applicant has submitted an updated mortgage survey.
         c.   Temporary certificates. A temporary certificate of occupancy may
be issued for a portion of a building or structure prior to occupancy of the
entire building or structure , provided that such portion of the building ,
structure , or premises is in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance
and the Building Code, and provided further that no threat to public safety
exists. The Building Inspector may require that a performance guarantee be
provided in accordance with §
2.18 as a condition of obtaining a temporary certificate. The date of
expiration shall be indicated on the temporary certificate; failure to obtain a
final certificate of occupancy within the specified time shall constitute a
violation of this Ordinance, subject to the penalties set forth in §
29.10.
         d.   Certificates for accessory buildings to dwellings . Buildings and
structures that are accessory to a dwelling shall not require a separate
certificate of occupancy, but may be included in the certificate of occupancy
for the principal use on the same parcel , provided the accessory buildings or
uses are shown on the plot plan and are completed at the same time as the
principal use .
      2.   Period of validity. A final certificate of occupancy shall remain in
effect for the life of the building or structure , or part thereof, or use of
the land, until the use of the building , structure , or land changes. A change
of use shall require a new certificate of occupancy.
      3.   Records of certificates. A record of all certificates of occupancy
shall be kept at the Township Hall. Copies of such certificates shall be
furnished upon request to a person or persons having a propriety or tenancy
interest in the property.
      4.   Application requirements. 
         Application for a certificate of occupancy shall be made on forms
supplied by the township and accompanied by the fees specified. A certificate
of occupancy shall be applied for at the same time as the application for a
building permit, if a building permit is required.
         The Building Inspector shall inspect a building or structure within
five working days after notification of completion of a building or structure
or other improvements. The Building Inspector shall issue a certificate of
occupancy upon finding that the building or structure , or part thereof, or the
use of land is in conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance. If the
Building Inspector denies approval of a certificate, the applicant shall be
notified in writing of the denial and the reasons for denial.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 29.09 FILING FEES.
   All applications shall be accompanied by a filing fee which shall be
established by resolution of the Township Board , in accordance with § 406 of
Public Act 110 of 2006, being M.C.L.A. § 125.3406, as amended. This filing fee
may include a deposit toward the costs of any consultants retained by the
township for reviewing the application, such as consulting planning services,
consulting engineering services, legal services, court reported services, or
similar services. The filing fee and deposit shall be paid before the approval
process begins. Upon notification of deficient payment of fees, administrative
officials charged with enforcement of the Ordinance shall suspend further
review of the application.
   Any deposit toward the cost of any consultants shall be credited against the
expense to the township of such consultants, which shall be fully charged to
the applicant. Any portion of the deposit not needed to pay such expense shall
be refunded without interest to the applicant within 30 days of final action on
the application.
   A schedule of the current filing fees and deposit requirements shall be made
available in the office of the Township Clerk.
   The assessment and payment of application fees does not affect the
requirements for a performance guarantee as specified in §
2.18.
   There shall be no fee in the case of application filed in the public
interest by a municipal department or Township Official.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 29.10 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   A.   Public nuisance . Buildings  erected , altered, razed, or converted
(including tents, mobile homes , and trailer coaches), or uses carried on in
violation of any provision of this Ordinance are hereby declared to be a
nuisance per se, and shall be subject to abatement or other action by a court
of appropriate jurisdiction.
   B.   Violation defined. Any person, firm, corporation, or agent, or any
employee, contractor, or subcontractor of same, who fails to comply with any of
the provisions of this Ordinance or any of the regulations adopted in pursuance
thereof, or who impedes or interferes with the enforcement of this Ordinance by
the Building Inspector or other enforcement official shall be deemed in
violation of this Ordinance.
   C.   Penalties. Any violation of this Ordinance shall constitute a
misdemeanor or municipal civil infraction, as determined within the township's
discretion. Any person who is convicted of a misdemeanor under this section
shall be subject to punishment by a fine not exceeding $500 or by imprisonment
not exceeding 90 days for each offense, or both, at the discretion of the
court. Each day a violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate
offense. If instead a municipal civil infraction is imposed, the penalty shall
be a fine not to exceed $500. Upon notice of a violation, the appropriate
township employee shall investigate any violation and then make a determination
as to whether the penalty shall be imposed. The Township Supervisor or his/her
designated agent is hereby authorized to write and serve municipal civil
infraction tickets. This municipal civil infraction ticket shall serve as
notice of the alleged violation. Proceedings for the municipal civil infraction
shall proceed as provided in the Township Municipal Civil Infractions
Ordinance. The imposition of a municipal civil infraction fine for any
violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue. Further
violations subject the owner or occupant, or person or persons, agent, firm or
corporation to subsequent municipal civil infraction violations.
   Furthermore, the owner or tenant of any building , structure , premise, or
part thereof, and any architect, engineer, builder, contractor, agent, or other
person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains any violation of
the Ordinance may each be found guilty of a separate offense and may be subject
to the penalties provided herein. The cost of prosecution shall also be
assessed against the violator.
   The imposition of any sentence shall not exempt the offense from compliance
with the requirement of this Ordinance.
   D.   All violations shall be addressed by following the procedures outlined
in the Township Municipal Civil Infractions Ordinance.
   E.   Authority to pursue court action. The Township Board or its duly
authorized representative is hereby empowered to commence and pursue any and
all necessary and appropriate actions or proceedings in the Circuit Court, or
any other court having jurisdiction, to restrain or prevent any non-compliance
with or violation of any of the provisions of this Ordinance, and to correct,
remedy, or abate such noncompliance or violation. Any person aggrieved or
adversely affected by such noncompliance or violation may institute suit or
join the Township Board in such a suit to abate the violation.
   F.   Other remedies. The rights and remedies set forth above shall not
preclude the use of other remedies provided by law, including any additional
rights of the township to initiate proceedings in an appropriate court of law
to restrain or prevent any noncompliance with any provisions of this Ordinance,
or to correct, remedy, or abate such non-compliance.
   G.   Rights and remedies preserved. Any failure or omission to enforce the
provisions of this Ordinance, and failure or omission to prosecute any
violations of this Ordinance, shall not constitute a waiver of any rights and
remedies provided by this Ordinance or by law, and shall not constitute a
waiver or nor prevent any further prosecution of violations of this Ordinance.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013; Ord. 54, passed 6-11-2014)
§ 29.11 RECORDS.
   The township shall keep accurate records of all decisions on all
applications submitted pursuant to this Ordinance.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 29.12 PUBLIC NOTICE.
   Any application process requiring a public hearing shall comply with the
requirements of PA 110 of 2006, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3101 through 125.3702, as
amended, and the procedures of this §
29.12.
   A.   Special land use and variance requests.
      1.   Publication in a newspaper of general circulation. Notice of the
request shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation not less than
15 days before the date the application will be considered for approval.
      2.   Personal and mailed notice. 
         a.   Notice shall be sent by mail or personal delivery to the owners
of property for which approval is being considered.
         b.   Notice shall be sent to all persons to whom real property is
assessed within 500 feet of the property and to the occupants of all structures
within 500 feet of the property, including the owners or occupants of
structures located in adjacent cities or townships. If the name of the occupant
is not known, the term “occupant” may be used in making notification.
         c.   All notice delivered by mail or personal delivery must be given
not less than 15 days before the date of the public hearing. Notice shall be
deemed mailed by its deposit in the United States mail.
         d.   The township shall prepare a list of property owners and
occupants to whom notice was mailed or delivered.
      3.   Content. Any notice published in a newspaper or delivered by mail or
personal delivery shall:
         a.   Describe the nature of the request.
         b.   Indicate the property that is the subject of the request.
         c.   Include a listing of all existing street addresses within the
property. If no such addresses exist, other means of identifying the property
may be used.
         d.   When and where the public hearing will occur.
         e.   When and where written comments may be submitted concerning the
request.
   B.   Zoning Ordinance text and map amendments.
      1.   Map or text amendments affecting ten or fewer parcels . If the
proposed map or text amendment will impact ten or fewer parcels , notice shall
be given as specified in §
29.12, subsection A.
      2.   Map or text amendments affecting 11 or more parcels . If the
proposed map or text amendment will impact 11 or more parcels , notice shall be
given as specified in §
29.12, subsection A, with the exception that the notice need not list street
addresses of properties that will be impacted by the map or text amendment.
      3.   Notice to other entities. Notice of the time and place of the public
hearing shall also be given by mail to any electric, gas, and pipeline public
utility company, each telecommunication service provider, each railroad
operating within the district or zone affected, and the airport manager of each
airport that registers its name with the Township Clerk for the purposes of
receiving notice of public hearings.
      4.   Additional information required in notice. Any notice required under
this section shall include the places and times at which the proposed text or
map amendment or amendments may be examined.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
ARTICLE 30.00
ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION
§ 30.01 OVERVIEW.
   The Township Board of Trustees or its duly authorized representatives as
specified in this article is hereby charged with the duty of enforcing the
provisions of this Ordinance. Accordingly, the administration of this Ordinance
is hereby vested in the following township entities:
   A.   Township Board of Trustees.
   B.   Township Planning Commission .
   C.   Zoning Board of Appeals .
   D.   Zoning Enforcement Officials , including the Building Inspector and
Township Planner .
   The purpose of this part of the Zoning Ordinance is to set forth the
responsibilities and scope of authority of these entities.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 30.02 TOWNSHIP BOARD OF TRUSTEES.
   The Township Board of Trustees shall have the following responsibilities and
authority pursuant to this Ordinance.
   A.   Adoption of Zoning Ordinance and amendments. In accordance with the
intent and purposes expressed in the Preamble to this Ordinance, and pursuant
to the authority conferred by Michigan Public Act 110 of 2006, being M.C.L.A.
§§ 125.3101 through 125.3702, as amended, the Township Board of Trustees shall
have the authority to adopt this Ordinance, as well as amendments previously
considered by the Planning Commission or at a hearing or as decreed by a court
of competent jurisdiction.
   B.   Review and approval of plans. 
      Township Board review and approval shall be required for all site plans,
pursuant to §
29.02.
      Township Board review and approval shall be required for all special land
uses , in accordance with §
29.03.
      Township Board review and approval shall be required for all planned
developments , in accordance with §
29.04.
   C.   Setting of fees. In accordance with §
29.08 of this Ordinance and § 406 of Michigan Public Act 110 of 2006, being
M.C.L.A. § 125.3406, as amended, the Township Board shall have the authority to
set all fees for permits, applications, and requests for action pursuant to the
regulations set forth in this Ordinance. In the absence of specific action
taken by the Township Board to set a fee for a specific permit or application,
the appropriate township administrative official shall assess the fee based on
the estimated costs of processing and reviewing the permit or application.
   D.   Approval of Planning Commission members. In accordance with Michigan
Public Act 33 of 2008, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3801 through 125.3885, as amended,
members of the Planning Commission shall be appointed by the Township
Supervisor with the approval of the Township Board .
   E.   Determining similar uses. The Township Board shall be responsible for
determining if proposed uses are similar in nature and compatible with uses
that are expressly permitted in a district, pursuant to §
2.08.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 30.03 TOWNSHIP PLANNING COMMISSION.
   The Township Planning Commission shall have the following responsibilities
and authority pursuant to this Ordinance.
   A.   Creation. The Township Planning Commission is created pursuant to
Michigan Public Act 33 of 2008, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3801 through 125.3885, as
amended, the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, and Township Ordinance 15. In
accordance with § 11 of Act 168, the Planning Commission shall have all the
powers and duties provided for zoning commissions created pursuant to Michigan
Public Act 110 of 2006, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3101 through 125.3702, as
amended.
   B.   Membership and operation. 
      Members of the Planning Commission shall be appointed by the Township
Supervisor with the approval of the Township Board of Trustees. The
qualifications of members, the term of each member, filling of vacancies,
removal of members, compensation of members, and operation of the Planning
Commission shall be in accordance with Michigan Public Act 33 of 2008, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3801 through 125.3885, as amended, and Township Ordinance 15.
The Planning Commission by resolution shall determine the time and place of
meetings. A special meeting may be called by either two members upon written
request to the secretary, or by the chairperson. The Planning Commission shall
adopt rules for the transaction of business, and shall keep a public record of
its resolutions, transactions, findings, and determinations.
   C.   Jurisdiction. The Planning Commission shall discharge the following
duties pursuant to this Ordinance:
      1.   Formulation of Zoning Ordinance and amendments. The Planning
Commission shall be responsible for formulation of the Zoning Ordinance, review
of amendments to the Zoning Ordinance, holding hearings on a proposed Zoning
Ordinance or amendments, and reporting its findings and recommendations
concerning the Zoning Ordinance or amendments to the Township Board of
Trustees.
      2.   Site plan review. The Planning Commission shall be responsible for
review of applications for site plan approval in accordance with §
29.02. As provided for in §
29.02, the Planning Commission shall be responsible for making a recommendation
to the Township Board to grant approval, approval subject to revisions, or
denial of site plan approval.
      3.   Special land use review. The Planning Commission shall be
responsible for holding hearings and review of all applications for special
land use approval in accordance with §
29.03, and making a recommendation to the Township Board to grant approval,
approval subject to revisions, or denial of approval.
      4.   Planned development review. The Planning Commission shall be
responsible for holding hearings and review of all applications for planned
development in accordance with §
29.04. The Planning Commission shall be responsible for making a recommendation
to the Township Board of Trustees to grant approval, approval with conditions,
or denial of a planned development proposal.
      5.   Formulation of a basic plan. The Planning Commission shall be
responsible for formulation and adoption of a master plan ) to guide for the
development of the township , in accordance with Michigan Public Act 33 of
2008, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3801 through 125.3885, as amended.
      6.   Review of matters referred by the Township Board . The Planning
Commission shall be responsible for review of plats or other matters relating
to land development referred to it by the Township Board of Trustees. The
Planning Commission shall recommend appropriate regulations and action on such
matters.
      7.   Report on operation of the Zoning Ordinance. In accordance with §
308(2) of Michigan Public Act 110 of 2006, being M.C.L.A. § 125.3308, as
amended, the Planning Commission shall periodically prepare for the Township
Board of Trustees a report on the operations of the Zoning Ordinance including
recommendations as to the enactment of amendments or supplements to the
Ordinance.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 30.04 ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS.
   The Township Zoning Board of Appeals (hereinafter referred to as “ZBA”) is
created pursuant to Michigan Public Act 110 of 2006, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3101
through 125.3702, as amended.
   A.   Membership and operation. The ZBA shall consist of five members who
shall be appointed in accordance with § 601(3) of Michigan Public Act 110 of
2006, being M.C.L.A. § 125.3601(3), as amended, as follows:
      1.   The first member shall be a chairperson of the Planning Commission
or the chairperson’s designee.
      2.   The remaining members (including any alternate members) shall be
electors of the township residing outside of incorporated cities and villages,
and shall be representative of the population distribution and of the various
interests present in the township .
      3.   Of the remaining members, one shall be a member of the Township
Board .
      4.   No employee or contractor of the township may be a member or
employee of the Board of Appeals. No elected officer of the township may serve
as chairman of the Board of Appeals.
      5.    The qualifications of members, the term of each member, filling of
vacancies, compensation of members, and operation of the ZBA shall be in
accordance with Act 110. The ZBA shall not conduct business unless a majority
of the members of the Board are present.
      6.   The Township Board may appoint up to two alternate members for the
same term as regular members to the ZBA . An alternate member may be called to
serve as a member of the ZBA in the absence of a regular member if the regular
member will be unable to attend one or more meetings. An alternate member may
also be called to serve as a member for the purpose of reaching a decision on a
case in which the member has abstained for reasons of conflict of interest. The
alternate member appointed shall serve in the case until a final decision is
made. The alternate member has the same voting rights as a regular member of
the ZBA .
   B.   Meetings. Meetings of the ZBA shall be held in accordance with an
adopted schedule, or at the call of the chairman, or at such other times as the
ZBA may specify in its rules and procedures. The ZBA shall state the grounds of
each determination, and shall maintain a record of its proceedings, which shall
be filed in the office of the Township Clerk.
   C.   Jurisdiction. The ZBA shall have the authority outlined in §
29.05.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 30.05 BUILDING INSPECTOR, TOWNSHIP PLANNER, AND OTHER ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS.
   A.   Overview. As specified throughout this Ordinance, certain actions
necessary for the implementation of this Ordinance shall be administered by the
Building Inspector and other township administrative officials, the Township
Planner , or their duly authorized assistants or representatives. In carrying
out their designated duties, all such enforcement officers shall administer the
Ordinance precisely as it is written and shall not make changes or vary the
terms of the Ordinance.
   B.   Responsibilities of the Building Inspector and assistants. In addition
to specific responsibilities outlined elsewhere in this Ordinance, and in
addition to specific responsibilities related to enforcement and administration
of the adopted Building Code, the Building Inspector or his or her duly
authorized assistants shall have the following responsibilities:
      1.   Provide citizens and public officials with information relative to
this Ordinance and related matters.
      2.   Assist applicants in determining and completing appropriate forms
and procedures related to site plan review, rezoning, and other zoning matters.
      3.   Review and investigate permit applications to determine compliance
with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.
      4.   Issue building or other appropriate permits upon compliance with
provisions of this Ordinance and other applicable ordinances.
      5.   Issue certificates of occupancy in accordance with §
29.07 upon compliance with all provisions of this Ordinance and other
applicable ordinances.
      6.   Perform inspections of buildings , structures , and premises to
insure proposed land use changes or improvements are and will remain in
compliance with this Ordinance.
      7.   Investigate alleged violations of this Ordinance and enforce
appropriate corrective measures when required, including issuance of violation
notices, issuance of orders to stop work, and revoking of permits.
      8. Perform other related duties required to administer this Ordinance.
   C.   Responsibilities of the Township Planner . In addition to specific
responsibilities outlined elsewhere in this Ordinance, upon request from the
Township Board or other authorized township body or official, the Township
Planner or his or her duly authorized assistants shall have the following
responsibilities:
      1.   Prepare and administer such plans and ordinances as are appropriate
for the township and its environs, within the scope of the Michigan planning
and zoning enabling acts.
      2.   Advise and assist the Planning Commission and be responsible for
carrying out the directives of the Planning Commission .
      3.   Advise and assist the Township Board and be responsible for carrying
out the directives of the Township Board .
      4.   Provide citizens and public officials with information relative to
this Ordinance and related matters.
      5.   Assist applicants in determining the appropriate forms and
procedures related to site plan review, rezoning, and other zoning and planning
matters.
      6.   Prepare and forward to the Planning Commission reviews of all
applications for site plan review, special land use review, planned development
proposals, petitions for amendments to this Ordinance, and other applications
which must be acted upon by the Planning Commission .
      7.   When requested, prepare and forward to the Zoning Board of Appeals
reviews of all applications for appeals, variances , or other matters on which
the Zoning Board of Appeals is required to act.
      8.   Forward to the Township Board all recommendations of the Planning
Commission concerning matters on which the Township Board is required to take
final action.
      9.   Working with the Planning Assistant, periodically report to the
Planning Commission on the status of township ’s zoning and planning
administration. The Township Planner ’s reports may include, but need not be
limited to, updates on the nature and number of planning, zoning, and
development inquiries; planning or zoning concerns that are not adequately
addressed in the Zoning Ordinance; development trends that the Planning
Commission should be aware of and/or may wish to study; statistical or other
information that would help the Planning Commission perform their duties;
administrative policy decisions that affect planning and zoning; and similar
concerns.
      10.   Maintain up-to-date zoning map and Zoning Ordinance text
amendments.
      11.   Maintain records as accurately as is feasible of all nonconforming
uses, structures , and lots existing on the effective date of this Ordinance,
and update this record as conditions affecting the nonconforming status of such
uses changes.
      12.   Review all applications for site plan review, special land use
review, planned development proposals, and take any action required under the
guidelines in
Article 29.00.
      13.   At the request of the Planning Commission or Township Board , draft
amendments to the Zoning Ordinance and other ordinances to accomplish the
planning objectives of the township .
      14.   Perform other related duties required to administer this Ordinance
and further the goals of the Master Plan .
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
ARTICLE 31.00
SEVERABILITY, REPEAL, EFFECTIVE DATE, ADOPTION
§ 31.01 SEVERABILITY.
   This Ordinance and the various parts, sentences, paragraphs, sections, and
clauses it contains are hereby declared to be severable. Should any part,
sentence, paragraph, section, or clause be declared unconstitutional or invalid
by any court for any reason, such judgement shall not affect the validity of
this Ordinance as a whole or any part thereof, other than the part so declared
to be unconstitutional or invalid.
   Furthermore, should the application of any provision of this Ordinance to a
particular property, building , or structure be adjudged invalid by any court,
such judgement shall not affect the application of said provision to any other
property, building , or structure in the township , unless otherwise stated in
the judgement.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 31.02 REPEAL.
   The previously adopted Williamstown Township Zoning Ordinance text, and all
amendments thereto, shall be repealed on the effective date of this Ordinance.
The repeal of the above Ordinance and its amendments does not affect or impair
any act done, offense committed, or right accruing, accrued, or acquired, or
any liability, penalty, forfeiture, or punishment incurred prior to the time
enforced, prosecuted, or inflicted. Adoption of the Zoning Ordinance text on
July 9, 2013, shall not affect the validity of the adopted zoning map, which is
not subject to repeal.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 31.03 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   Made and passed by the Township Board of Williamstown Township, Ingham
County, Michigan, on July 9, 2013, and effective seven days following
publication of Notice of Ordinance Adoption by the Township Clerk in a
newspaper of general circulation in Williamstown Township, pursuant to the
provisions of § 401 of Michigan Public Act 110 of 2006, as amended. This
Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and
publication according to law.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2013)
§ 31.04 ADOPTION.
   We hereby certify that the foregoing ordinance is a true copy of an
ordinance as enacted by the Township Board of Trustees on July 9, 2013.
   A.   Public hearing by Planning Commission : May 21, 2013.
   B.   Recommendation of Planning Commission to approve the Zoning Ordinance
text to the Township Board : May 21, 2013.
   C.   Township Board adoption of the Zoning Ordinance text: July 9, 2013.
   D.   Date the Ordinance text shall take effect: July 28, 2013.
                                                                        
Mickey Martin, Supervisor       Date
I, Ernie Gaffner, Clerk of the Williamstown Township, Ingham County, Michigan,
hereby certify that notice of adoption of the foregoing ordinance was published
pursuant to the provisions of Michigan Public Act 110 of 2006, as amended, in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Williamstown Township on July 21, 2013.
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
      Table
         
I.   FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS
TABLE I: FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
30 C.P.  12-5-1989   Granting Consumers Power Company a gas franchise for a
                     period of 30 years
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Michigan Compiled Laws Annotated
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO MICHIGAN COMPILED LAWS ANNOTATED
M.C.L.A. Section Code Section
M.C.L.A. Section        Code Section
15.231 et seq.          91.28
15.261 et seq.          91.28
28.451 et seq.          92.41,
                        92.43
41.181                  10.19,
                        92.02
41.184(2)(b)            30.01
41.184(3)               30.01
41.271—41.290         93.05
41.801—41.813         92.02
117.5e                  50.131
124.21—124.30         Ch. 156, App. A, § 12.01
125.251 et seq.         10.19
125.286i                Ch. 156, App. A, § 29.07
125.401 et seq.         91.21
125.401 through 125.543 Ch. 156, App. A, § 29.08
125.1351—125.1356     Ch. 156, App. A, § 4.01
125.1501 et seq.        91.21
                        Ch. 156, App. A, § 1.03, §
125.2301—125.2349     16.01, §
                        16.03
125.2311                Ch. 156, App. A, § 16.03
                        151.04,
                        154.02,
                        Ch. 156, App. A, § 1.03, §
                        2.18, §
                        8.02, §
                        8.03, §
                        10.02, §
125.3101—125.3702     29.04, §
                        29.06, §
                        29.07, §
                        29.12, §
                        30.02, §
                        30.03, §
                        30.04,
                        Ch. 156, App. A, § 2.06, §
                        2.24
125.3208(3)             Ch. 156, App. A, § 3.03
125.3307                Ch. 156, App. A, § 29.06
125.3308                Ch. 156, App. A, § 30.03
125.3402 (2)            Ch. 156, App. A, § 29.06
125.3406                Ch. 156, App. A, § 29.09, §
                        30.02
125.3601 (3)            Ch. 156, App. A, § 30.04
                        Ch. 156, App. A, § 1.03, §
125.3801—125.3885     30.02, §
                        30.03
211.1 et seq.        91.26
211.1 to 211.157        152.053
247.321—247.329       Ch. 156, App. A, § 26.03
259.431—259.464       Ch. 156, App. A, § 8.02
259.481—259.493       Ch. 156, App. A, § 8.02
                        152.006,
280.1 to 280.630        152.036,
                        Ch. 156, App. A, § 2.24
286.471—286.474       Ch. 156, App. A, § 1.03 
                        155.27,
324.101—324.90106     Ch. 156, App. A, § 1.03, §
                        8.02, §
                        9.02
324.3101—324.3134     Ch. 156, App. A, § 2.20
324.11101—324.11152   Ch. 156, App. A, § 1.03
324.11101—324.11153   90.01
324.11103(3)            90.01
324.21101—324.2121331 Ch. 156, App. A, § 1.03
324.21101(g)            90.01
324.30101—324.83109   Ch. 156, App. A, § 2.20
324.30101—324.30113   Ch. 156, App. A, § 2.20
324.30301—324.30329   Ch. 156, App. A, § 2.20, §
                        2.24
324.31501—324.31529   Ch. 156, App. A, § 2.20
324.51501—324.51906   92.04
324.4101                155.06
331.501—331.516       Ch. 156, App. A, § 8.02 
333.26421               Ch. 156, App. A, § 8.02 
333.27951 et seq.       111.02,
                        111.03
338.2301 et seq.        91.28
400.701 – 400.737     Ch. 156, App. A, § 1.03, §
                        8.02 
559.101—559.272       154.03,
                        154.04
559.101—559.276       Ch. 156, App. A, § 1.03
559.166                 Ch. 156, App. A, § 1.03
                        154.02—
                        154.04,
                        154.21,
                        154.61,
                        154.66,
                        155.06,
560.101—560.293       155.27,
                        155.28,
                        155.60,
                        155.63,
                        Ch. 156, App. A, § 1.03, §
                        2.01, §
                        18.02, §
                        26.04
722.111 – 722.128     Ch. 156, App. A, § 1.03 
750.349b                Ch. 156, App. A, § 29.06
764.9                   91.09
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Code Section
Ord. No. Date       Code Section
                    110.01—
23       3-20-1981  110.22,
                    110.99
25       4-10-1982  153.01—
                    153.06
                    50.001—
                    50.004,
                    50.015—
                    50.017,
                    50.030—
                    50.035,
                    50.050,
                    50.051,
                    50.065—
26       6-19-1982  50.073,
                    50.085—
                    50.088,
                    50.100—
                    50.115,
                    50.130—
                    50.132,
                    50.145—
                    50.149,
                    50.999
–      2-7-1984   110.12—
                    110.14
–      9-5-1989   50.115,
                    50.146
30 C.P.  12-5-1989  TSO Table I
32       9-5-1991   30.01
                    91.01—
                    91.10,
–      9- -1993   91.99,
                    110.01—
                    110.22,
                    110.99
–      - -1995    90.01—
                    90.07
                    154.01—
                    154.07,
                    154.20,
                    154.21,
33       - -1996    154.35—
                    154.44,
                    154.60—
                    154.68,
                    154.99
                    155.01—
                    155.06,
                    155.20—
                    155.29,
–      3-18-1997  155.40—
                    155.49,
                    155.60—
                    155.68,
                    155.99
                    154.02,
                    154.04,
                    154.21,
                    154.37,
                    154.39,
–      4-1-1997   154.61,
                    154.62,
                    154.65,
                    154.66,
                    154.68,
                    155.02,
                    155.06
                    93.01—
–      2-3-1998   93.08,
                    93.99
                    154.02,
                    154.03,
–      12-1-1998  154.44,
                    155.26—
                    155.28
                    151.01—
–      6-29-1999  151.10,
                    151.99
                    150.01—
                    150.06,
                    150.20—
39       - -2001    150.42,
                    150.60—
                    150.63,
                    150.99
–      3-6-2001   155.26,
                    155.60
–      5-1-2001   155.26
                    152.001—
                    152.006,
                    152.020,
                    152.021,
                    152.035—
                    152.037,
–      3-5-2002   152.039,
                    152.050,
                    152.053,
                    152.065,
                    152.066,
                    152.080—
                    152.083,
                    152.999
                    92.01—
                    92.09,
41       10-1-2002  92.20—
                    92.29,
                    92.99
                    92.01—
                    92.09,
–      8-5-2003   92.20—
                    92.29,
                    92.99
                    155.25,
–      2-3-2004   155.26,
                    155.60
–, § 19-7-2010   152.001
–, § 19-7-2010   152.002
–, § 19-7-2010   152.003
–, § 19-7-2010   152.004
–, § 29-7-2010   152.005
–, § 29-7-2010   152.006
–, § 39-7-2010   152.020
–, § 39-7-2010   152.021
–, § 49-7-2010   152.035
–, § 49-7-2010   152.036
–, § 49-7-2010   152.037
–, § 49-7-2010   152.038
–, § 49-7-2010   152.039
–, § 49-7-2010   152.040
–, § 59-7-2010   152.050
–, § 59-7-2010   152.051
–, § 59-7-2010   152.052
–, § 59-7-2010   152.053
–, § 69-7-2010   152.065
–, § 69-7-2010   152.066
–, § 79-7-2010   152.999
–, § 79-7-2010   152.080
–, § 79-7-2010   152.081
–, § 79-7-2010   152.082
–, § 79-7-2010   152.083
--       7-9-2013   Ch. 156, App. A
                    154.99,
                    155.99; Ch. 156, App A:
                    2.06,
54       6-11-2014  2.07,
                    4.03,
                    7.08,
                    11.04,
                    29.10
                    Ch. 156, App. A:
                    1.03,
                    2.02,
                    8.02,
                    11.02,
                    12.02,
55       7-9-2014   13.02,
                    14.02,
                    15.02,
                    17.02,
                    18.02,
                    20.02,
                    21.02,
                    22.02
                    Ch. 156, App. A:
                    1.03,
                    8.02,
56       8-13-2014  20.02,
                    21.02,
                    24.04,
                    27.04
                    Ch. 156, App. A:
                    1.03,
57       4-18-2015  8.02,
                    15.02,
                    18.02
                    91.99,
58       8-13-2014  92.99,
                    93.99
59       8-13-2014  Ch. 156, App. A:
                    2.18
60       7-8-2015   91.11
                    92.40—
--       6-14-2017  92.45,
                    92.99
--       6-13-2018  Ch. 156, App. A:
                    8.02
--       12-12-2018 Ch. 156, App. A:
                    8.02
                    111.01—
52       2-13-2019  111.04,
                    111.99
--       2-13-2019  Ch. 156, App. A:
                    22.02
--       6-12-2019  Ch. 156, App. A:
                    8.02
--       11-13-2019 91.20—
                    91.30
                    Ch. 156, App. A:
--       1-8-2020   1.03 ,
                    2.07
--       12-9-2020  Ch. 156, App. A:
                    8.02
                    Ch. 156, App. A:
--       12-9-2020  21.01,
                    21.02
--       9-8-2021   Ch. 156, App. A:
                    29.02
                    Ch. 156, App. A:
--       6-9-2021   25.51—
                    25.53
--       3-9-2022   Ch. 156, App. A:
                    8.02
--       4-13-2022  Ch. 156, App. A:
                    6.02
--       7-13-2022  Ch. 156, App. A:
                    2.25
                    Ch. 156, App. A:
                    1.03,
--       12-14-2022 7.07,
                    8.02,
                    15.02,
                    18.02
--       - -        Ch. 156, App. A:
                    29.03
                    Ch. 156, App. A:
                    1.03,
                    8.02,
                    11.02,
                    12.02,
--       2-8-2023   13.02,
                    14.02,
                    15.02,
                    16.02,
                    17.02,
                    18.02
                   
 
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP
BOARD OF TRUSTEES
MEETING MINUTES
Current through January 14, 2026
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
1996 Meeting Minutes
OCTOBER 1, 1996
The regular meeting of the WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP BOARD OF TRUSTEES was called
to order by Supervisor Obst on Tuesday, October 1, 1996 at 7:31 p.m. The Clerk
was asked to record who was present and if a quorum was present. Clerk Graham
stated a quorum was present and recorded the following; Supervisor Obst, Clerk
Graham, Treasurer Nilsson, Trustee Zaban, Trustee Wiegandt and Building
Inspector Aven.
The agenda was read over with several additions; Sidewalk construction, the
Constables report, computer update, Kane violation, Cox violation, and the
Township hall’s storage area.
WILLIAMSTON COMMUNITY FIRE BOARD REPORT, Rep. Keilholtz;
County Controllers 911 money - meeting this week and next week to discuss
availability of funds for this area. New ambulance to be delivered in January
1977 or shortly thereafter. Fire Board will attend the Ingham County Law and
Courts sub committee meeting to present our position. The meeting, chaired by
Mark Grebner - County Commissioner, will be held at 7:30 p.m., October 10, 1996
at the Ingham County Social Services building.
ATTORNEY’S REPORT, Stephen O. Schultz
Noo Fear - attempting to locate Mr. Squires. Have found several old addresses
through the Secretary of State’s office. Will drive by the Aurelius Rd address
to see what it is. 1440 E. Grand River is still the address listed on all
licenses and permits held by Mr. Squires. A violation of ordinance will be
filed against both Mrs. Speaks and Mr. Squires. Whomever they locate will be
held responsible for cleanup. This will be a district court matter. Both
nuisance and zoning violations.
Annexation petition - City of Williamston - No news from the Boundary
Commission. No hearing date has been set. They are very backed up due to a loss
of staff.
Kane Issue - Mr. Kane believes he can act under the approved split plan in
perpetuity. Attorney Schultz needs to meet with the Planner to see when he
pulled the permits and any construction activity. Will make recommendations
after this meeting.
BUILDING INSPECTOR’S REPORT, Inspector Aven;
All permits that are final in report. Very busy. Mr. Kane has a stop work
order.
Attempting to stop residency on the Struebel property, 212 E. Grand River Rd.,
until permits have been obtained from the Health Department. Current pole
building is not a residence. No C of Ode issued. Per Attorney Schultz: Issue
will be taken up in District Court if Mr. Jerry Deck attempts to rent out an
apartment on the property without the proper permits.
Cox Complaint - A six month temporary residence permit is allowed while the
main residence is under construction, but Mr. Cox appears to be living on the
property without the required permits. Will know more by the end of the week.
Building Inspector Aven to check on Cox issue as it pertains to section 2.07,
pages 2-9 of the zoning ordinance.
Building Inspector attended conference last month. Absence at board meeting due
to the conference.
ATTORNEY SCHULTZ: Enforcement of the sign ordinance. The Flagshop owner sees it
as outdoor advertisement of their product just as Litchfield’s does of theirs.
This is a mute point. Litchfield is operating under a lawful pre-existing non-
conforming use. Also, one company violating the ordinance does not make it OK
for another to do so. No outdoor display of goods is permitted in zones B-1 or
B-2. Flag store has threatened to change their display to be only National and
State flags. Their intent clearly goes against the ordinance prohibiting
banners and signs except for National and State flags without a permit.
Township can enforce the ordinance or go to the Board of Appeals to seek
definition of sign. Attorney Schultz is comfortable with the language in the
ordinance. If banners flying for quite some time before the ordinance went into
effect, then a lawful pre-existing non-conforming use can be invoked, but only
for the same number and size of banners that were displayed before the
ordinance.
Will be sent back to the Planning Commission to clarify or amend the ordinance.
Per Planning Commission Chair Martin, The wording of the ordinance can be
changed if needed. Currently no limitation on the number of National/State
flags is stated.
Treasurer Nilsson asked what the history of this complaint was.
Per Trustee Zaban, a member of the Planning Commission requested that the
ordinance be enforced. And that from day 1 there have been some flags flying on
the site.
Question from audience (Nancy Fink) - Are the flags legal due to blocking
visibility to the road? This issue must be addressed by the Road Commission and
/or State Highway Act. Not part of the Township’s jurisdiction.
Clerk Graham - Send the issue to the board of appeals for clarification and
then to the Planning Commission or the Board based on the Appeal Board’s
decision.
Planning Chair Martin - Page 7-9 of the zoning ordinance needs to have the
sentence on flags clarified.
Attorney Schultz - Planning Commission should revisit the issue. Sent back to
the planning commission to decide if the ordinance should be amended. Attorney
will work with the Planning Commission chair and have recommendations at the
next Township Board meeting.
ISSUE FOR ATTORNEY SCHULTZ - House under construction in the Woodview
Subdivision does not meet the required setbacks on one corner of the house.
Owner did not want to pay to have the property properly surveyed before
construction began. They are already framing the second floor of the house.
Attorney sees this as a self created hardship, and not something the Township
should have to compensate the owner for. Per Planner Martin, the owner has
three options: 1) tear down the structure and start over; 2) redesign the house
so that they can just cut off the corner that is in violation; or 3) go to the
Zoning Board of Appeals to see if they will allow the structure to stand. Per
Attorney Schultz, this matter is not yet at the stage where it is a legal issue
for the Township. Zoning Board of Appeals meeting scheduled for Oct. 14, 1996.
PLANNING COMMISSION REPORT, Chair person Mickey Martin;
Williamstown Estates - Need approval of Phase II and approval of the tentative
and preliminary plat all in one.
NBQ Flood Plain mapping has not come in yet. Mr. Kyes is in contact with Larry
Bryan. He should have a report by Thursday and will have the mapping available
1-3 weeks after that. The Flood Plain could be a problem if it changes. Chair
Martin requested the board approve Phase II of Williamstown Estates planned
development with the provision that the issue will be revisited if the flood
plain changes significantly. Clerk Graham so moved, seconded by Trustee
Wiegandt. Motion passed as written by the Planning Commission with conditions
#1 - #5 stated in the minutes of the Sept. 17, 1996 Planning Commission
meeting.
Clerk Graham moved to approve the tentative and preliminary Platte as written
by the Planning Commission on Pages 4 & 5 of their report subject to prior
final approval of PD and submission of preliminary plat application. Trustee
Wiegandt seconded. Discussion followed on amount of open space provided (40
plus acres out of 137 acres), size of lots (2-6 acres) and certification of the
foot bridge. Motion passed unanimously.
Trustee Zaban voiced the board’s appreciation to the Planning Commission for
all the hard work over the past three and a half years that led to the passing
of these two motions this evening.
Option to divide an Ag Commercial Lot into two lots discussed. Purpose of this
option is to allow farm owners to remain in their residence on a 2-5 acre
parcel, while still being able to sell the remaining agricultural land. The
letter by Mr. Petrides on this issue was addressed. He is in favor of this part
of the plan. Another issue to be addressed later is of concern to him.
Existing single family dwelling allowed to be split off on a two to five acre
parcel. Larger remaining parcel can then be built on if sold and a conforming
lot. Intent is to preserve the agricultural land when someone wants to remain
living in their home but no longer wishes to work the land.
Treasurer Nilsson moved that the township allow splitting off of Ag Commercial
as proposed by planning commission with additional detail as presented.
Seconded by Clerk Graham.
Attorney Schultz pointed out some ambiguous wording: “ Ag Commercial lot
legally created”, implies that only the smaller lot is conforming and that the
larger remaining lot would not be. This is not the intent of the board. Intent
of the section is that both lots would be considered conforming.
Motion amended by Trustee Zaban to put the word “both” in front of “lots” in
paragraph 4 of the proposal. Accepted by Treasurer Nilsson. Supervisor Obst
called for a roll call vote
   Ayes   Wiegandt, Graham, Obst, Nilsson, Zaban
   Nays   None
Motion passed unanimously.
ASSESSOR - BOARD OF APPEALS REPORT
Noo Fear issues already covered earlier in the meeting.
ROAD TASK FORCE UPDATE
Board would like to congratulate the task force on the great job that they are
doing. Believes they have an excellent working relationship with the County
Road Commission’s representative, Mr. Bob D’Alcorn. Report received and filed.
CAPITOL CITY RIFLE CLUB - response has been received and they will propose a
solution.
SIDEWALK - Only 1 bid was received. Viable bid, compared to bids received by
the School District. Sidewalk would extend for approximately 1068 feet, from
the Woodview Subdivision south to Mitchell Road and from Mitchell Road south to
the High School entrance.
The Williamston School District would like a breakdown of the costs and ability
to approve composition . Per Mr. Tebeau, since the schools are responsible for
maintaining the part of the sidewalk that is on the school property, they want
to be sure that it exceeds minimum pounds per square inch (psi) requirements.
Discussion on who would be responsible for liability and maintenance of the
sidewalks. Decided since this was the first sidewalk in the Township it would
be a good time to adopt a sidewalk ordinance. Attorney Schultz will get copies
of some other Townships’ ordinances to use as a base for creating Williamstown
Township’s.
Also brought to the board’s attention that the sidewalk should be put in 90
days before the first frost. Already past this time period. Will discuss
options with contractor. The schools will be FAXed ASAP about the bid. There is
no time frame on the bid. Trustee Zaban moved that Supervisor Obst and Clerk
Graham be delegated to approve the length of the sidewalk up to 1062 feet and
cost up to the current bid of $13,800.00. Seconded by Treasurer Nilsson.
Discussion on available funds from the Road Commission and the money held in
escrow by A&D. Motion passed.
COMPLAINTS -
10 E. Sherwood Road is being cleaned up. Board is satisfied with what the new
owner is doing.
Streubel property definitely inhabited - needs to meet code.
COMPUTER UPDATE - in packet. Machines and software are being installed as they
come in.
CONSTABLE REPORT -
Cox - already addressed.
Noo Fear - More junk has been removed. Has not been able to catch Mr. Squires.
There appears to be a new business in the front part of 1440 E. Grand River
Road.
DNR ANNIVERSARY - No one from the Township plans to attend.
INGHAM COUNTY MTA - Open House at their new building on October 16, 1996.
MARIE WOODMAN - A letter of appreciation for her many years of service to the
Township has been written.
TOWNSHIP HALL STORAGE AREA - Mr. Graham can extend the storage area above the
ceiling with two 4’x8’x3/8” boards. This will enable the Township to no longer
store things directly on the ceiling joists. A $20.00 expense. Trustee Zaban
moved that Mr. Graham be allowed to do the work providing that it does not
exceed $100.00. Seconded by Treasurer Nilsson. Motion carried. Project was
completed on Oct. 4, 1996. Spent $30.00 on materials and $20.00 on labor.
ROAD COMMISSION - Letter from Mr. Bob D’Alcorn of the Ingham County Road
Commission was received. He apologizes for not including the Township in the
discussions of the Beeman and Rowley Road project. The Township will write back
that in the future the Supervisor and Clerk should be involved in any issues
relating to roads in Williamstown Township. The board will extend an invitation
to Mr. D’Alcorn to present the Road Commission’s agenda for the year at a
regular Board meeting when he has it available.
TREASURERS REPORT
PARK LAND - On Wednesday, September 25, 1996 there was a 1 hour walk through of
the land. The park committee is made up of new faces who are eager to work on
the project and have some good ideas about fund raisers and grants. Need to
find out the needs of the Red Cedar Rec., the Schools and other citizens in
general for the park. The committee is attempting to set a Saturday morning
meeting schedule.
The Constable noticed the Mead family having a get together on the property in
September. They told him that they would not close on the property until
September 20th when in actuality they had closed on it August 28th. No action
was taken by the constable at this time.
Discussion on the Township’s current liability coverage on the Park property.
The park is not open to the public yet. No Trespassing signs need to be posted.
The billboard will be taken down. The current crops in the field will be the
last crops allowed. Treasurer Nilsson brought up the fact that the park
committee can apply for the same DNR grant to develop the park that the
Township used to purchase the property.
CITY OF WILLIAMSTON - They are looking for people who are not elected officials
of the City to serve on a Williamston/Williamstown Township Sewer Committee.
The next meeting of the Williamstown Township Board is scheduled for Tuesday,
November 12, 1996; The next meeting of the Planning Commission is scheduled for
October 15, 1996; and the next scheduled meeting of the Zoning Board of Appeals
is October 14, 1996.
CONSENT AGENDA
Brief review of the Treasurer’s Financial Report for September 1996, the
Clerk’s List of Accounts to be Paid October 1, 1996, and no amendments to the
minutes, as presented, of September 10, 1996.
Wiegandt moved, Nilsson seconded; PASSED to acknowledge the Treasurer’s Report
of Financial Activities for September 1996, Approve the minutes of the Regular
Township Board meeting held on September 10, 1996, and to approve the Clerk’s
list of Accounts to be paid checks #7502 through #7560, for a total of
$39,591.54.
Supervisor Obst: Roll call vote please.
   AYES:      Zaban, Nilsson, Wiegandt, Graham and Obst
   NAYS:      None
Zaban moved to adjourn if there were no objections. None voiced.
Meeting adjourned at 9:30 p.m.
___________________________            _____________________
Shirley A. Graham, Clerk            Susan E. Jennings
Township of Williamstown            Recording Secretary
sj
NOVEMBER 12, 1996
The regular meeting of the WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP BOARD OF TRUSTEES was called
to order by Supervisor Obst on Tuesday, November 12, 1996 at 7:34 p.m. The
Clerk was asked to record who was present and if a quorum was present. Clerk
Graham stated a quorum was present and recorded the following; Supervisor Obst,
Clerk Graham, Treasurer Nilsson, Trustee Zaban, Trustee Wiegandt and Building
Inspector Aven.
The agenda was read over with several additions: Update of legal descriptions;
Don Weite letter (Pebble Brook roads); radon testing kits; office staff
Christmas bonuses; secretarial position to be filled and an application
received for this position.
TRI COUNTY OFFICE ON THE AGING - Donna Hobart, representing the Tri County
Office on the Aging made a presentation to the Board requesting a $3,000.00
donation from Williamstown Township toward the construction of a new kitchen
for the Meals on Wheels program. Similar requests are being made of all area
townships and cities serviced by the organization. The organization needs to
reach their goal of $1.5 million by December 31, 1996 in order to qualify for a
challenge grant from the Kresge Foundation. Ten people were serviced by Meals
on Wheels in Williamstown Township in 1995, with many others taking advantage
of the community dining hall meals in Williamston. Treasurer Nilsson moved that
the Township donate the requested $3,000.00 to the Tri County Office on the
Aging towards construction of a new kitchen. Supported by Clerk Graham. Motion
passed unanimously.
WILLIAMSTON COMMUNITY FIRE BOARD REPORT - Representative Keilholtz
Several members of the Ingham County Board of Commissioners believe that the
Williamston Community Fire Board is taking an unfair advantage of the County’s
paramedics since we do not have any of our own and are not paying anything
extra for a County paramedic to go on a call when necessary. We only have First
Response and EMTs available and these people are serving on a volunteer basis.
Average cost for an EMT to go on a run is $5-$6 per hour. Average cost for a
Paramedic is $20 per hour. Concerns expressed that the county does not
understand the large area (103 square miles) that our department covers on a
strictly volunteer basis. Commissioner Grebner is the chair of the Law and
Courts committee. Commissioner Schaefer, our area’s representative, is also on
the committee.
The Fire Board will purchase a new generator. The Fire Board will also purchase
a used Fire Truck that the Fire Association will repair. Concerns expressed
that drivers must know the roads in the area better.
ATTORNEY’S REPORT - Stephen O. Schultz
Holding off on action against ‘Noo Fear’. Mrs. Betty Speaks has started
eviction proceedings against Mr. Squires. She filed a Landlord/Tenant Action in
District Court and was awarded a default judgment on November 4, 1996. She can
issue a writ on the 14th with a 30 day notice for eviction. She is currently
following all proper procedures for eviction and as long as she continues to do
so the Township will not take further action.
Annexation Petition filed by the City of Williamston - No notice of hearing has
been sent by the Boundary Commission yet, but a Legal Contingency Hearing has
been scheduled for December 17, 1996 in the morning. No major flaws are evident
in the petition, if the Boundary Commission finds the petition legally
sufficient, then a public hearing in the Township will be scheduled for early
1997.
Capitol City Rifle Club - Supervisor Obst raised the issue of the letter
received from the rifle club. The typed response seemed to raise some issues
that were not addressed earlier. Received a complaint regarding outside
lighting. Question of expanded lighting not really an issue because they are
not expanding their lighting, rather they are repairing some faulty lighting
that they already have. This will have the perception of expanded lighting, but
it really isn’t. Hours of operation also an issue. CCRC believes that operating
within their standard hours of operation is at their sole discretion and not a
violation of the Township’s nuisance ordinance. The standard hours of operation
have always been 9:00 am to 8:00 PM. They are agreeing on an annual basis to
certain reductions in hours. For 1996 this was 9:00 am to 5:00 PM on Saturday
and Sunday with the exception of certain matches and closing altogether on
certain days such as Mother’s Day. The Township disagrees that the 9:00 to 5:00
on Saturday and Sunday are voluntary and a written response is in order to
insure that 9:00-8:00 was not grandfathered in on weekends when the nuisance
order was adopted. This issue will be considered again at the next Board
meeting with a proposed response.
Sewer and Water Issues and an annexation request - Mr. Bruce Michael, developer
of River Wood, would like to know the board’s position on sewer and water
hookups available to the township and whether or not they are going to agree to
a 425 agreement with the City of Williamston. If the sewer hookup issue cannot
be successfully negotiated with the city then he has no choice but to file for
annexation to the city.
Much discussion followed regarding sewer taps that were still available to the
township. The city is claiming that there are none left. Township under
contract with the firm of Jones and Henry to do a study on the subject. They
concluded that the township has at least 20,000 gallons/day left with a
Residential Equivalency Unit (REU) being 210-300 gallons, or a minimum of 67-95
taps. The Township believes they have 35,000 gallons/day left which would be
117-167 taps. Jones & Henry is also the City of Williamston’s engineer. A copy
of the report was furnished to the city. Per Attorney Schultz, there are many
issues available that would allow the township to take the city to court if
necessary to get the sewer taps that the township is entitled to.
Supervisor Obst recommends that Mr. Bruce Michael go ahead with his plans for
developing River Wood while remaining in the township and that if the city will
not allow the sewer taps, then the township will go to court over the issue.
Mr. Carl McIntosh, engineer for the Hideaway Woods IV subdivision, is also
concerned about the city allowing required hookups to sewers. He has plans to
build a pumping station that will accommodate 55 lots, even though only 15 are
currently approved. Claims the city is telling him he must get approval from
the township first and that the township is telling him he must get approval
from the city first. Needs to know if the board can approve the plat while the
pump station is being planned. He will submit the plat to the township in a
week or so. The board has been given a conceptual layout for all 55 lots. The
time frame for developing them all is at the discretion of the board since the
land for the remaining 40 still needs to be rezoned before that phase of the
project can proceed. Further discussion between the board and Mr. Carl McIntosh
regarding how well the pumping station designed for 55 lots will work when
there are only 15 lots hooked up.
Per Planner Martin, the township did not sign the final plat for Brookshire
until the city had signed and approved the sewer plan. Planner Martin wants to
be sure that Mr. Carl McIntosh is aware that the final plat approval will not
be signed until the plans are approved by the city.
Per Attorney Schultz, the city may approve the 55 tap pump station, but that
does not obligate them to sell the remaining taps to the township at the time
that they are required.
The tap fee of $1,000 is not paid until a building permit is pulled at the
township. This is part of the building permit application criteria.
Further discussion between the board and members of the audience regarding the
remaining taps available to the township. Even if city allows all the taps that
the township believes they are contractually entitled to, the three
developments represented at this meeting alone would use them up. Township
believes the city is holding sewer taps hostage in order to have some leverage
for annexation issues.
BUILDING DEPARTMENT ACTIVITY - Walter Aven
37 new home permits have been issued in the township since the beginning of the
year. This is up from last year.
Spagnuolo’s has been issued a building permit to remodel the interior of their
property on Grand River as a restaurant. They need to be made aware that
special use permits are required for operating hours and parking. Two-thirds of
the existing structure will be used as a restaurant and the remaining one-third
will be rented out as office space.
PLANNING COMMISSION REPORT - Chair, Mickey Martin
Perry rezoning request - Planning commission recommend denial of the rezoning.
There are no other RE zones in the vicinity. Approval would result in spot
zoning. There are other lots in the area that are around 5 acres. The citizens
of the area petitioned that their area remain Ag Small Farm when the new zoning
was approved, even though they were initially slated to be RE. Treasurer
Nilsson moved that based on findings of fact and the planning commission’s
recommendation to deny the rezoning, that the rezoning be denied. Supported by
Supervisor Obst. Discussion followed.
When Mr. Perry obtained the property he realized he would not be able to split
the property for ten years based on splits his grandfather had already made. At
the time the land was obtained by Mr. Perry, AG Small Farm had a minimum
acreage of 5 acres. Mr. Perry was unaware that when the new zoning ordinance
went into effect that AG Small Farm now had a 10 acre minimum.
Supervisor Obst observed that for good zoning purposes the rezoning should be
denied, but that what is reasonable with what is going on in the surrounding
area it should be approved. Suggested an alternative that a new zoning
ordinance be adopted where an AG Small Farm property with at least 600 feet of
frontage be allowed to split off one five acre parcel. Supervisor Obst
recommended turning down the proposed rezoning in favor of turning the issue
over to the Planning Commission to adopt the suggested ordinance. Mr. Perry
stated he didn’t care what zone he ended up with as long as he was allowed to
make the split he requested. He has approximately 1100 feet of roadside
frontage, so that would not be an issue for him. Clerk Graham stated the main
problem is that the residents were afraid of the new zoning name ‘Rural
Estates’. They feared the word ‘estates’ would increase the taxable value of
their property. It would not. Per Planner Martin, the frontage requirements for
RE and AG Small Farm are the same. The only difference between the two zones is
the minimum acreage. Roll call vote on the motion before the board was taken.
Those voting in favor of the motion to deny rezoning were Treasurer Nilsson,
Trustee Zaban and Supervisor Obst. Those against the motion were Clerk Graham
and Trustee Wiegandt. Motion passed.
Trustee Zaban moved that the Planning Commission be asked to have a public
hearing to discuss modifying the zoning ordinance so that a 5 acre parcel could
be split off of an Ag Small Farm parcel that had sufficient frontage. Supported
by Trustee Wiegandt. Motion passed unanimously. Time frame for this new
ordinance to take affect would be at least 90 days. Supervisor Obst apologized
to the Perrys for the delay this action causes.
Mr. Bruner rezoning - A clerical error on the zoning map has been discovered.
Mr. Bruner’s property is shown as RE on the map when in fact it should be RR.
Since the map was voted on, a new vote is required to correct the error. Clerk
Graham so moved. Supported by Trustee Wiegandt. Motion passed unanimously.
Fee Schedule - Planner Martin has been keeping close records of the bills
involved with site plan approval. In many instances the $685 set fee is being
used up in the first 2 or 3 changes to a plan. Several developments have
submitted many more changes and the township is losing money. Suggest that a
$1500 escrow account be set up for plan approval of developments, with the
unused balance to be refunded. Treasurer Nilsson moved to create a $1500 escrow
account for plat revisions, renewable at a rate of $500. Supported by Trustee
Wiegandt. Motion passed unanimously.
CITY OF WILLIAMSTON ANNEXATION PROPOSAL - 425 ANNEXATION AGREEMENT
The City is proposing a 5 year exemption from city taxes for developed property
and a 20 year exemption for undeveloped property. Supervisor Obst read parts of
his Oct 14th letter to the city outlining proposed procedures to follow for
negotiations with the City of Williamston. Instead of entering into proposed
negotiations, the city countered with a “last and final offer” ultimatum.
Annexation petitions have been filed for North Green I and II and the Odell
property. No one else in the proposed areas have stated that they wish to be
annexed by the city. The need for another meeting with the city was suggested
since what was in their letter was not what they had discussed at the last
meeting. Supervisor Obst’s letter was an attempt to address all outstanding
issues with the city when entering into a 425 agreement. If, at the end of the
agreement, the land reverts back to the township, then a buffer would have been
established beyond which the city cannot annex. If the land reverts to the city
at the end of the agreement then no such buffer would exist.
Planner Martin questioned why the township would want to enter into a 425
agreement with the city. Response was that it would solve the sewer agreement
issues and square off boundaries, among other things.
Treasurer Nilsson suggested that we respond to the city’s ultimatum with one of
our own. Comment from the audience was that responding to an ultimatum with an
ultimatum does nothing to further negotiations. This type of response would
just set up a confrontational, and possibly hostile situation between the city
and the township. That is not in the best interest of either entity. The city
has been looking for citizens willing to serve on a committee with citizens
from the township to attempt to resolve some of these issues where elected
officials have been unsuccessful. So far the city has been unsuccessful in its
search. The township has people ready and willing to serve on such a committee.
Another suggestion from the audience would be for a representative from the
township to attend the city council meetings and a representative from the city
to attend the township board meetings. Due to the city council’s tendency to
conduct certain elements of their meetings in closed sessions, this may or may
not be beneficial.
Attorney Schultz commented that the sewer situation in particular should be
looked at on a service level instead of a boundary level, and some sort of
joint operating agreement entered into with the city. This agreement could be
modeled after the successful cooperation between East Lansing and Meridian
Township’s joint operation of their sewer and water system. However the city
does not seem to be able to get beyond their “us vs. them” mentality.
It was mentioned that one of the problems is that the city has had a high turn
over in elected and appointed officials in the past ten years. People currently
in office may not be aware of the history of the current sewer agreement and
are therefore attempting to play games with it.
Planning Commissioner Brian Jennings commented that the regional fire
department seems to work well. We need to enter into more similar regional
service agreements. As a citizen in the city’s proposed annexation area he
stated that he definitely did not want to be annexed by the city. He saw little
or no benefit for a 17 mil increase in his taxes. He would like to see a
regional board created between Williamstown and Wheatfield Townships and the
City of Williamston to work out such issues as sewer and water.
It was generally agreed by the township board not to accept the October 23,
1996 425 annexation proposal from the City of Williamston. Options available
are: 1) Make a counter proposal; 2) Set up a meeting with city officials; or 3)
Work through subcommittees.
Mr. Bruce Michael asked what the Township’s position would be if he went ahead
and asked for the needed sewer taps in his development and the city turned him
down. Attorney Schultz replied that the township would take the city to court
immediately.
Mr. Carl McIntosh suggested getting elected officials out of the negotiations.
Form a committee of concerned citizens from both municipalities to work out the
details of an agreement and present their recommendations to the city council
and township board for approval. Supervisor Obst restated that the township has
people who are willing to do just that but that the city has been unsuccessful
in finding people to serve on such a committee. Mr. Carl McIntosh stated that
he would take it upon himself to recruit city citizens willing to participate.
Planner Martin asked Attorney Schultz if it would be feasible for the township
to put themselves in the driver’s seat and annex the city. Attorney Schultz
stated that there is a process of detachment that the township could attempt,
but the draw backs out weigh the benefits. Most notable is that along with the
township obtaining a percentage of the city’s assets with such an agreement,
they would also obtain an equal percentage of the city’s debt. Another option
suggested was that the city and township merge and form a charter township.
This is also possible, but again not financially feasible considering the
city’s outstanding debts.
Treasurer Nilsson suggested that we reply to the city with a letter stating
that the proposed agreement is not acceptable and propose a meeting with the
city to work out the differences. It was also suggested that citizen
participation in the negotiating process be included in the letter.
Regarding existing sewer taps - requests must continue to be honored on a first
come first serve basis. The treatment plant is capable of servicing more
residents than currently stated. Supervisor Obst stated that the city’s mayor
told him that the only leverage the city has to obtain land is the sewer.
Attorney Schultz - the state law that requires a residence within 200 feet of
sewer line to be connected to the sewer system does not apply across political
boundaries. The Department of Public Health has been unwilling to involve
themselves in such debates.
Question from Mr. Bruce Michael - Approximately 170 homes are currently
requesting sewer hookups just from the three developments represented at
tonight’s meeting. Even if the city honors all the taps the township believes
they are entitled to will there be enough to go around? Calculations determined
that it would be close. Other options proposed were small community septic
systems such as are in place at the township’s two planned developments.
HASLETT ROAD - Recommendations will be delivered to the board the week of
November 18th. Public hearing tentatively set for January 16, 1977 pending
availability of Bob D’Alcorn from the Ingham County Road Commission. Several
surveys from property owners along Haslett road have been returned.
LETTER FROM DONALD WEITE -Mr. Weite is upset that Sandstone and Agate way were
not repaved this year. Trustee Zaban observed that roads in the Schoals
subdivision of Okemos have already been repaved and that this is a newer
subdivision than Pebble Brook. A response to Mr. Weite describing how the Road
Commission priorities for repaving were set will be sent .
KANE ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW - Mr. Kane filed a Freedom of Information Act
request. Due to the large volume of documents requested a fee of at least $100
was requested from Mr. Kane for copying services with a $50 deposit required.
Mr. Kane met with the planning commission subcommittee and did not follow up
with any of the information requested by the committee. He has not been meeting
any of his deadlines for submitting information. The Planning Commission has
closed his file.
SIDEWALK ORDINANCE STATUS - Brian Jennings
The proposed ordinance will be submitted by the week of November 18, 1996. The
sidewalk is in. The proposed ordinance does not define what a sidewalk is, i.e.
what the standards are for a sidewalk based on the type. The ordinance and
standards should be separate documents so that the ordinance does not have to
be amended when new construction methods, materials, etc. become available.
PARK REPORT - Treasurer Nilsson
The township should receive the balance of the money by December, 1996.
ASSESSORS REPORT - Norman Obst
The agricultural study just completed by the state indicates a 15%-16% increase
in agricultural land for equalization. A 5% increase for residential property
is indicated.
SCHOOL SIDEWALK - INGHAM COUNTY CARRYOVER
The township currently has $628 that it would like to carry over to next year
for the school sidewalk. Have to inform the county that we are participating in
funding the school sidewalk. Treasurer Nilsson proposed that we take the
original proposal for the sidewalk and determine what portion of that was for
the school property. There was a total of $8750 available from the County. The
Township has spent $6000 so far. The difference would be a couple thousand
dollars plus the interest accrued. The original estimate for the sidewalk
project was $13,800. The schools are requesting a letter letting them know how
much we will contribute to the construction of the sidewalk.
Treasurer Nilsson moved that we contribute to the sidewalk on school property
an amount of $4400 to be paid at the completion of the project. Supported by
Trustee Wiegandt. Motion passed unanimously.
DRIVEWAY POST ON TOWNSHIP PROPERTY
One of the posts at the end of the drive way at the Township Hall has been bent
making it impossible to close the gate. The post needs to be replaced, it
cannot be repaired. Since this involves setting an I-beam in concrete, the
issue has been tabled until spring.
LEGAL DESCRIPTIONS
The County will no longer update our legal descriptions. Discussion followed
about how much to pay someone to enter the descriptions on the computer. Clerk
Graham motioned that a maximum of $10.00 per description be paid to someone to
enter the descriptions. The funds to come from the lot split fees. Supported by
Trustee Wiegandt. Motion passed.
RADON TESTING
Kits will be made available at the township hall for residents interested in
testing their property for Radon. There is no cost to the Township, the
property owner will pay $5.00 to the Township for the test kit.
CHRISTMAS BONUSES FOR OFFICE STAFF
Treasurer Nilsson moved that the Christmas bonus for office staff be increased
from $50 to $75 this year. The office staff includes the office secretaries,
the deputies, the planner and the planning commission secretary. Trustee Zaban
supported the motion. Motion passed.
SECRETARIAL POSITION
Decided to go back to a full time position for the secretary. One application
has been received, Carol Lowe, recommended by Gerald Wilbrink. Agreed to
interview her ASAP and have her start Monday, November 18, 1996 pending the
results of the interview. Will hire her on a 3 month trial basis with pay to
start at $8.50 per hour. She will work with Doris Aven until the end of the
year to learn the position. The position will be strictly hourly until the end
of the 3 month trial at which time, if it is decided that she will retain the
position full time, then vacation and holiday pay will be reinstated.
CONSENT AGENDA
Reading of the minutes from the October 1, 1996 meeting. Mr. Struble’s name was
spelled incorrectly. Item “No C of Ode issued” should have read “No C of O
issued”, where C of O is a certificate of occupancy. Regarding the Cox
property, Building Inspector Aven stated that Mr. Cox told him that no one was
spending the night at the property. Brief review of the Treasurer’s financial
report for October, 1996 and the Clerk’s list of accounts to be paid November
12, 1996.
Clerk Graham moved, Trustee Wiegandt seconded; PASSED to acknowledge the
Treasurer’s report of financial activities for October, 1996, Approve the
minutes of the Regular Township Board meeting held October 1, 1996 with the
changes noted above, and to approve the Clerk’s list of accounts to be paid
checks #7561 through #7662, for a total of $127,564.53.
Supervisor Obst: Roll call vote please.
   Ayes:      Zaban, Nilsson, Wiegandt, Graham and Obst
   Nayes:      None
Next regular board meeting set for Dec 3, 1996.
Clerk Graham moved to adjourn the meeting. No objections.
Meeting adjourned at 11:28 p.m.
______________________________         _______________________________
Shirley A. Graham, Clerk            Susan E. Jennings
Township of Williamstown            Recording Secretary
DECEMBER 3, 1996
The regular meeting of the WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP BOARD OF TRUSTEES was called
to order by Supervisor Obst on Tuesday, December 3, 1996 at 7:37 pm . The Clerk
was asked to record who was present and if a quorum was present. Clerk Graham
stated a quorum was present and recorded the following: Supervisor Obst, Clerk
Graham, Treasurer Nilsson, Trustee Zaban, Trustee Wiegandt and Building
Inspector Aven.
The agenda was read over with one addition: The employment status of Doris
Aven.
HIDEAWAY WOODS IV FINAL PLAT APPROVAL - Carl McIntosh
To expedite matters Mr. McIntosh requested that the board authorize signing of
the final plat for Hideaway Woods IV pending approval of the planning
commission. Per Planner Martin, everything seems in order and Mr. McIntosh will
be contacted should McKenna and Associates require any further information.
Trustee Weigandt moved that the board authorize signing of the final plat for
Hideaway Woods IV pending approval of the Planning Commission, including any
conditions the planning commission may require. Supported by Trustee Zaban.
Motion passed unanimously.
WILLIAMSTON COMMUNITY FIRE BOARD REPORT
Minutes of Fire Board meeting accepted.
ATTORNEY’S REPORT - deferred to end of meeting - Attorney Schultz delayed at
another commitment.
BUILDING DEPARTMENT ACTIVITY - Walter Aven
There have been permits pulled for 39 new houses in the Township as of Nov 30,
1996. One came in Dec 3rd, making the year to date total 40. Read over the
inspector’s report. No questions.
PLANNING COMMISSION REPORT - Mickey Martin
No action required. Minutes from last Tuesdays joint meeting were read. The
Commissioners appreciate the joint meetings. All Planning Commissioners will be
encouraged to attend the regular board meetings.
ASSESSORS REPORT - Norman Obst
Put in a number of lot splits, but they haven’t been done yet. Mr. Obst and
Harold Powell reviewed the agricultural equalization study with the County and
had it revised to a smaller increase.
BOARD OF APPEALS - Norman Obst
Meeting on the 11th with an administrative review of Mr. Kane's stop work
order.
OLD BUSINESS:
HITCHCOCK REQUEST TO RENT AND FARM PART OF THE PARK LAND
Mr. Hitchcock requested that we rent the land to him. Called the DNR - Jean
Powers. Rent collected could be ear marked for improvement of the park as a
possible way of raising funds. Per Planning Chair Martin the park committee is
meeting but they don't have a plan as yet. They still want to meet with the
schools and Red Cedar Rec. Trustee Weigandt stated that the Hitchcocks would
like to rent only 55 acres of the park and this could be a way to raise funds.
An access to the rest of the property would be allowed. Treasurer Nilsson asked
for comments from the audience: Katherine Lo stated that she thought the
Township bit off more than they can chew when they purchased the land. She
believes money is being leached out of the Township by McKenna and Associates.
Rud Hoag stated that it would depend on what is going to be grown on the land.
Creating a Cross Country track may be a problem with the crop. He thinks
farming is a good way to pick up some extra money for the park. Rex Ellsworth -
believes the lease would be a good way to bring in some revenue. He has some
concerns about paying for the long term maintenance of the park. Treasurer
Nilsson stated that fund raising programs will be put in place, and that the
Township may require a budget in the future for a parks and rec dept.
Supervisor Obst stated that we still need approval, but he thinks the DNR will
approve the lease. Clerk Graham stated that the expected revenue would be $40/
acre x 55 acres, or $2,200.00.
The Hitchcocks must be made aware that this will probably be a one time deal.
Trustee Weigandt stated that as long as the DNR grant would not be in jeopardy
and no funds will be lost, then he thinks it is easy money for the Township to
rent it out. Trustee Zaban stated that the committee has a long project ahead
of them to determine fund raising and development of the park. He thinks it is
an excellent project for the future of the township. Supervisor Obst asked if
there were no problems from the DNR if they should go ahead and lease the land.
All discussion from the board that followed was in favor of the lease.
Trustee Zaban asked who was responsible for removing the billboard from the
park property? The company has a lease until the end of the year and they will
then remove it. Trustee Wiegandt stated that the DNR park sign will be put up
permanently once the farming has stopped. He took the sign down so that it
would not get in the way of, and be destroyed by farming equipment.
10 SHERWOOD ROAD COMPLAINTS
Debris has been moved from land, but there is still some there. The current
owner believes he is being harassed because it was in disrepair when he bought
it. He is working on cleaning it up. Building Inspector Aven can proclaim it a
substandard building in which case it needs to be repaired or boarded up
completely. Land owner has two other properties in similar situation that he
has to improve first. Building is a danger to kids in the area. Trustee
Weigandt - fire did not do much damage to the building. Neighbors were not
happy when the fire department put the fire out. Building is in very bad shape.
boarding it up is a good idea. The Township does not want to discourage this
guy from cleaning it up when he is able to.
Katherine Lo believes it would look more like a slum if it were boarded up.
Nancy Fink thinks it is secured facing Sherwood. She suggested having all doors
and windows repaired to the point so that they are secure without boarding them
up. Trustee Weigandt stated that the building was not stable enough for this to
be an option. Township could be sued if kids get hurt playing in there.
Inspector Aven will write a letter asking when the property owner will come in
for a building permit and explain the hazardous situation that currently
exists. Inspector Aven will also do an informational inspection of the
property.
RIFLE CLUB RESPONSE - Norman Obst
Proposed letter to the rifle club read to the board by Supervisor Obst.
Attorney Schultz assisted in the composition of the letter with Supervisor
Obst. 12 consecutive months issue discussed. Rifle club believes their hours
are really 8-8 on weekends even though they took special action to limit them
every year. Their taking such action has limited themselves according to the
zoning ordinance. Putting in a new structure comes up every year in their
meetings as well. Have to get a special use permit if they want to increase
their hours. Not saying that they absolutely cannot increase their hours.
Mickey Martin does not want this issue to instigate a neighborhood feud.
Supervisor Obst - Club said that they would discuss with the neighbors before
deciding to increase their hours. The club has agreed to provide the township
with a list of their shooting matches. The Board generally agreed to send the
letter as written.
CITY/TWP SEWER ISSUE & 425 DISCUSSION.
City has told Mr. McIntosh there is no capacity left. Issue has been turned
over to the attorney for possible legal action.
A&D INTEREST REFUND.
Attorney Schultz has stated that the interest should be returned to A&D. A 1098
will have to be provided to A&D for Income Tax purposes.
SCHOOL SIDEWALK ISSUE
Notice of commitment of funds received from the schools. Matching at the county
is $2128 that they are willing to carry over into the 1997 year. Generally
agreed to accept the letter from the schools.
LETTER FROM DR. WAITES
Dr. Waites is upset that Rocky Hill and Sandstone were not paved. George Durak
informed Dr. Waites that none of the roads mentioned were on the County Road
Commission’s list for 1996. Road Commission never recommended that those roads
be done. An effort will be made to get them on the list for 1997. Trustee Zaban
stated for the record that just because the roads are on the list for 1997 does
not mean that they will be done in 1997. Other roads in Pebble Brook were on
the list for three years before they were actually repaired. They will have to
wait until they make it to the top of the list.
DORIS AVEN EMPLOYMENT STATUS
Based on what Carol, the new secretary, is earning and the fact that Doris is
training her, Doris believes she should get an increase to $9/hr.
Supervisor Obst does not believe that this request is out of line since Doris
is training Carol and dealing with some of the more technically difficult
issues of the secretarial position. Clerk Graham is currently having Doris come
in on Mondays and Fridays . She is not adverse to increasing Doris’ wages.
Trustee Zaban does not oppose the increase. He believes we need good backup
people. Trustee Weigandt is also not opposed to the increase. He thinks we
should hang on to people with knowledge. Clerk Graham moved to increase Doris
Aven’s wages to $9/hr. Supported by Trustee Weigandt. Motion passed
unanimously. The increase is to go into effect retroactively to December 1,
1996.
BURNING ORDINANCE
276 permits have been issued since April 1, setting aside $552 ($2 each) which
goes towards the cost of printing the Township’s newsletter. It costs
approximately $1000 to put out the newsletter. Letter from Nancy Fink regarding
state rules for burning permits read into the record. We should be using our
own permit since our rules are stricter than the DNR. Clerk Graham stated that
burning permits were not required by the DNR for agricultural land, but that
the Township requests that they take one out. The Township is using the money
set aside from the permits to print the newsletter, where burning and
environmental issues are discussed among other things. Suggested that we need a
two part carbonless form created and a committee set up to come up with the
wording. Currently person burning must have a copy on their person, and the
Township retains a copy for its records. The permit is called in to the
dispatcher and they refer it to the fire chief. A printed copy is currently not
required by nor being forwarded to the fire chief.
CORWIN ROAD LIFT STATION BILL
The Township owes the money, but the City owes the Township more. Clerk Graham
suggested paying the bill and then remind the City gently of the necessary work
that needs to be done on the manholes at the west end of town and that the City
is responsible for this work. The Township does owe half of the cost of repair
on the lift stations. The upkeep of the line and the manholes is the city's
responsibility because they collect a fee to do that. Supervisor Obst suggested
holding off until they are able to talk to attorney Schultz. Do not feel we
should pay on a contract that the City is not honoring (Mr. McIntosh sewer
denial). City is not recognizing the 1987 agreement even though we paid our
part of it. Waiting to discuss the issue with the attorney - will hold off on
payments. Per Supervisor Obst the City has agreed to accept the Jones and Henry
report if they are permitted to annex some property. This is why we may be
taking the issue to court.
Trustee Zaban raised the issue on if we should be sending complete minutes to
the city considering what we get from them in the way of minutes. Supervisor
Obst thinks we should continue.
WRIGHT FEE INCREASE FOR RECYCLING
Mr. Wright believes he is providing a worthwhile and popular service at a
bargain. Trustee Zaban moved that the Township accept the proposed fee
increase. supported by Trustee Weigandt. Passed unanimously.
WILLIAMSTON COMMUNITY SCHOOL RESOLUTION - SUMMER TAX COLLECTION
Per Treasurer Nilsson - if there is any charge at all it is not worth it to the
schools to collect in the summer, they do not receive enough money from the
township to make it worthwhile. There would be a fee - so no summer collection
will be done for Williamston schools. Partial list of costs put together by the
clerk, needs to go over it with the treasurer if any other school districts
want to collect in the summer.
AUTOMATIC MAILING OF TAX RECEIPTS
Suggestion from Mickey Martin that tax payment receipts only be mailed to
taxpayers who send in a self addressed stamped envelope. Currently receipts are
mailed out the day payment is received in the office, which means we must pay
regular first class postage rates instead of bulk rates. Suggestion will be
considered for the next tax year by Treasurer Nilsson.
DRAIN COMMISSION PRESS RELEASE - ACKNOWLEDGED
Information from the press release will be used in the next Township
newsletter.
CONSTABLE DAHLSTROM’S CERTIFICATION AS A SALVAGE VEHICLE INSPECTOR
Constable Dahlstrom has been certified by the State of Michigan as a salvage
vehicle inspector. He is now authorized to investigate the properties in person
rather than having Attorney Schultz write a letter. Able to investigate and
inspect the vehicles which may be made up of used/stolen parts. Use the term
"recycled vehicle" instead of "used" car now. These cars can be made up of
parts from several different cars. An attempt to control cars being kept to
cannibalize for parts; stolen cars/parts; etc.
HASLETT ROAD PUBLIC HEARING - THURSDAY JANUARY 16, 1997
The Township is holding the public hearing with the road commission present.
Sent second survey to people who did not respond to the first survey. Time for
the meeting is still to be determined.
TRAFFIC LIGHT AT GRAND RIVER AND ZIMMER ROADS
Mr. Ellsworth asked what the procedure is to get a light at an intersection?
Grand River and Zimmer Road would fall under the jurisdiction of the Michigan
State Police Department. Efforts to date to get a traffic light at this
intersection have been unsuccessful. The new Williamston Post Office now going
in at that intersection may force the issue with the State Police Department.
ATTORNEY REPORT - Steve Schultz
First apologized for not being able to arrive sooner.
Noo Fear - default judgment has been entered against Mr. Squires. Betty Speaks
has not been in to get execution on the judgment. Township should contact Betty
and let her know the next step is still hers and that it is her violation as
the property owner. Hopes that will be enough to prod her to continue pursuing
the issue herself.
Sewer matter - We are proceeding to explore what our alternatives are. Legal
sufficiency hearing on the 7th. Will reserve comment until after the meeting.
Open meetings act requires that the purpose of a closed session be stated in
the minutes.
Sidewalk ordinance - Attorney Schultz will look at it.
Close Hart Road between Haslett and Germany on Dec 17 between 6:00 pm and 11:00
pm - MSU Highway Traffic Safety Programs. Closure is for night time training of
law enforcement investigative procedures. The Township has agreed to this
closure. A letter to this affect has been signed by Clerk Graham and returned
to the IICRC.
Attorney Schultz- comments on subdivision control ordinance will be delivered
to the Planner by Dec 10, 1996. Will review sidewalk ordinance. Will set up
separate billing files for zoning matters at the law firm.
TREASURER’S REPORT
We are changing signatures on the trust and agency accounts at Republic and
Independent Banks to require two signatures on the accounts - one from the
clerk's office and one from the treasurer's office. Resolution read to make
these changes. So moved by Treasurer Nilsson, supported by Clerk Graham -
unanimously approved to have Christine Nilsson, Treasurer; Susan Jennings,
Deputy Treasurer; Shirley Graham, Clerk; and Florence Dubreuil, Deputy Clerk as
valid signatories on these accounts.
CONSENT AGENDA
Reading of the minutes from the November 12, 1996 meeting. No corrections or
modifications required. Review of the Treasurer’s financial report for November
and the Clerk’s list of accounts to be paid December 3, 1996. Trustee Weigandt
moved, Clerk Graham seconded; PASSED to acknowledge the Treasurer’s report of
financial activities for November, 1996; approve the minutes of the Regular
Township Board meeting held November 12, 1996; and to approve the Clerk’s list
of accounts to be paid December 3, 1996 of checks #7663 through 7714 for a
total of $28,458.08.
Supervisor Obst: Roll call vote please.
   Ayes:      Zaban, Nilsson, Wiegandt, Obst, and Graham
   Nayes:      None
Next regular board meeting set for January 7, 1996.
Treasurer Nilsson motioned to adjourn - seconded by Trustee Wiegandt - no
objections.
Meeting adjourned at 9:48 pm.
____________________________         ______________________________
Shirley A. Graham, Clerk               Susan E. Jennings
Township of Williamstown            Recording Secretary
1997 Meeting Minutes
JANUARY 7, 1997
The regular meeting of the WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP BOARD OF TRUSTEES was called
to order by Supervisor Obst on Tuesday, January 7, 1997 at 7:34 PM. The Clerk
was asked to record who was present and if a quorum was present. Clerk Graham
stated a quorum was present and recorded the following: Supervisor Obst, Clerk
Graham, Treasurer Nilsson, Trustee Zaban, Trustee Wiegandt and Building
Inspector Aven.
The agenda was read over, there were no additions.
PUBLIC COMMENTS:
John Taylor - Oak Leaf -
Mayor's letter to editor of the Enterprise seemed to be a challenge to the
Township. Only solution he proposed that he thought viable for curing the
City’s financial problems was annexation. He talked about a need for sense of
community. Moved to the area because of the rural nature of the Township and
the nature of the city. Township residents obviously shop in the city and are
in and out of the city regularly. This Mayor and city council has made a dent
in Mr. Taylor’s image of the area. Does not appear to have been much planning
involved in their recent developments. Cited such things as building too close
to Williamston Road, putting in an oil change downtown and putting in a truck
stop next to the new restaurant. The truck stop will attract many trucks to the
area, especially on Williamston Road. These things do not fit Mr. Taylor’s
image of how development should proceed in this community. City has made a mess
of it. There is also a lot of development in the Township. Mr. Taylor wants the
board to know his view that he did not move to this area to see significant
development. He does not want to see any, but low, low density development.
Does not believe that the sewer capacity issue fits in how the Township should
develop. It is not inevitable that high density development come to this
Township. Cited examples from Livingston County where development has been
slowed. Does not believe it is the job of this board to promote significant
development. Haslett road issue allows for more development by allowing more
traffic. Concerned that board has voted 3-2 for development that most people in
the community do not want. Believes both the township and city are off track,
but especially the city.
Supervisor Obst: - invited Mr. Taylor to Jan 16th meeting on the Haslett Road
issue. Does not want to stop development, but promote it in such a way so that
it is not obvious that it is there. The entire board wants to preserve the
charm of the township and the rural nature with the master plan, etc. Sewer
capacity is a difficult issue. More capacity would encourage more development,
but reality is that the development will still occur, but it will occur in the
city due to annexation. Annexation issues are already before the boundary
committee.
Mr. Taylor - not saying no development - but wants to see lower density
development.
Clerk Graham stated that as a member of fire board she has had first hand
knowledge of an area where the city and surrounding townships have cooperated
and worked to the advantages of the entire area. She does not understand why
other such community wide issues cannot be handled in the same spirit of
cooperation to the benefit of all in the area.
FIRE BOARD REPORT -Report read and filed by the board.
ATTORNEY’S REPORT - Steve Schultz
It was a busy month.
The Boundary Commission dismissed the petition for annexation of the properties
on the west side of the city that contained the hub cap and shoe stores.
Petition was dismissed because the property descriptions submitted were
inaccurate. A refiling has not yet occurred. A public hearing will occur at
such time that a complete and accurate petition is filed. Reason for the
annexation request is to get municipal water service to the properties.
Noo Fear - Mrs. Speaks obtained default judgment to evict Mr. Squires, but no
order has yet been served. She still has not taken any further action to follow
up on the judgment. Mrs. Speaks is not seeking any additional rent. No further
legal action has been taken. Attorney Schultz suggested that Constable
Dahlstrom should file a blight complaint and serve it to Mrs. Speaks.
Subdivision control ordinance - working with Mr. Price on Woodview II and road
issue. Addressing continuing sewer dispute and will have more to report later.
Also working on the Sidewalk Ordinance, Mrs. Spagneuolo needing a site plan and
other issues.
BUILDING PERMIT DEPARTMENT - Walt Aven
51 new homes were built in the Township this year.
10 Sherwood Road - Mr. Aven wrote a letter to Mr. Garcia. Mr. Garcia’s response
was that he is In process of taking the building down in the next few months.
The building has been made more secure, but is still easy to get into. If Mr.
Garcia does not follow up on obtaining a demolition permit, the Township will
have to board up the building. Time frame for this action is two weeks.
PLANNING COMMISSION REPORT - Mickey Martin
Brunner Issue:
57-60 acres is currently on the zoning map as RE. The property was originally
zoned RR. When the new zoning ordinance was adopted the planning commission
proposed to rezone this parcel and surrounding parcels to RE. Mr. Brunner
requested at that time to remain RR. The commission agreed to do that and
reported to the board that he would remain RR. Board saw the recommendation
letters and the chart for all the rezonings. Due to an oversight the map was
never changed. No one caught the oversight at time of final adoption. When Mr.
Brunner went to sell his property the issue came up. Planning commission
recommended to approve leaving it as RR. Planning commission minutes page 3
have the record of the public hearing. Findings of fact also in the packet on
Mr. Brunner's property.
Obst: Findings of fact were accepted bottom of page 5. Recommended correction
of administrative error.
Area residents submitted a petition to the board objecting to the RR zoning of
the Brunner parcel. Surrounding parcels are all RE and the neighbors believe RR
will allow for higher density housing than they want to see in their
neighborhood.
The following residents voiced their concerns and objection to zoning the
Brunner parcel as RR:
Mr. & Mrs. S. Terry, Mr. J. Creighton, Ms. R. Zimmerman, Mr. F. Goodman, Mr. P.
Apostle, and Mr. and Mrs. J. McGarey. Concerns stated were lack of informing
neighbors that Mr. Brunner had asked to remain zoned RR initially so that
objections could have been made known at that time. Fear that development of
the property if zoned RR would result in doubling the number of residents in
the immediate area. Life savings tied up in their properties on the assumption
that the area would retain its rural nature. Traffic on Zimmer Rd, especially
at the corner of Zimmer and Grand River, becoming a major problem for
residents. The Township’s inability to get a traffic light installed at this
intersection to date. Do not believe that proper procedures were followed in
granting Mr. Brunner RR initially, and in addressing the correction to the map
from RE to RR.
Planner Martin and members of the board addressed issues raised. Proper
processes were followed.. RR under the current zoning is the same as RR was
under the former zoning ordinance. The parcel could not be zoned to anything
denser than RR. The board has been trying to get a traffic light at Zimmer and
Grand River for the past 5 years. It is the state police departments decision
on where traffic lights will be installed. They have a list of 11 warrants, at
least some of which must be met before a light will be installed. They will no
longer install one just by the will of the people. They did that in another
township and then were successfully sued when a fatality occurred at the
intersection after the light was installed.
Treasurer Nilsson moved that the map be changed to reflect the RR zoning.
Supported by Trustee Wiegandt. Motion passed unanimously.
Supervisor Obst stated that he does not believe nature of the area will be
changed. We will do our best to get the traffic light. A state trooper is going
out to look at the intersection with the Ingham County Road Commission.
Clerk Graham stated a petition from the people in the area will carry more
weight than anything else the township can do on their own.
Mr. Terry stated that he hopes the board will be more responsive to the
petition for the traffic light than they were to the petition from the
surrounding residents on the zoning ordinance. Believes the board has sided
with the land owner who is leaving the township instead of the 19 home owners
who are staying.
Attorney Schultz stated that it is illegal by state law to zone by petition.
Zoning has to be based on a planning ordinance and other state laws.
Supervisor Obst stated that statutes allow that this zoning can be reversed by
a referendum on a ballot. The Board appreciates the citizen input and
understands the consequences of going against what the people want as we are
elected officials.
Schneider, Brannan and Schwartz Rezoning. Recommendation to approve the
rezoning. Total of 74 acres, rezoning 13.2 acres to AG-SF and the small parcel
of RR to AG-SF. Keeps major portion in agricultural and satisfies concerns of
the neighbors. Will square off properties in the area, no new parcels will be
created. Mrs. Stillwell be contacted to change the zoning of her property from
AGC to something more conducive to her property.
Trustee Wiegandt moved to approve the planning commission’s recommendation.
Treasurer Nilsson supported. Motion passed unanimously.
The Board agreed to have Planner Martin contact Mrs. Stillwell about changing
the zoning of her land, and if she is agreeable to this, to hold a public
hearing on her rezoning.
Woodview 2 - Final Plat. Has not gone to the planning commission yet. Asking
for board to agree to sign off on the final plat if the planning commission
finds that they agree to it. Planning commission will get their reports from
McKenna and associates and go through their regular thorough process of
reviewing the final plat.
Treasurer Nilsson concerned that the planning commission not be rushed in their
evaluation of the final plat.
Planner Martin assured the board that they would be thorough.
Trustee Wiegant moved that the board authorize signing off on the final plat
pending approval by the planning commission and acceptance that any conditions
that the commission may set will be met. Seconded by Clerk Graham. Passed
unanimously.
Subdivision Control Ordinance - Brian Jennings - Praised by the board and
Planner Martin for his efforts..
Reviewed comments from public meeting. Believes that most of them that
addressed the ordinance were covered in the ordinance. Recommends approving
subdivision control ordinance as well as zoning changes required for the
ordinance. MTA comments - The house bill sitting on Governor Engler's desk is
nowhere near the form of the previous versions of the bill and is no longer
supported by the MTA. Lot splits are now the only area addressed by the bill.
Should the Governor sign the bill there would be only minor changes required in
our act. We should rewrite our land division ordinance if it passes. It would
no longer be 4 splits allowed in 10 years. There would be a formula that
determines how many splits you can have.. There is pressure for the Governor to
veto the bill because it is no longer what the original bill was. Chris Doozen
recommends the board approve the subdivision control ordinance tonight, there
would only be minor changes required if the bill is signed.
Treasurer Nilsson wants to have communication between the township and the
developers. Two site plans would be required.
Pre application meeting option before the developers start drawing their plans.
The Township cannot legally require this meeting. We are bound by state laws as
to what can be done. Pre application can not be required, but there can be
incentives to have them. Need to approve changes to zoning ordinance in order
for the subdivision control act to be most effective.
Treasurer Nilsson moved that we adopt the subdivision control ordinance as
presented by the planning commission and to publish notice as required by law.
Seconded by Trustee Wiegandt. Roll call vote:
   Ayes:      Nilsson, Zaban, Wiegandt, Obst, Graham
   Nayes:      None
Recommended Changes to Section 8.03 Subsection C of the Zoning Ordinance
Treasurer Nilsson moved to approve the changes to section 8.03, subsection c of
the Zoning Ordinance as recommended by the planning commission. Trustee
Wiegandt supported. Roll Call Vote:
   Ayes:      Nilsson, Zaban, Wiegandt, Graham, Obst
   Nayes:      None
end of planning commission report.
ASSESSORS REPORT - Listing of splits read over.
BOARD OF APPEALS - Minutes read and filed.
City of Williamston minutes available.
RENTING OF PARK LAND - received the check for last year's rent. $771.99.
CAPITAL CITY RIFLE CLUB - suggested changes to the letter. Happy with the
letter now and their new sign. Things going well.
CITY/TOWNSHIP SEWER - proceeding along those lines.
MRS. SPAGNUOLO - Walt Aven
They will be required to stripe their parking lot. Occupancy permit would be
held up until the parking lot was striped. Remodeling the interior - no
structural changes. When it becomes an office then it is a change of use and
will require a site plan. Recommend that if they are ever going to put in the
offices then they should submit a site plan now.
COMPLAINT AND RESPONSE 1197 WILD CHERRY - handled by Constable Dahlstrom
MERIDIAN CHARTER TOWNSHIP - RECREATION EXPLORATORY COMMITTEE - has been
forwarded to Mike Nestell.
BURNING PERMIT ISSUE
Question of changing procedures for obtaining burning permits. Chris Nilsson
and Sue Jennings will investigate the issue and have recommendations at the
February meeting.
INGHAM COUNTY MTA MEETING NOTICE - 1/15/97 Leslie Township Hall.
HASLETT ROAD PUBLIC HEARING - 1/16/97 7:30 PM
Township Board's meeting - not the Road Commission's meeting. No
recommendations to be made by the board at this meeting. Receiving input from
the public. Per the Ingham County Road Commission’s request, a recommendation
will be made on the Haslett Road issue at the Township Board’s February 4, 1997
meeting.
Trustee Wiegandt stated that he has received many calls and expects a large
meeting. His calls have been negative. Surveys received at the Township are
more positive.
CONSENT AGENDA
Reading of the minutes from the December 3, 1996 meeting. No corrections or
modifications required. Acknowledged the Treasurer’s financial report for
December 1996 and authorized the Clerk’s list of accounts to be paid January 7,
1997, checks # 7715-7788 for a total of $41,791.45. Trustee Wiegandt moved to
approve the consent agenda as stated above, supported by Treasurer Nilsson.
Roll call vote:
   Ayes:      Wiegandt, Graham, Obst, Nilsson, Zaban
   Nayes:      None
TRAFFIC LIGHT AT GRANDRIVER AND ZIMMER
Brian Jennings suggested turning this issue over to the transportation
committee. Mr. Jennings will then take the issue on himself since he is on this
committee and has just attended a workshop on traffic planning. The Board
agreed to do so.
Trustee Wiegandt moved to close the meeting. Supported by Clerk Graham. No
objections - meeting adjourned at 10:31.
Shirley Graham, Clerk               Susan Jennings, Recording Secretary
FEBRUARY 4, 1997
The regular meeting of the WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP BOARD OF TRUSTEES was called
to order by Supervisor Obst on Tuesday, February 4, 1997 at 7:34 PM. The Clerk
was asked to record who was present and if a quorum was present. Clerk Graham
stated a quorum was present and recorded the following: Supervisor Obst, Clerk
Graham, Treasurer Nilsson, Trustee Zaban, Trustee Wiegandt and Building
Inspector Aven.
The agenda was read over with the following additions: New business: letter
with alleged sewer tap request and sewer assessment refund. Old business:
Township burning permit.
HASLETT ROAD ISSUE:
Norm Obst’s evaluation letter was read into the record. George Durak, chair of
the Transportation and Utilities Committee was puzzled by the petition that had
been submitted to the Township Board. After the surveys that had been taken and
the individual questioning of the residents he didn’t understand why there was
a petition filed requesting the speed limit be lowered to 45 MPH when this
issue never came up in his questioning of the residents. Supervisor Obst’s
letter requested that the Ingham County Road Commission study the speed issue
and make a recommendation for a speed limit. He also stated that per the
brochure provided by Bob D’Alcorn of the Ingham County Road Commission, that
the driving environment determines drivers’ average speed. Supervisor Obst was
of the opinion that improving the road would make it safer, and thus the
driving environment would be one where drivers were more likely to drive
faster. Treasurer Nilsson disagreed with this. She believed other factors, such
as pedestrian and bike traffic, and houses all along the road are also part of
the driving environment and therefore speed will not increase significantly if
at all. Mr. Durak looked at studies on Grovenberg and College road where speed
limits are close to Haslett. He thinks that it is a false conclusion that speed
will increase. If it does increase it may only be by a mile or two.
Chuck Cleland, chair of the Advisory Board stated that according to the theory
in the pamphlet, the safest road would be a dirt 2 track where people are going
very slow and the road is not improved. The Ingham County Road Commission
(ICRC) contends these modifications will change neither the volume nor the
speed. The advisory council noted that this road is not just going to be
improved, but safety will also be enhanced by increasing the line of site and
removing some trees. There is only speculation on how much the speed will
increase. It will be a mistake to conclude that the speed will increase
significantly. Based on the booklet from the ICRC, it is an impossible task to
lower the speed limit to anything lower than what it is now.
Supervisor Obst stated that the point in the letter was that it is important to
recommend that lowering speed is not for vehicular safety. He’s looking at best
speed to maintain the character of life and safety of the area - Ag equipment,
pedestrians, bikers, etc. In light of these objectives, what is the best speed?
Needs more questions answered before a recommendation can be made.
Treasurer Nilsson moved that a decision be delayed until the March meeting to
allow time for questions to be answered by the ICRC. Seconded by Trustee Zaban
who believes a lot of information was conveyed at the public meeting that needs
to be considered before a decision be made. He thinks there should be a
detailed plan of what trees stay and which ones have to go.
Much discussion followed among members of the board and others attending the
meeting regarding landscape plans and stop signs. There was concern over giving
the go ahead for the project without first having a detailed landscape plan
from the ICRC. However, the viewpoint was also raised that the ICRC is not
going to spend the money to have such a plan developed before they have some
kind of OK from the township to go ahead with the project. It was generally
agreed that stop signs might be a good way to help control speed on Haslett
Road. Examples of where this seems to have worked were given, including the
recent 4 way stop at Putnam and Church in the City of Williamston. The issue
here would be to get the ICRC to go along with the stop signs and propose which
intersections would most benefit from them.
People were generally impressed with Dr. Morton, the Tree Expert the ICRC had
come to the public meeting on January 28, 1997. There was some belief that if
the ICRC continued to use the services of Dr. Morton, then the township could
have a more confident feeling that their landscaping concerns would be
addressed in a manner that would benefit the area.
There were also concerns about the line of sight along many areas of the road.
This is especially a problem when farm equipment is on the road. Treasurer
Nilsson also read statements from the Bus director for Williamston Schools and
the Williamston Post Master. Both of these people voiced concerns that their
employees do not feel safe performing their jobs along certain stretches of
Haslett Road. There are many places where there is nowhere to pull over and
where the busses’ flashers are not always seen in time.
Mrs. Jane Nico, a current bus driver for the school system, stated that many
roads in the district have no shoulders, or poor lines of vision where extra
precautions must be taken by the drivers to ensure safety. This is not an issue
particular to Haslett Road.
Discussion among the board members that they would like to re-word the motion
before the board. They want to see the project go forward, but they also want
to have their questions addressed satisfactorily. Treasurer Nilsson withdrew
her motion, the withdrawal was seconded by Trustee Zaban.
Further discussion followed on how best to word the motion so that the ICRC
would get the support from the township they were looking for while at the same
time ensuring that the remaining questions of the township are answered
satisfactorily.
Treasurer Nilsson moved that the Williamstown Township Board of Trustees
supports the Haslett Road improvements proposal and recommends the Ingham
County Road Commission work with a Township representative on speed, safety and
landscaping issues. The motion was seconded by Clerk Graham.
Supervisor Obst stated that he is interested in pursuing the proposal further,
but wants to work out these other issues first. He does not agree with the
motion as written and needs more assurances. He cannot support this motion.
Trustee Zaban stated that he thinks the ICRC can provide more detailed answers
on stop signs before a go a head is given.
Supervisor Obst called for a roll call vote:
   Ayes:      Treasurer Nilsson, Trustee Wiegandt, Clerk Graham
   Nayes:      Trustee Zaban, Supervisor Obst
The motion passed.
FIRE BOARD REPORT
No minutes available. The new ambulance has arrived. There were some wiring and
radio problems, but they have been repaired. The ambulance is now back on site.
ATTORNEY’S REPORT - Steven Schultz
In regards to the law suit against the city involving the sewer system, the
city did not answer the complaint. Instead they filed a motion to dismiss the
complaint. The motion to dismiss will be heard by Judge Houk on March 12. The
township will file an answer to the motion to dismiss prior to that date. We
have received inquiries from individuals who wish to participate in the law
suit against the city as legal parties.
Manholes - Jones & Henry study identified ones that needed repair. A letter has
been drafted that those repairs be made under terms of our 1979 agreement. For
consideration this evening.
John Kane - zoning board of appeals met and Attorney Schultz will be writing a
legal opinion.
Amendments to plat act effective March 31 will be passed along to Supervisor
Obst and Planning Chair Martin.
Need to put the City of Williamston on notice of their contractual obligations
regarding letters received by Supervisor Obst. According to the 1979 agreement
the township owns the sewer and determines who will be allowed to tap in and
who will not. It was a requirement of the EPA grant that the township take this
action. The Board feels comfortable with both letters.
Jones and Henry - chemicals in the system could be coming from Hick’s
Photography Studio. The studio has been contacted, but no response has been
received from them as yet.
BUILDING INSPECTOR REPORT - Walter Aven
Raymond Garcia has been sent an application for a demolition permit. The
building Is more secure than what it looks and the property has been posted.
Mr. Garcia plans on tearing it down and building a new home. He has 6 months
from the time the permit is issued to tear down the building. The Building
Inspector believes the site is no longer a hazardous situation.
The overall trend seems to be that permits are slowing down. The Building
Permit Report was reviewed and placed on file.
PLANNING COMMISSION - Mickey Martin
No action required by the board this month.
There are two issues that are not on the report. Mr. Brunner's property
developer is on the go. They are planning to attend the planning commission
meeting as an informational item. No formal plans have been submitted. But will
list his proposal and invite the neighbors to the meeting. Property zoned RR,
they are currently doing soil borings.
The site plan has been received from the Post Office. Planner Martin recommends
that they send the plan to Chris Doozen for his input. She believes it is well
worth the cost to forward it. The Board agreed.
The new Spagnuolos Restaurant and Independent Bank are wanting to redo their
site plans. We will try to set up a meeting with MDOT and see if this is going
to work. Planner Martin is working with residents to get a petition going to
get a stop light at the intersection. According to the Post Office’s site plan
all customer traffic will exit onto Zimmer Road.
Spagnuolo’s has not filed a new site plan as yet. They have been informed that
they need to re-stripe the parking lot and include handicap parking. They are
not required to file a new site plan until they remodel the part of the
building that they are going to set up as offices, but it will be suggested to
them that it might be in their best interest to file one now, during the
initial phase of remodeling and landscaping, so that they don’t have to redo
the landscaping later.
The sewer capacity for the restaurant is still available.
Sky Line Outdoor advertising was looking at five other sites in the area, but
not in the township. They have received permission from Mrs. Speaks to use her
property and they are proceeding with that location.
Question was asked as to who is paying for the new post office building. The
Federal Government actually purchased this property and they are the ones that
are paying for the building. The previous location in the city and the current
location in the medical building were both leased by the Federal Government and
owned by other individuals.
ASSESSORS REPORT - Norm Obst
Fallen behind a bit in getting the assessments done in time. Increases in
agricultural assessments are quite large - up to 20% in certain areas of the
state. Taxable value increase is capped by the rate of inflation, which is 2.8%
for this year. Ingham County has kept the assessed increase under 10%.
MR. BARTIG - SEWER TAPS THAT WERE PURCHASED 15 YEARS AGO OR MORE.
Possibility of selling them to someone else. Would like to sell them back to
the township. Would like to live there several more years before any
development. No use for the taps. They would like to retain two taps - the one
they are using and one other one and sell the remaining eight for somewhere
around $1500 per tap. Their intent is to keep the land agricultural for the
foreseeable future.
Attorney Schultz stated that the property was given a special assessment
district based on the benefit to the property. The benefit is there whether the
connections to the sewer are made or not. This is not an issue of buying and
selling goods. We are talking about equity. There has been a change in
circumstances. The 1971 taps no longer applies only to the west side, it also
applies to the north side. The Bartig property has not been developed and
foreseeabley won't be. The township may want to make a refund based on the
equity of the situation. Can we go back and re-cut the assessment district? We
need to be very careful before we do anything about buying taps or refunding
money; 1) that we can do it, and 2) that we don't open ourselves up to other
suits. Then is it something that the township decides is equitable to do.
Mr. Bartig asked if sewer assessments had been transferred in the past. No,
they have not.
Attorney Schultz believes that a legal brief should be written before a
decision is made. The time for challenging the assessment is past. We are
dealing here with a reevaluation. If we do it here do we have to redo it for
all properties? The attorney wants to look at the legal issues for the big
picture before a decision is made.
Letter from Capitol City Rifle Club received with favorable comments.
O'Malley & Short letter Bond property intervening with the sewer suit against
the city.
Notice of new 4 way stop sign at Williamston and Holt Roads.
SAFETY STREET CONTRACT AGREEMENT
These address signs are 18”x6” and highly reflective. The cost of the signs are
$20 each, $5 of which is retained by the township and will go to a designated
fund. Order forms are in the February newsletter. Signs are mailed directly to
the home owners.
Treasurer Nilsson moved that we sign the contract and earmark the funds for the
fire department. Seconded by Trustee Zaban. Motion passed.
SUMMIT CEMETERY BOARD REQUEST FOR ADDITIONAL FUNDING, BUDGET ITEM.
Harold Powell representing the cemetery board:
The board has not had a raise for several years. We can no longer support
payroll and operating expenses at current funding levels. Percentage of funding
between the township and the city should be based on assessed values of their
respective properties. The cemetery needs an extra $10,000 this year. The board
agreed to put this into the budget discussion at the March 1997/1998 budget
meeting.
INGHAM COUNTY LIBRARY
No action required at this time.
SOCIAL SECURITY AGREEMENT AMENDMENT
The township entered into a 218 agreement in 1973. Recent legislation has
changed for election worker officials. They need to make more than $1000 in a
year before withholdings, and consequently a W-2, are required. A 1099-MISC is
not required unless they make more than $600.00 in a year.
Clerk Graham proposed a resolution that the township amend the 218 agreement to
exclude all election workers who made less than $1000 per year. Supported by
Trustee Wiegandt. Supervisor Obst called for a Roll Call vote:
   Ayes:   Trustee Wiegandt, Trustee Zaban, Clerk Graham, Supervisor Obst,
Treasurer Nilsson
   Nayes:   None
BOARD OF REVIEW APPOINTMENT
Trustee Wiegandt moved that the board re-appoint the current Board of Review
Members; Harold Powell, Gerald Eidt, and Bill Crabtree. Motion was seconded by
Clerk Graham. Motion approved.
EAGLE SCOUT PROJECT
A couple of suggestions were made for possible projects for Mr. Laumer. One was
that bushes need to be replaced and the other was that some sort of landscaping
needed to be done around the new propane tank. These suggestions will be
forwarded to Mr. Laumer for him to develop a proposal.
BURNING PERMIT - Chris Nilsson
Suggestion for an annual permit (calendar year). The township will keep the
information from the annual permit in a database and send a paper copy to the
resident so that they can have it with them when burning. In order to validate
the permit the resident would call the township and verify their parcel and
driver’s license numbers to receive an activation number that would be good for
up to three days, at that time we would call the fire department like we do
now. The Activation number would be given to the resident and the dispatcher.
We also see this as a good opportunity to promote fire safety with a copy of
the burning ordinance and/or a fire safety brochure being given out with the
annual permit. This will now go to the Williamston Community Fire Board for
their consideration and approval.
Mr. Bartels, who wrote the letter, is encouraged with the approach we are
taking here with the annual permit. The permit as designed was approved by the
board.
CONSENT AGENDA -
Reading of the minutes from the January 7, 1997 meeting. The following
corrections and modifications were required: Deletion of two incorrect
sentences from paragraph 5 of page 2 that stated “RR is not that different from
RE. They have the same frontage requirements.” The final sentence on page two
was modified to read “The Board agreed to have Planner Martin contact Mrs.
Stillwell...”. In paragraph 5 of page 3 the word “act” was replaced with the
word “ordinance” in two cases, and the spelling of Mr. Doozen’s name was
corrected. In paragraph 6 of page 3 the spelling of “site” was corrected. In
the 6th paragraph from the bottom of page 3 the initials CCRC were spelled out
to read Capital City Rifle Club. On page 4 under CONSENT AGENDA, the wording
was changed to reflect that the Treasurer’s report was acknowledged and the
Clerk’s list of accounts to be paid was authorized. Trustee Wiegandt moved,
Trustee Zaban seconded: to acknowledge the Treasurer’s report of financial
activities for January, 1997; approve the minutes of the Regular Township Board
meeting held January 7, 1997 with the changes noted above; and to authorize the
Clerk’s list of accounts to be paid checks #7789-7852 for a total of
$26,330.65.
Supervisor Obst called for a Roll Call vote:
   Ayes:      Wiegandt, Obst, Nilsson, Zaban, Graham
   Nayes:      None
MEETING DATES SET - All meetings to be held at the Township Hall
Budget Meeting - Saturday March 1 - 9:00 AM.
Annual Meeting - Saturday April 19 - 9:30 AM.
Board Meeting - Tuesday April 1 - 7:30 PM.
Board Meeting - Tuesday March 4 - 7:30 PM.
Meeting Adjourned at 10:31 PM
_________________________________         _________________________________
Shirley Graham, Clerk               Susan Jennings, Recording Secretary
MARCH 4, 1997
The regular meeting of the WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP BOARD OF TRUSTEES was called
to order by Supervisor Obst on Tuesday, March 4, 1997 at 7:35 PM. The Clerk was
asked to record who was present and if a quorum was present. Clerk Graham
stated a quorum was present and recorded the following: Supervisor Obst, Clerk
Graham, Treasurer Nilsson, Trustee Zaban, Trustee Wiegandt and Building
Inspector Aven.
The agenda was read over with the following additions: New business: Salary
motion from budget meeting. Mrs. Hepfer entered a letter on the Haslett Road/
Secondary Commercial Network issue. An additional 4 applications (for a total
of 5) were received under the development rights resolution.
Reports:
FIRE BOARD REPORT - Harold Powell
Need to expand equipment and building. We currently cannot get the doors open
on one rig without hitting another one. Not up to date on things. There is an
increased need for emergency work. The Fire Board is considering possibly
buying a lot or two next to the current location; moving to a new, larger
location; or adding an additional location. Some of the larger new homes going
into the area require that the department obtain a ladder truck. The old
pumpers are getting old, it is almost impossible to get parts for them. The
fire board anticipates having an expansion plan in place in the next few
months. The funds would need to come from a millage. Each local government
serviced by the fire department would have to vote their own levy. The
expansion is just in the planning stage. The new ambulance is in service. One
of the older ambulances was involved in an accident, but it has been repaired.
We are now getting the 911 money from the County.
Burning permit concerns - chief and assistant chief do not like the year long
permit. Did not think it could be easily enforced. Trustee Wiegandt thought a
cooperative effort between the board and municipalities can make the process
more easily available to the public. He believes we can come up with a solution
that will please everyone. Trustee Wiegandt will work with Treasurer Nilsson to
fine tune the permit process. Trustee Zaban stated that the fire board only had
the one night to look at the permit proposal. He believes further discussion
will allow us to come up with something that is satisfactory to everyone.
ATTORNEY - Steve Schultz
Another busy month.
Ongoing discussion with the city to try to resolve the lawsuit. No success in
doing this. City requested that we sit down and negotiate. Question on what
would be discussed. Issue presented was annexation petition. Cannot get over
the issue on whether we have sewer capacity while saying we don't. City
proposed that we summarily dismiss the lawsuit and then they will sit down and
talk. City has attempted to correct their errors in violating the open meeting
act.
Clerk Graham stated that Dennis Irwin Stabenow called looking for a neutral
location for a meeting. Boundary commission declared the petition legally
sufficient. There will be a public hearing April 10, probably at one of the
schools. There is a list of 18 criteria the boundary commission must consider
to determine whether or not to approve the petition. Principal areas of
dispute: are sewer, water, and public vs. private roads.
Regarding the letter from Mr. Kendall on Haslett road and the width of the
easement; the case law that Attorney Schultz was asked to look at checked out.
The cases Mr. Kendall is relying upon are good cases that presume the easement
is 66 feet wide, but can be rebutted if the owner can prove there was a use in
place prior to the easement being accepted and that there was encroachment.
Property owner must establish the use, not the township. The Road Commission
will have to deal with this issue directly with the land owners - possibly to
condemn and take over the land.
Special assessments in sewer district number one - Mr. Bartig wanting to be
reimbursed for sewer taps that were never used and does not intend to use. Is
it advisable legally to pay back to folks some of the assessment levied to
build that line. No property right and no right to a refund for an assessment
district that was never used. No legal liability. There is case law that when
an assessment district was set up and folks not originally in the district paid
a hookup fee to tap into the district then there can be a refund to all those
assessed on a prorata basis, and not just those who hadn't used their taps.
This is permissible and legal. To just refund people who hadn't used their taps
is not. A prorata rebate to everyone would be allowed. Courts concerned with
abuse and have specific time lines for challenging an assessment. If they try
to challenge after the time line then the courts would be appearing to play
favorites. Only way to make a refund is to do it prorata once the time for
challenge has passed. We are not obligated to provide sewer at this time. No
property right that guarantees tying into the sewer. Property is improved by
having the line run through the property. Taps are available only on a first
come first serve basis. Assessment was not an assessment for capacity. It was
an assessment to have the pipe put in the ground. The assessment was for the
line and not for purchasing plant usage.
Proposed amendment to zoning ordinance regarding wireless communications and
land division in the sub division control ordinance based on legislation in
late 1996.
Hearing on city's motion before Judge Houk is March 12 at 1:30. Motion by the
city that we did not utilize the meeting clause before going further to sue in
breach of contract. The city is contending that because the township did not
officially declare that a given meeting was held specifically to fulfill the
legal obligation of the contract in all the meetings that were held over the
past two years between the two, that the lawsuit should be dismissed.
BUILDING REPORT - Walt Aven
There has been a slow down on new permit applications. More building is
currently being finished than started. Mr. Garcia has decided he may try to
salvage the original building after having removed the breezeway and other
little attachments that were added at less than code.
PLANNING COMMISSION - Mickey Martin
Needs action on Sky Line outdoor advertising. Applied for a 233 square foot
billboard off premise sign on Betty Speaks’ Grand River property that is zoned
Light Industrial. The Planning Commission recommended denial of the billboard.
They determined it was not compatible to the residential areas to the west and
also not to the problems of that site to begin with. It does not meet the goals
of this township for a rural atmosphere. Also felt it was too close to the city
limits. A lot of discussion followed. There are currently negotiations for
someone to purchase the property from Mrs. Speaks. He would want to set up a
marine store to sell and fix boats.
Mr. Haskins from Sky Line plead their case before the board. They have looked
at the area for some time. He has clients that have requested sites for this
area. They felt they met all the guidelines set up in the zoning ordinance
that. They plan to do some landscaping and cleaning up of the area. They felt
they were doing the right thing. The sign would be visible from both
directions. They would take the ash trees out at the property owners request
and then put in suitable landscaping. They were going to put in an I-Beam
structure, but have agreed to put in a pole structure which is more expensive
and more attractive.
Sky Line believes this is the only location in the township which meets all the
criteria for off-premise signs. It is not a huge billboard - the guidelines
specify a maximum of 300 square feet. They are proposing a sign that is less
than 250 sq. ft. The ordinance says that signs "shall be allowed" in the light
industrial zone. They would be removing two non-conforming signs from the
premises and feel they will be improving the overall look of the site. There
was a public hearing on the application - no one showed to speak against the
issue. McKenna and Associates recommended approval based on certain criteria
which they believe their proposal meets. The sign would not be illuminated and
trees would be cut down on the west property line and be replaced with a stand
of white pine trees closer to the road. McKenna agreed to the sign and the
location of it with conditions. The sign would provide opportunity for local
businesses to advertise. It would not be a detriment to the area. Sky Line has
numerous signs throughout the Lansing area that are bought in packages. The
sign would be an affordable means for local people to advertise. Mrs. VanDoozen
submitted an objection, but she has put up two new billboards in the area
herself since writing the letter.
Building Inspector Aven needs clarification on whether or not the billboard is
considered a free standing sign since only one free standing sign is allowed
per site. An on premise free standing sign must be 100 feet away from an off
premise sign. Further clarification on this issue is still needed.
If the property is sold and the new owners request rezoning the sign will
become a legal non-conforming use. The lease would transfer to the new owners
of the property.
Board discussion on wanting to clean up what is already a trashy looking site.
Some opinion that billboards would not improve the look of the area; that the
site is too close to the city limits; that billboards do not tie into the
master plan of the township; and that there would be people protesting the sign
once it was up..
A review of the permit process was requested of Planner Martin. The zoning is
correct, but only with a special use permit. Special Use Permit process - take
information in, hold public hearing, hold meeting on recommending or denying
the permit - go through the nine criteria and answer them according to the
special use permit. This was all done. Questions on who Sky Line’s clients are
- MSU, PHP, Roof Top Landing, CATA, MADD, Schools, Circus, Capitol Cadillac,
etc.
Motion by Trustee Wiegandt that we table the decision for thirty days until
questions of ownership change are cleared up and to see if the new owner would
like to go forward with the process. Seconded by Treasurer Nilsson. Motion
passed. The thirty days will also be used to respond to questions of
interpretation of the free standing sign part of the zoning ordinance.
Zoning amendment change to allow 15 acre Ag-Small Farm parcels to split off a 5
acre parcel if lot size requirements are met. The Planning Commission
recommends denial because of the new state ordinance which now allows splits on
parcels that have been previously split without waiting another 10 years. This
change would currently affect 14 parcels. Commission believes they would be in
effect granting special uses for these parcels. Negates the Purpose of the Ag
Small Farm Zone.
Discussion followed about a need for these splits to happen. Concerns from the
Planning Commission that there would be a domino effect in allowing these
splits. There would not be a domino effect because parcels divided must have
been in existence at the time that the provision was adopted. Wording of the
proposed ordinance has been changed to make it clearer. It now reads:
Any parcel in the AG-SF district may be divided to create one (1) new parcel
that may be as small as five (5) acres in size, provided that all of the
following criteria are met:
·The parcel being divided must have been in existence at the time of adoption
of this provision, must not have been split from another parcel during the
preceding ten (10) year period, must be at least fifteen (15) acres in size,
and must have at least two (2) adjoining parcels that are five (5) acres in
size or smaller.
·Aside from the parcel that is smaller than 10 acres, all other resulting
parcels shall be at least ten (10) acres in size.
·All resulting parcels shall comply with all applicable requirements of the
Zoning and Land Division Ordinance, including lot width and setback
requirements, except that the parcel that is smaller than 10 acres need not
comply with minimum lot size standards.
Lots legally created pursuant to these requirements shall be considered
conforming with respect to minimum lot size.
Clerk Graham moved that the new wording of the proposed ordinance be sent back
to the Planning Commission for review and comments. Seconded by Trustee
Wiegandt. Motion passed. Another public hearing is not required.
Question on Williamstown estates - we should have a new flood plain map
shortly. Can make paying of legal fees required before going further with any
other permits. If dropped, then legal fees will be attached to the tax bill.
Mrs. Stillwell property - returned signed application to be rezoned to AG-SF to
conform to the area.
Mr. Spagnuolo has filed a special use permit. They are going forward with the
offices. He needs a building permit before he starts remodeling the office
area. The new restaurant will be more of a sports bar. It will have pool
tables, arcade games, a big screen TV, etc. The Ingham County Road Commission
needs a site plan as well from him.
Mr. Hubbell needs two plans. He has not submitted a second plan, so we cannot
proceed further until we hear from him. We have not heard from him since the
letter of Feb. 14, 1997 was sent.
ADVISORY COUNCIL - Mickey Martin
We are meeting monthly. We have been concentrating on Haslett Road and the
Parks committee. The Parks committee has been very active. They are meeting
with land experts from MSU and plan to send out a survey in the newsletter to
find out what uses the community wants for the park. After that information has
been compiled as well as needs from the schools and Red Cedar Rec., the
committee will start planning the park.
Some committees have not met. We need them to all meet. Mr. Cleland (advisory
council chair) is requesting reports, if a committee hasn’t met then some
reorganizing will take place.
The council is also meeting on Land Development Rights. We should have a
recommendation to the board by the April 1st meeting for their action. We have
received 5 proposals for the state to buy development rights for farms in the
township. Do we have to hold up the applications until the board has made a
resolution? Attorney Schultz believes all concerned agencies can be working on
the applications at the same time. Clerk Graham will call Rich to confirm this.
Resolution is preworded, it just needs dates and other blanks filled in.
The State intends to buy all the development rights in the Ag 1 area because we
are running out of farm land. Indiana and another state is also doing this.
Land eligible for this plan is limited in Ingham County. It is important that
the applications be submitted quickly.
Supervisor Obst wondered if there is a downside to making the resolution
tonight. He thinks maybe another meeting should be scheduled before the next
regular board meeting.
Attorney Schultz thought the issue was pretty straightforward. The board needs
to make a policy decision on if they support the purchase of the development
rights.
Supervisor Obst asked if we have verified that all applicants are in Ag-
Commercial. That fact has been verified.
Clerk Graham stated that Michigan went into the Federal PA116 program. Property
owners are now buying their way out of this program and the money is being used
to purchase other AG lands' development rights. As an applicant there are still
many questions that have not been answered: when are the payments coming, are
they taxable, are they coming in one lump sum or spread out over several years?
Could be a one time thing or available in other years.
Trustee Wiegandt moved that the resolution provided by the State be adopted and
filled out and sealed for all five applicants. Supported by Treasurer Nilsson -
motion passed.
ASSESSOR'S REPORT
Meeting Wednesday, March 5th with 2 members of the Board of Review. This is the
first year township is doing the tax and assessment programs on their own.
Certain municipalities have property owners meet with the assessor prior to the
Board of Review to reduce the load on the Board. This procedure has been OK’d
by the Township Board of Trustees if the Assessor can schedule the meetings.
Taxable value now appears before assessed value on the assessment sheets. This
should make the forms easier to read.
A suggestion was made that the newsletter for February, 1998 include an article
to assist in answering questions on when the SEV goes up, why does it go up.
Property sales in the immediate neighborhood have a strong impact on this.
Sales uncap property, so they are the main reason for heavy increases in the
assessment to keep them consistent with property values.
Mr. Powell had a question on assessments for land that has sold the development
rights. Supervisor Obst did not believe the sale of development rights would
not have an impact on the assessment, but would have to research the question
further. Mr. Obst thought it might be possible that assessments on this type of
land could go down because they no longer have the development potential
figured in.
BOARD OF APPEALS
No meeting.
LIBRARY COMMITTEE
Ed Noonan would like 2 people from the Township to serve on a library board.
Not clear if this is the district library board or another local library board.
Supervisor Obst thinks he meant the local library. Bob Reed and Gerry Eidt are
on the intergovernmental committee and are the ones recommended to talk to Ed
Noonan about his committee.
HASLETT ROAD AND THE SECONDARY COMMERCIAL NETWORK -
Haslett Road improvements are to be paid by category D funds, if they are not
on the secondary network, they will no longer be eligible for category D funds.
The Board needs clarification on what differences exist (if any) between all
season roads and the secondary commercial network. There were also concerns
voiced of ever having Haslett road paved if we don't do it now. All season
roads can have truck traffic now. The Perry exit off of I-69 at M-52 is the
primary truck route to I-96. Haslett has been an all season road since 1979.
Classification is not changing on Haslett road. May see an increase up to
Shoeman road now that I-69 is finished. Truckers don't want to use roads such
as Haslett, they want to stay on the expressway as much as possible. The title
is new, but the use is the same. Mr. D'Alcorn's letter states that these roads
are all season roads that act as collectors for the major highway routes.
Trustee Wiegandt stated that the use of the road will not change they are just
changing the name to continue to qualify for the category D funding. The
Michigan Department Of Transportation (MDOT) has mandated this designation.
Discussion among the board about how involved the Township needs to be in the
planning of the road improvements.
Letter read into the record by Mrs. Hepfer --- Because the silent majority
isn’t here tonight, I would like to speak for them. I hope the Township Board
will vote in the affirmative to have Haslett, Meridian, Williamston and Shoeman
Roads be considered Secondary Commercial Network roads because the Ingham
County Road Commission budget funding is dependent on that approval.
As I understand it, if Haslett Road is not part of that network then the other
three roads cannot be either. These township roads will only be maintained and
will not be improved because there will not be any funding for that.
Haslett Road has not had any major improvement since the early fifties and its
condition has deteriorated to the point that it cannot be easily fixed. Please
give your approval so that these roads are Secondary Commercial Network roads
and that the Haslett Road Improvement Project can go forward. -Emma Hepfer,
March 4, 1997.
After much discussion among the board members it was decided that the county
did not need the township’s approval to go ahead with the project. They were
only looking for our consent to further good will among the various government
entities. It was decided that Treasurer Nilsson would draft a letter to Mr.
D’Alcorn of the road commission stating that after much discussion the township
has agreed to the 4 Township Roads inclusion in the Secondary Commercial
Network as proposed by the County Road Commission.
KEY DATA: REQUEST FOR ASSESSMENT INFORMATION
They are asking for information in a format that the Township does not have.
They are not offering the Township anything in return for this information.
According to Attorney Schultz this request technically falls under the Freedom
of Information Act. Since we do not have the information in the format that
they require we can give them the raw data to put into the format that they
want.
COMPLAINTS
2155 Mitchell and 2454 Haslett Road are being handled by Constable Dahlstrom.
Even though the property may be occupied by a renter, the property owner is
ultimately held responsible for cleaning up the trash.
SECRETARIAL JOB DESCRIPTION
A job description for the new full time secretarial position has been decided
on.
APPRECIATION NIGHT:
Decided to support our Township business’ and hold the dinner at the Brookshire
Inn. Will check with them for available dates in April.
SALARY RESOLUTION:
Motion by Clerk Graham that the 1997/1998 Trustee salary be $4,200 per trustee,
plus $60 per meeting. Supported by Trustee Wiegandt. Motion passed.
Motion by Trustee Wiegandt that the 1997/1998 Clerk’s salary be $18,396.
Supported by Clerk Graham. Motion passed.
Motion by Trustee Wiegandt that the 1997/1998 Treasurer’s salary be $18,396.
Supported by Trustee Zaban. Motion passed.
Motion by Trustee Zaban that the 1997/1998 Supervisor’s salary be $11,592.
Supported by Trustee Wiegandt. Motion passed.
CONSENT AGENDA -
Reading of the minutes from the February 4, 1997 meeting. The following
correction was required at the bottom of page 3: The board agreed to put this
into the budget discussion at the March 1997/1998 budget meeting. Clerk Graham
moved, and Trustee Wiegandt seconded: to acknowledge the Treasurer’s report of
financial activities for February, 1997; approve the minutes of the Regular
Township Board meeting held February 4, 1997 with the correction noted above;
and to authorize the Clerk’s list of accounts to be paid checks #7853 - 7919
for a total of $34,516.89.
Supervisor Obst called for a Roll Call vote:
   Ayes:   Treasurer Nilsson, Trustee Zaban, Trustee Wiegandt, Clerk Graham,
Supervisor Obst
   Nayes:   None
Meeting Adjourned at 11:06 PM
______-___________________________      ____________________________________
Shirley Graham, Clerk               Susan Jennings, Recording Secretary
APRIL 1, 1997
The regular meeting of the WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP BOARD OF TRUSTEES was called
to order by Supervisor Obst on Tuesday April 1, 1997 at 7:32 PM. The Clerk was
asked to record who was present and if a quorum was present. Clerk Graham
stated a quorum was present and recorded the following: Supervisor Obst, Clerk
Graham, Treasurer Nilsson, Trustee Wiegandt, Trustee Zaban and Building
Inspector Aven.
The agenda was read over with the following additions: Paul DeWeese and John
Taylor, amendment of the budget for the 1996/97 fiscal year and passing a
Township General Appropriation Act for the 1997/98 fiscal year.
PUBLIC COMMENTS:
Bench Mark Project - Wendy Pincumbe
Miss Pincumbe would like to see the speed limit on Mitchell Rd lowered to 35
miles per hour from the current 45 miles per hour. She submitted a petition
signed by her neighbors to the Board. She received some of her information from
Officer Howard Dahlstrom of the Williamston Police Department (also Constable
of the Township). He was aware of two attempts to lower the speed limit - the
first one was successful in lowering it to 45 from 55, the other attempt to
lower the speed to 35 was not. Miss Pincumbe’s main concern is the high school
students leaving the school on Mitchell driving towards Williamston Road
traveling too fast. This poses a dangerous situation for the people who live in
the area who might be walking or biking along this stretch of the road,
especially students walking to and from school.
Clerk Graham moved that the petition and Miss Pincumbe’s research be forwarded
to the Ingham County Road Commission and our County Commissioner, Randy
Schaefer with a vote of approval from the Board. Seconded by Treasurer Nilsson.
Comment by Trustee Zaban that the board is highly in favor of Miss Pincumbe’s
petition. Motion passed unanimously. Brian Jennings, from the Transportation
and Communications Committee will also be contacting Miss Pincumbe to further
enlist her help in seeing this speed limit dropped.
Eagle Scout Project - Tyson Laumer
Submitted a proposal for landscaping the North West side of the township hall.
Two plans were submitted that will include low maintenance, low growing shrubs.
The first plan will also put some plants in the front of the building. Price
estimate is included in the plans. If the plants are ordered through the
nursery instead of the catalog then the plants would be available when needed
for planting. He also has a cost estimate for 3 gallon plants that would be a
little cheaper than the local nursery, Christians.
Clerk Graham informed Mr. Laumer that Mr. Hayes also has a nursery that might
be more reasonable than others. The mowing company used by the Township would
pull out the older shrubs that are dying. Other scouts would be included in the
project so that Mr. Laumer can demonstrate his leadership skills. He should
have approval for the project from the Scouting Council within a month.
Clerk Graham is in favor of the more extensive plan, so is Treasurer Nilsson.
Cottage Gardens is the wholesaler that has the 3 gallon plants. Trustee
Wiegandt motioned we go with the more extensive plan. Treasurer Nilsson
seconded the motion. Clerk Graham thought we should put a price limit on what
can be spent and asked that the motion be amended to not exceed $300 without
contacting the Board. Trustee Wiegandt and Treasurer Nilsson agreed to amending
the motion as stated by Clerk Graham. The motion has been amended. Motion
passed unanimously.
Dr. Paul DeWeese, 3896 N. Williamston Road
Dr. DeWeese gave a brief presentation outlining his campaign for the seat in
the State House of Representatives that will be vacated by Dan Gustafson in
1998. Listening to the public and responding to their concerns is the main
theme of his campaign. Affordable medical insurance for small business owners
and their employees and public education were some of the topics he discussed.
Dr. DeWeese answered some questions after his presentation.
Secondary Commercial Truck Route Issue - John Taylor, 1533 Corkwood Trail
Mr. Taylor would like the Board to revisit the Secondary Commercial Truck
Routes proposed by the Ingham County Road Commission and rescind their approval
of the Township roads that are included on the list. He is especially concerned
about Williamston and Haslett Roads. The Tri-County Regional Planning
Commission is voting on this issue on May 6th and Mr. Taylor would like the
Township to rescind their approval before that time. Mr. Taylor is concerned
that inclusion in the network would mean increased truck traffic on these roads
and that they may be added to the commercial operators county map, which would
encourage trucks to use these roads. Mr. Taylor realizes the Township has no
formal approval in the matter but he believes their vote could have an
influence on the Tri-County Regional Planning Commission. Mr. Taylor’s letter
was submitted to the Board. The Board will revisit this issue later in the
meeting.
REPORTS
FIRE BOARD - Harold Powell
A committee has been formed to pull together some ideas of what the space
requirements are for a remodeled fire barn and/or a new fire hall and to
contact the 4 architect firms selected to decide which one to go with. There
was a small March Fire Board meeting since many members were unable to attend.
The new ambulance has over 2500 miles on it already. The proposed new building
is becoming a critical issue for the department, more space is a necessity.
ATTORNEY'S REPORT - Stephen Schultz
Reviewed the new subdivision ordinance and land division ordinance and also the
opinion by McKenna and Associates with regards to the landing strip
regulations.
Freedom Of Information Act Requests: Regarding a request for certain documents
by Attorney Lett. The documents were provided within 5 days of his request.
There was no statement in the cover letter that if he disagreed he had certain
rights under the freedom of information act. This type of response is required
under the freedom of information act even if 100% of the information that was
requested was given. Attorney Schultz would be happy to provide standard text
for these types of responses in order to be sure that nothing happens
incorrectly. All requests for documents, whether they are written or verbal,
even if they don’t state that they are a freedom of information act request,
need the standard text included in the response.
Litigation With The City: Agreed to a meeting with the City on April 16 where
each side will lay out their concerns. The City has proposed the meeting be
held at the City Hall Annex in order to avoid a room charge. We have an
agreement on the content of the meeting. The structure of the meeting with the
City will be a presentation by the Supervisor and the Township’s Attorney; the
City Manager and the City’s Attorney; and then open discussion. This is an
informational meeting only - there will be no deliberations and no decisions
will be made. The purpose of the meeting is for the two sides to come together
and figure out where the other side really stands on the issues so that
negotiations will be more beneficial. No minutes will be taken. The meeting is
for everyone to find out where each side is coming from. There was more than a
mild suggestion from the judge that this meeting take place.
By the 15th of April the Township must advise the City who our expert witnesses
are going to be. They have to let us know who theirs are by April 29th. On May
19th there will be a status conference with the judge. We are set to go into
mediation on August 22. Mediation consists of 3 attorneys, one from the
plaintiff side of the bar, one from the defense side of the bar and one
neutral. If the results of mediation are not acceptable to one side or the
other, then going back to court at that time would be a more expensive
proposition.
The Boundary Commission Will Hold A Public Hearing April 10 At 4:00 PM
regarding the annexation request on the west side of town. Attorney Schultz
would invite and encourage anyone who wants to attend to please be there. It is
important for the boundary commission to see how important an issue this is for
the township. The order of the proceeding is as follows: hear from the
petitioner, the city, the township and then anyone else who has any comments.
This meeting will be held at the Community Center.
Treasurer Nilsson questioned the fact that Joe Cox, the City of Williamston’s
Attorney, is on the Boundary Commission. This is correct. Mr. Cox will not be
serving on the panel - there is a conflict of interest here. 5 members are
assigned to each case. There are 3 permanent members appointed by the governor
who hear every case. Each county has two members who are appointed by the
senior probate judge in that county. The three state commissioners do a good
job of maintaining their independence and attempts to remain neutral. None of
them has a discernible pattern of voting. There is a 30 day period for
submission of written materials after the hearing, and a 15 day period to
respond to the written materials. There will then be a judicated session where
they will gather all the materials and discuss them. At that time they will
decide on their findings and it will be at the next meeting before they approve
their findings. Once the Boundary Commission makes its decision it is difficult
to have it overturned in court.
BUILDING PERMITS - Walter Aven
Written report was read and accepted by the Board. There have been 4 new homes
and one fire rebuild so far this year.
PLANNING COMMISSION - Mickey Martin
Action Items Required
Special Use Permit for Sky Line Advertising that was tabled last month. Planner
Martin is receiving conflicting information from Mr. Haskins of Sky Line
Advertising and Mr. Michael Musser, a potential buyer of the property. Each
thinks that Mrs. Speaks is in agreement with their position to go forward with
the application for a special use permit, or to withdraw the application,
respectively. Planner Martin has drafted a letter to Mrs. Speaks to respond by
April 22 on whether she wants to withdraw the application.
Treasurer Nilsson moved that Planner Martin send the letter to clarify Mrs.
Speaks’ position; that the letter be sent certified mail with a return receipt
requested; and that the Board delay their vote until a response has been
received. Clerk Graham seconded the motion.
Public Comments:
Three residents, Mr. Mark Bartig, Mr. Tom Mitchell and Mrs. Gloria Van Dusen,
voiced concerns against the sign. Most of the concerns were related to the sign
being so close to the entrance of the city, that it would overshadow any
welcome signs the city might erect. Also thought that it would set a precedence
for other large signs to be erected in the area. One resident was under the
misconception that the sign would be lighted and he didn’t want it shining in
his bedroom. The proposed sign will not be lit.
Mr. Haskins stated that because of the industrial zoning requirement, there are
only 2 legal locations in the township that are buildable. This is one that is.
He thought the guidelines were set to allow things to be done. This is the
first time anyone has spoken against the sign, except for Mrs. Van Dusen who
uses outdoor advertising. Mr. Haskins has a legal permit application and a
legal lease from Mrs. Speaks. This is a local community business. They are
trying to do everything as legal as they possibly can and even more. There are
people for it and people against it - he is doing everything he can to follow
the rules.
Some concern as to whether or not the neighbor was informed about the sign.
Remembers being asked about cleaning up the fence row, but has no recollection
of the sign being mentioned. It was confirmed that the Bartig's were informed
by mail of the public hearing.
Motion passed - decision delayed for another month.
Cherry Valle Final Plat
Subdivision south of Sherwood on Zimmer. Entrances from Zimmer and the existing
sub of Cherry Ridge. 21 plots. They have met all the recommendations and deeds
of 4 metes and bounds lots have been received. Planning commission would
recommend approval. Trustee Wiegandt moved to approve, seconded by Treasurer
Nilsson. Supervisor Obst had a question on the 4 metes and bounds parcels. They
are not in the plat, they are metes and bounds parcels. Reason was because they
could get separate septic approvals. These 4 lots will still be bound by the
subdivision covenants and restrictions as so stated on their deeds. RR zoning
with R1 usage permitted. Supervisor Obst called for a Roll Call vote:
Ayes:   Treasurer Nilsson, Trustee Zaban, Trustee Wiegandt, Supervisor Obst and
Clerk Graham
Nayes:   None.
The Mylar was signed after the vote.
Zoning Ordinance Text Amendment Of The Ag-SF Lot Splits. Changed the wording.
The proposed amendment now reads:
Any parcel in the AG-SF district may be divided to create one (1) new parcel
that may be smaller than ten (10) acres but not less than five (5) acres in
size, provided that all of the following criteria are met:
·The parcel being divided must have been in existence at the time of the
adoption of this provision, must not have been split from another parcel during
the preceding ten (10) year period, must be at least fifteen (15) acres in
size, and must have at least two (2) adjoining parcels that are five (5) acres
in size or smaller.
·Aside from the parcel that is smaller than ten (10) acres, all other resulting
parcels shall be at least ten (10) acres in size.
·All resulting parcels shall comply with all applicable requirements of the
Zoning and Land Division Ordinance, including lot width and setback
requirements, except that the parcel that is smaller than ten (10) acres need
not comply with minimum lot size standards.
Lots legally created pursuant to these requirements shall be considered
conforming with respect to minimum lot size.
The provision should be placed in two sections of the ordinance:
·Section 15.03, sub-section B, as a footnote to the 10-acre Minimum Lot Area
standard.
·Section 26.02, Schedule of Regulations, as a footnote to the 10-acre minimum
lot size standard in the AG-SF district.
Trustee Wiegandt moved that the Zoning Ordinance be amended to include the
above provision in the specified locations.. Supported by Trustee Zaban.
Supervisor Obst called for a Roll Call Vote:
Ayes:   Trustee Zaban, Treasurer Nilsson, Supervisor Obst, Clerk Graham,
Trustee Wiegandt
Nayes:   None
Revision To Subdivision Control Ordinance And The Ordinance To Regulate The
Division Of Land: Changes are revisions that were necessary to comply with the
new state act. State had a depth to width ratio and buildability for septic/
sewer system requirements. The revision was written so that the Township was
not liable to provide the septic/sewer system, but that a perk test is to be
done and septic approved by the health department. Once adopted they will have
to be published as soon as possible.
Moved by Trustee Zaban to adopt the changes as amended March 18th by the
Planning Commission to regulate the division of land. supported by Trustee
Wiegandt. Supervisor Obst called for a Roll Call vote:
Ayes:   Trustee Zaban, Treasurer Nilsson, Supervisor Obst, Clerk Graham,
Trustee Wiegandt
Nayes:   None
Moved by Trustee Zaban for approval of the subdivision control ordinance
amendments as of the March 18th Planning Commission meeting. Supported by Clerk
Graham. Supervisor Obst called for a Roll Call vote:
Ayes:   Treasurer Nilsson, Supervisor Obst, Clerk Graham, Trustee Wiegandt,
Trustee Zaban
Nayes:   None
Planner Martin Requested $5,000 at the budget meeting for a GIS mapping
computer system. Dan Urbane, the Township’s current computer consultant, was
selected to work with the township on this system. We have not settled on a
printer yet, this is still being researched. We are looking at a wide carriage
(17x22 inch paper) printer so that larger maps could be printed. We will come
within the budget. Still need to purchase the software. Ordered the zip drive
because of the rebate offered. April 10 the prices should go down again. The
system should come in around $3,000, excluding software and the printer.
The Account Has Been Paid On The Williamstown Estate Property. Plans have been
signed by the planning coordinator. Believe construction will now begin.
Land Division Ordinance - Attorney Schultz has a handout that states all the
split possibilities on parcels up to 200 acres.
BOARD OF REVIEW AND ASSESSORS REPORT - Norman Obst
There is a problem with developers selling lots but not filling out the proper
property transfer affidavits. We need a way to nudge developers that they need
to file these when they sell the lots.
Board of review will meet Thursday April 3rd at 7:30 to finish things up.
TRANSPORTATION AND COMMUNICATIONS COMMITTEE
Supervisor Obst received a letter from George Durak that stated he is resigning
from the transportation and communications committee due to other personal
commitments.
Recommendation on the proposed 1997 road construction projects, and should Mr.
D'Alcorn be invited to a board meeting. Brian will get with Ken and get a
response to the board. Board will take up this issue at the next regular
meeting, May 6, after receiving the response from the committee.
OLD BUSINESS
Burning Permit - Ron Wiegandt
The Fire Board will let us try the new process for a year to see how it works.
The newsletter will be used to publish the new process. The old process will
also still be an option.
Township Appreciation Dinner -
We have not heard from Dianne Byrum yet. Paul DeWeese asked to meet with
influential people in the township. He will also be invited to speak. We want
to send the invitations this Friday. Dinner will be Friday, April 25th. Social
hour at 6:00 dinner at 7:00 at the Brookshire Inn.
Department Of Natural Resources -
We have received the final payment from the DNR to close out our recreation
land purchase grant process. This will be the last year that the property will
be allowed to be farmed. Letter of agreement for a one year rental.
NEW BUSINESS
Complaint Against Waste Management: A letter was received March 19th from Mr. &
Mrs. Harry Esch of Williamston Glass. They filed a complaint against Waste
Management for not picking up the trash that is falling off their trucks nor
responding promptly to phone calls regarding such trash. Constable Dahlstrom
will be sent to investigate the complaint.
Development Rights Resolution - Tom Cullimore on Lounsbury Road filed an
application to sell his development rights to the State of Michigan. This was
the only application received this month. Trustee Wiegandt moved that the Board
pass a resolution supporting the selling of development rights for the
Cullimore property. Supported by Treasurer Nilsson. Supervisor Obst called for
a Roll Call Vote:
Ayes:   Trustee Wiegandt, Trustee Zaban, Treasurer Nilsson, Supervisor Obst,
Clerk Graham
Nayes:   None
Abraham & Gafney PC: Clerk Graham moved that the firm of Abraham & Gafney PC
again be retained to perform the annual audit. Supported by Trustee Wiegandt.
Motion passed unanimously.
Capitol City Rifle Club - reviewing their shooting hours using bills 78 and 79
that were signed by the Governor. These were the original bills referenced when
they were grandfathered in.
Ingham County HAZ MAT Response Team - check has been written. There was prior
Township Board approval to participate.
Newsletter - deadline for entries is 10:00 AM, Monday April 21st. Would like an
article from Brian Jennings on the traffic light study at Zimmer and Grand
River. Brian discussed his informal traffic counts at the post office and his
attempt to set up some more formal countings.
Hideaway Woods - Charlie Perkins is withdrawing his offer for the Woodview
Subdivision to drain into the Hideaway Woods Subdivision due to lack of payment
on the agreement and other unforeseen issues. This is an Issue if the Township
receives a building permit request for a Woodview property. It would have to be
approved by the Drain Commission before a permit would be issued.
Amending Of The 1996/97 Budget. Out of contingency 101-191-702 into elections
$1500. Other - insurance, pensions, social security, was over the budget for
1996/97 - will have to take money out of contingency to cover this amount and
put it into accounts 101-851-007, 101-851-012, and 101-851-017 - $6000. Over on
the building inspector by about $10,000. Debiting contingency by $17,500. Clerk
Graham moved that the budget be amended as outlined above. Supported by
Treasurer Nilsson. Approved unanimously .
Curts Lawn Care - $120 /wk to mow. They will trim the hedges for $75 and
perform same services as they have in the past. Will remove the dying bushes
around the building if the township wants them to do so. Snow removal has been
prompt. Lawn damage has been repaired by them. They provide a good service.
There were no objections, so the contract with Curts Lawn Care will be renewed.
Williamston Area Chamber Of Commerce - The Township is now on the mailing list
for their newsletter.
Letter From Kathy Fields - She wants to use the Township Hall for a Great Lakes
Pony Club teaching seminar on Saturday, April 12th. This is an educational non-
profit organization. As long as the hall is available that day, the board sees
no problem in letting them use it.
Township General Appropriations Act. for the 1997/98 fiscal year. Estimated
Revenue is $488,925. Estimated Expenditures are $686,618. Motion to adopt the
appropriation act of the general fund by cost center for the 1997/98 fiscal
year by Treasurer Nilsson. Supported by Trustee Wiegandt. Supervisor Obst
called for a Roll Call vote:
   Ayes: Treasurer Nilsson, Trustee Zaban, Trustee Wiegandt, Clerk Graham,
Supervisor Obst
   Nayes: None - Motion Passed.
Special Meeting Of The Township Board Of Trustees On March 18, 1997
Treasurer Nilsson moved to approve the minutes of the closed session from the
March 18th meeting as corrected. Supported by Trustee Wiegandt. Motion passed
unanimously.
Treasurer Nilsson moved that the minutes of the special meeting of March 18th
be approved. Seconded by Trustee Wiegandt. Motion passed unanimously.
Further Discussion On The Secondary Commercial Network. Treasurer Nilsson will
draft a letter in response to Mr. Taylor.
CONSENT AGENDA
Clerk Graham moved, and Trustee Wiegandt seconded: to acknowledge the
Treasurer’s report of financial activities for March, 1997; approve the minutes
of the Regular Township Board meeting held March 4, 1997; and to authorize the
Clerk’s list of accounts to be paid checks #7920-7973 for a total of
$43,703.51. Supervisor Obst called for a Roll Call vote:
   Ayes: Treasurer Nilsson, Trustee Zaban, Trustee Wiegandt, Clerk Graham,
Supervisor Obst
   Nayes: None
Meeting adjourned 10:35 PM.
__________________________________      ________________________________
Shirley Graham, Clerk               Susan Jennings, Recording Secretary
MAY 6, 1997
The regular meeting of the WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP BOARD OF TRUSTEES was called
to order by Supervisor Obst on Tuesday May 6, 1997 at 7:34 PM. The Clerk was
asked to record who was present and if a quorum was present. Clerk Graham
stated a quorum was present and recorded the following: Supervisor Obst, Clerk
Graham, Treasurer Nilsson, Trustee Wiegandt and Trustee Zaban. Building
Inspector Aven was excused.
The agenda was read over with the following additions: Old Business - Cherry-
Valle subdivision and Skyline Billboard Request. New Business - Tom Hamlin
Request.
TOM HAMLIN REQUEST - Public was told that Mr. Hamlin asserted that our Zoning
Ordinance was unconstitutional and that the Township’s Attorney was planning to
respond tonight, at the Board of Trustees meeting because the Board of Appeals
does not have the authority to act on this request. Mr. Hamlin would like to
rent a house to 4 unrelated graduate students in a subdivision that is zoned
for single family residences. The definition of a family according to the
Williamstown Township Zoning Ordinance is as follows:
1.   A domestic family, that is, one or more persons living together and
related by the bonds of consanguinity (blood), marriage, or adoption, together
with servants of the principal occupants and not more than one additional
unrelated person, with all of such individuals being domiciled together as a
single, domestic, housekeeping unit in a dwelling.
2.   The functional equivalent of the domestic family, that is, persons living
together in a dwelling unit whose relationship is of a permanent and distinct
character and is the functional equivalent of a domestic family with a
demonstrable and recognizable bond which constitutes the functional equivalent
of the bonds which render the domestic family a cohesive unit. All persons of
the functional equivalent of the domestic family must be cooking and otherwise
housekeeping as a single, nonprofit unit. ...
Refer to page 1-13 of the Williamstown Township Zoning Ordinance for the
complete definition. Mr. Hamlin’s request states that the Zoning Ordinance is
not constitutional and that it discriminates. Mr. Hamlin had no comment other
than what is already stated in his letter to the board.
The Township also received comments and letters from people in the neighborhood
defending the ordinance as written. Supervisor Obst deferred to Attorney
Schultz. Mr. Schultz looked at the Township ordinance with respect to the
definition of family and if there is any new case law on this issue. Most cases
challenge ordinances that state specific numbers. Those have been stricken. The
Court has laid down some guidelines. There is no case law in this state and
only one odd one in another state that would show that our definition is
improper or unenforceable. There is case law looking at our definition that has
been sustained or found valid. Would enforcing the ordinance be discriminatory
under the Elliott-Larson civil rights act as stated in Mr. Hamlin’s letter?
There is nothing in this ordinance that forces a landowner to violate the
Elliott-Larson civil rights act. The requirement that the residents must be a
family does not require anyone to discriminate against anyone. It only means
that the people living there must live as a family - traditional or non-
traditional, nothing more and nothing less. The requirement does not
discriminate against various types of familial status, just that they must be
living together as a family. Attorney Schultz is comfortable with the ordinance
and that it is a fact specific issue. If they are living as a family, then they
are OK.
The following residents of Red Cedar Manor Subdivision voiced their opposition
to the property in question being rented to a group of 4 unrelated graduate
students: Clay Bradon, Don & Karen Bouffard, Ed & Sharon Carter, Veronica
Matejko, Alexis Smith, Marirose Carrillo, Vickie Selinger and John McLaughlin.
Other citizens voicing statements were Nancy Fink and Michael Musser. Concerns
stated were negative effects on property values, changing the character of the
neighborhood, negative impact on quality of life in the neighborhood. Opinion
was that the current pricing structure on the rental would be a deterrent to
most families and that it encouraged the type of group rental that is
undesirable and illegal in this neighborhood. There were also concerns about
how the residents would be notified if there were any further Township meetings
that addressed this issue. Supervisor Obst advised them that they would receive
written notification by mail if there were any further developments regarding
this issue.
Mr. Hamlin stated that he has lived in this community for 10 years, and he has
coached many kids in the community. He is not trying to do anything against the
law. He does rent to college students, but he is very particular about the
college students he rents to. The four that are interested in this property are
very responsible graduate students, who have passed vigorous qualifications and
will be in the area for 6-8 years. Mr. Hamlin stated that he has never had this
problem before in any of the other communities where he owns rental property.
The residents of Red Cedar Manor submitted a petition to the Township Board
should any further action be required in this matter.
SKYLINE BILLBOARD ISSUE - Mr. Rick Imshaug, owner of Skyline Advertising.
The Township Board tabled this issue in the past due to some concern that the
owner of the property did not want to go forward with the application. The
Board received a letter from Mrs. Speaks today. It stated that she does not
favor the sign but does not want to withdraw her name from the application due
to possible legal action against her from Skyline. There was a recommendation
from the Planning Commission to deny the sign dated Feb. 27, 1997. The motion
passed, but not unanimously. Treasurer Nilsson motioned that the Township Board
deny the Special Land Use Permit for the sign from Skyline Advertising on the
1476 E Grand River property. Seconded by Trustee Zaban. Discussion: Heard back
from Mrs. Speaks that she does not want the sign because she is still in the
midst of negotiations for selling the property. Nothing has been finalized yet.
Trustee Wiegandt stated that it was a problem of looking into the future to
determine what somebody else may or may not want.
Michael Musser stated that he is the individual who is in negotiations with
Mrs. Speaks to buy the property in question. He would like the sign to be
denied. The sign has no significance with what he plans to do with the parcel.
Negotiations will not be finalized until early winter. He has a five year plan
that he has discussed with the Planning Commission. Will get a copy to the
board. The plan does not include this type of sign on the property. Mr. Musser
is concerned that the sign will not permit any use by any organization within
the community. Only paid advertisers of Skyline will be allowed to use the
sign. Believes the sign would be unattractive and not an asset to the community
and that it would detract from his business.
Mr. Imshaug stated that the proposed sign meets all the guidelines of the rules
and is actually well within the boundaries. The matter was referred to McKenna
and Associates. Skyline has exceeded the recommendations set by McKenna for
approval. We have submitted letters from businesses in the community. Dozens of
local charities use Skyline’s billboards at no charge. If the sign is denied at
this location then it appears the township is saying that they do not allow
billboards in this township.
Trustee Zaban stated that there are similar signs in the township further west
on Grand River. He doesn't feel the proposed sign meets all the criteria
because the piece of land to the west is not commercial, but residential. Mr.
Imshaug stated that the ordinance does not say anything about what zoning can
be adjacent.
Attorney Schultz - point of information - either incorporate the reasons set
forth by the Planning Commission or state some findings about why the motion is
opposed. When he reviewed the lease he found the legal description of the
property to be leased is defective. The lease states that the property to be
leased is the west property line, there is no width mentioned, just the line.
Attorney Schultz is not sure if we granted the special use permit, what
property is to be included in the lease - there is no width to the parcel.
Trustee Zaban moves that the original motion be amended to include the findings
of fact from the Planning Commission dated Feb. 27, 1997 denying the Special
Land Use Permit, the letter from Mrs. Speaks dated May 6th, and the defect in
the lease that does not specify the width of land to be rented. Motion has been
amended. Supervisor Obst is concerned about residential uses to the west, the
fact that Mrs. Speaks does not feel it is in her interest to have the sign, and
the fact that there appears to be a legal defect in the lease. Motion passed
unanimously.
Nancy Fink - Special Use Permit to be used at the discretion of the board. Have
to look at each case because of having various different zonings next to each
other. Should be evaluated on a one by one basis for this purpose.
FIRE BOARD REPORT - Walter Keilholtz
Submitted to the board. Question from Attorney Schultz regarding the width of
streets and turning radiuses in Riverwood. If they are city streets then they
are not bound by the Ingham County Road Commission’s guidelines. This is a
concern from a public safety point of view and also an annexation point of
view. All roads in Williamstown Township must meet the County’s guidelines for
width and turning radiuses. Mr. Keilholtz stated that the Fire Board does not
have regulations on this, nor the authority to impose any. Trustee Wiegandt
stated that they were private roads when the development was built so they do
not come under the guidelines of the Ingham County Road Commission The Fire
Department will go down the roads as far as they can with their trucks and then
go the rest of the way by foot.
Mickey Martin asked Trustee Wiegandt if two cars were parked along the side of
the street across from each other in the City’s Riverwood Development, could
the fire vehicles get through? The answer was no, they could not.
Attorney Schultz - County road standards are sufficient in the Township, but in
the City where they are not county roads, whether the annexation is approved or
not, the Fire Board ought to have regulations that require the roads to meet
the guidelines. Trustee Wiegandt - The Fire Board does not have this authority.
It must be the City that accepts these standards for public safety reasons. If
the City ignores this advise it would raise issues of City liability if there
is a fire on one of these streets.
Nancy Fink asked if there could not be some literature to go out to builders
regarding driveway width and fire safety. Trustee Wiegandt stated that the Fire
Department has had good relations with builders in conforming when building,
the problem is 5 or 10 years in the future when the trees grow and driveways
become impassable for large trucks and fire equipment.
Mr. Keilholtz stated that a valid point was raised. The Fire Board should have
someone there when the plans are drawn up for a subdivision.
Attorney Schultz stated that If the Fire Department can't get their equipment
down the narrow roads it is a problem whether the property is in the City or
the Township. The problem related to annexation is that if builders can build
narrower, and therefore cheaper roads in the City, then it is in their best
financial interest to annex to the city.
ATTORNEY’S REPORT - Stephen O. Schultz
Follow up to meeting on 4-16-97 - Spoke with Joe Cox to determine if the City
is still interested in meeting. They are. The have appointed Mayor Farrell,
Council Member Deforest, City Manager Sumis and Attorney Cox to represent the
City. If the Board desired to meet we would appoint two members of this board
along with Mr. Schultz. Mr. Cox thought this would be appropriate and
desirable. The City would like to resolve the issue with Hideaway Woods
immediately. Hideaway Woods has voiced their intent to intervene and sue the
city for damages and an order to require the City to allow the hookups to water
and sewer at this site.
The City would like to meet weekly on Thursdays, Wednesdays or Tuesdays in that
order. Attorney Schultz does not believe they necessarily need to meet weekly
but that they should meet whenever there is something to talk about. Attorney
Schultz recommends that the Township Supervisor should be one of these people,
the other person is totally up to the board.
Trustee Zaban recommended that Supervisor Obst and Trustee Wiegandt be the
Township representatives to meet with the City along with Attorney Schultz.
Treasurer Nilsson to be the alternate. Attorneys Schultz and Cox will set up a
meeting schedule. They definitely want to talk about Hideaway Woods. Is the
city willing to move at all on the sewer issue? Start getting a feel to see if
they have any desire to try to reach an agreement at all and get an idea of
what their ultimate goals are. We can now probe in more detail each party's
position.
Annexation - Annexation letter faxed out. He talked to folks at STS Consultants
(consulting engineers) and Chris Doozen from McKenna Associates faxed Mr.
Schultz some information. There is a letter due the end of the week that tracts
the theme from the public hearing with respect to the section 9 criteria that
it is a case of a runaway developer that is asking the Boundary Commission to
be a super zoning commission that will save him anywhere from $30,000 - $50,000
in development costs by jumping into the City and allowing roads to be built at
substandard levels.
Freedom of information Act (FOIA)- Attorney Anne Skilton put together proposed
boiler plate responses where an FOIA request is granted, denied, denied in part
or granted in part. Attorney Schultz forgot to bring them with him tonight, he
will be sure to get them to the Township Office tomorrow. The Board should
designate an FOIA officer. The officer should be designated by a resolution,
and it should be assigned to an office rather than the name of a specific
person. This person would be responsible to respond to all FOIA requests.
Supervisor Obst moved that the Office of the Clerk be nominated to be the FOIA
Officer, seconded by Treasurer Nilsson, motion passed.
Treasurer Nilsson brought up the issue of having to come to some agreement on
how the sewer issue is going to be measured - Residential Equivalent Units
(REU's) or metered flow. Either way the township is well under the contractual
limits.
Attorney Schultz stated that we have to get a sense from the City of what their
position is on the flow use.
Trustee Wiegandt stated that the information is there. The Township conducted
the metered tests requested by the City, but they have not accepted the data.
New people on the City Council refuse to look at what has been done in the
past. They will not look at the issue or try to resolve it until the courts are
involved, as is the case in Hideaway Woods.
Attorney Schultz stated that the Township would not want to formulate a plan
until we have some idea what the City’s position is.
Treasurer Nilsson asked if as part of our lawsuit did we specify that the city
pay the legal fees? Attorney Schultz responded that we cannot do that in this
case. This is a basic breach of contract case. Nothing in the contract states
that either party is responsible for legal fees. 425's are not part of the
lawsuit. He is not suggesting that we propose anything on annexation or 425's.
That is up to the City.
BUILDING REPORT - Report read and accepted by the board.
PLANNING COMMISSION - Mickey Martin
Marjorie Stilwell rezoning - 1.24 acre AG-C parcel was isolated by a recent
rezoning. Requested she go to AG-SF to become more conforming. The Planning
Commission recommends the rezoning.
Clerk Graham moves that the Board approve the rezoning request and accept the
finding of facts by the Planning Commission. Seconded by Trustee Wiegandt -
motion passed.
Terry and Nancy Lutz - Special Land Use Permit to exceed the square footage
limit of 2400 square feet total for all accessory buildings combined. The
Planning Commission recommends approval of this Special Land Use Permit. The
building is to house some llamas that they plan on raising. Clerk Graham moved
that the Special Land Use Permit at 6055 Lounsbury Road be approved based on
the finding of facts by the Planning Commission and since there were no adverse
comments from the neighbors. Seconded by Treasurer Nilsson. Any new out
buildings would require a special use permit as well since they have now
exceeded the 2400 sq. foot maximum. The Special Land Use Permit stays with the
property and would still be valid when the property is sold.
Tom Graham raised concerns over 2 parcels on Zimmer that have piles of manure.
Biggest problem is that they don't get rid of it, not that they can't get rid
of it. This is a violation of the nuisance order. A complaint should be
submitted and the constable would be sent out. Mr. Graham is of the opinion
that tattling on neighbors is not the way to do things and he will not be
signing a complaint.
Motion to approve the Special Land Use Permit passed.
Independent Bank is requesting a Special Land Use Permit to construct a sign
that is 15 ft high. The ordinance allows a maximum of 6 ft without a Special
Land Use Permit. Placement of the sign has to meet all set back limitations.
The Planning Commission recommended approval of the Special Land Use Permit.
The sign will have site clearance so that autos can see under it. The new sign
will be smaller than the current sign. It will display the time and temp and be
illuminated. The bottom of the sign is 8ft from the ground. Still some question
of Truck Clearance (can commercial truckers see under it adequately). Overhang
must also be within the setbacks. Made sure that the bank was made aware of
this. Sign will not be in the line of vision of the road.
Supervisor Obst moved to approve the Special Land Use Permit application for a
free standing sign as proposed by Independent Bank subject to the following
requirements, the sign and overhang must be behind the 50 foot setback
requirements from Grand River and the dimensions of the sign must be what has
been submitted to the Planning Commission. Supported by Trustee Wiegandt.
Motion Passed.
Cherry-Valle - On final plat the road came out of lot 13 of the old Cherry-
Ridge II Subdivision. This violates the land division ordinance. Planning
Commission did not realize this at the time, nor did the board or McKenna and
Associates. The Planning Commission recommends combining lot 13 with lot 14.
Same person owns lots 13 and 14. We have a parcel of land that currently exists
in two platted subdivisions. Easiest thing to do is to amend the old
subdivision plat rather than correct Cherry-Valle. The same people own all of
the adjoining property except for one person across the street. We violated our
own land division ordinance when Cherry-Valle was approved without realizing
it. Best thing to do is to append lot 13 to lot 14 of Cherry-Ridge II.
Clerk Graham moved that the Township Board recognizes the error by all parties
concerned and that we direct the owner of lot 13 and 14 in Cherry-Ridge II to
file an amended plat and once this is done the board instructs the assessor to
make the necessary corrections and any and all costs to be paid by the property
owner. Supported by Trustee Wiegandt. Motion passed.
Pines Office Park - Matter was discussed at an earlier meeting, but due to an
oversight no vote was taken on approving the final site plan for Pines Office
Park. The Planning Commission had recommended that the Board approve the plan.
Clerk Graham moved that we approve the final site plan for Pines Office Park.
Supported by Treasurer Nilsson. Motion passed.
ASSESSORS REPORT - Norm Obst
Just did form # 4025 for the county, everything’s going all right. Board of
Appeals has meeting coming up on May 14, 1997.
ADVISORY COUNCIL - Chuck Cleland
The original purpose of the council was that the Board wanted to reorganize the
Township government on a committee structure. Committees were very large, there
were many of them and most of them never met. We tried to reorganize the
structure into 5 standing committees. Most of these committees still don't
work. Two work well and one special committee - the park committee - works
well. Most of the participation by citizens is driven by issues that hit home
to them. We have not made good progress in getting the committees to function
well.
One option is to proceed as usual.
Option 2 - Do we need the standing committees? Is it sufficient just to have an
agricultural person or a transportation person on the council and then when
necessary to appoint special committees when a need arises? Advisory Council
suggests going with option 2.
Problem 2 is how the Advisory Council itself is working. The Council does not
think that it is working well. If the Council hasn't provided the Board with
good information and advice then we need to fix the relationship between the
Council and the Board. The Council has in the past just operated on Supervisor
Obst’s advice to them. No formal mission statement, or agreement from the Board
on how the Board should work with the Advisory Council was ever established. We
need better communication between the Board and the Council. There should be a
Board member attending Advisory Council meetings. This would further the
discussions. What issues does the Board want the Council to study? We believe
the Council would be better used to study long term complex issues: e.g.,
inter-governmental affairs, long term open space, long term agricultural
problems, etc. Also specialized problems in the township where a specialist in
the township could be utilized. It is preferable that the Advisory Council
provide advice to the board in the form of alternate choices and perceived
impacts. They are willing to make some of those long term predictions and put
them in the frame work of alternate choices. Reorganization has had some
successes, but also many failures. We need to do some fine tuning to make the
advisory council work better. Clerk Graham stated that she would like 30 days
to think about the issue.
The Council’s understanding of their role is that many issues could be referred
to them without the Board thinking them out during public meetings. Is this
something that the board will find useful? Chuck Cleland should be the
interface between the various committees and the Board.
Treasurer Nilsson sees the Council as very beneficial. She likes the idea of
reorganization and would volunteer to be the Board representative on the
Advisory Council.
Supervisor Obst had a little more in mind with regard to a mission statement
for the Council. The Township is constantly running into problems that it
wasn't prepared for or hadn't foreseen. He would like the Council to also work
on anticipating problems before they happen and not just be reactionary. This
would take a lot of research on the council’s part.
Mr. Cleland stated that If we are going to ask people to do this then there has
to be some feedback. Need to develop a rapport between the Council and the
Board so that the people on the Council feel that their information is
prioritized against other information coming in - that their research efforts
are recognized and weighed in as a factor when considering their
recommendations.
Treasurer Nilsson suggested having a regular spot on the Board’s agenda for
collecting issues to be studied by the Advisory Council.
Mr. Cleland stated that the Council needs some affirmation that the board
subscribes to this procedure. If their advice is not taken that is fine, but
let the Council know what other considerations were taken by the board when
their decision was made.
1997 ROAD IMPROVEMENTS - Brian Jennings
Report read and questions answered. Realizes chip-and-seal not wanted in the
subdivisions, but had to be thrown out as an option in the case of Newman Road.
Questions on the computer ratings used to rate the roads. Ingham County road
Commission (ICRC) recommended repaving 7 roads and paving 4 gravel roads. The
same criteria as last year was used for rating the roads except for number of
homes on the road. Explained ratings on the spreadsheet. Rowley Road
improvements were supposed to be paid by the developer. $7900 escrowed by Dave
Mahaney with the Road Commission, but this is a $23,000 project. Township would
still incur some cost on this road. $75,000 budgeted to spend on roads this
year. Treasurer Nilsson raised the question of impact fees; requiring a
developer to contribute to maintenance and improvement costs of roads around a
subdivision when the subdivision will be impacting the surrounding roads.
Money should be escrowed with the County to do the top coat for Quarton and
Woodview, etc. from the developers. Clerk Graham moved that the recommendations
for the specified roads, Rowley (only if the $7900 from the developer is
there), Agate, Rocky Hill and Sandstone be done and in finishing up Pebble
Brook with the exception of Newman road; and to formulate a policy for future
subdivision roadwork. Supported by Trustee Zaban.
Mrs. Mickey Martin voiced opposition to the resurfacing of Rowley/Beeman being
paid by the Township, stating that the road would not need the work if it
weren't for the subdivision.
Motion passed.
OLD BUSINESS
Community Pool - Tabled until June. The price and policies pool usage have not
yet been established for this summer.
Township Hall Softball Field Recommendations - Trustee Wiegandt
Suggested adding a second baseball diamond, soccer field and peg ball area. We
need to field tile the entire area. The cost would be more than $20,000. We
will have to put it out for bid. The Parks and Rec. committee has been in
contact with Red Cedar Rec. It would take 30 days to get an engineer to assess
tiling requirements, 30 days to get bids from contractors, 30 days to have the
bids returned, etc. We are looking at Sept. or Oct. at the earliest to get the
tiling done. Trustee Wiegandt will get an estimate for the tiling and forward
it to the Advisory Council. Plans for the land will also be forwarded to the
Advisory Council.
Township Hall Building Recommendations - Clerk Graham
The base boards need to be replaced. Robert Tracy in Quinlan Subdivision does
this type of work. He will be contacted for an estimate.
NEW BUSINESS
Ionia County Historical Society - Announcement of their Historical Homes Tour,
May 17-18, 1997.
Free Trees - Mr. & Mrs. Cool, owners of the property located at 1440 Haslett Rd
(03-15-200-004), have offered to donate trees from this property for the
Township Hall property. The trees are available to be moved at the Township’s
expense. Per Attorney Schultz, we would have to make sure that all Department
of Agriculture requirements are met and that the trees have been certified as
being healthy.
Keep Michigan Beautiful Request - Generally agreed to donate the $25 for
participation..
IRS Criminal Investigation Division - FOIA Request for Information. The list
they are asking for does not exist at the Township. Per Attorney Schultz, even
though Equalizer may be capable of creating the list, the Township is under no
obligation of running the report. It is advised that Clerk Graham draft a
letter denying the FOIA request and directing the IRS to the Ingham County
Equalization Department.
AA Township Hall Usage - Request for Additional Wednesday Night. A third night
is more than the Township can give them. The hall has to be available for
township residents to use. The Board decided that they have been more than
generous in allowing the group to use the building two nights a week at no
charge and that the third night would be an imposition that the Township is not
willing to accommodate.
Blight Complaint - 5301 N Zimmer Road - Old Barn in a Heap. Will send Constable
Dahlstrom to see what can be worked out to get the situation corrected.
Possibility of having the fire department do a training/controlled burn if the
EPA and Air Quality will allow it.
Constable's Report - Complaints already discussed.
Applications for a Parade Detour for the city of Williamston and closing
Sandstone for a children's day on June 21. Trustee Zaban moved that we approve
the requests. Supported by Trustee Wiegandt. Motion Passed. Pebblebrook
Homeowner’s Association road closure for Sandstone Drive on Saturday June 21,
1997 for a kid’s day parade and picnic; and the Red Cedar Jubilee Parade detour
on Zimmer Road to Sherwood Road and east to the Township Line on Saturday June
21, 1997.
Office Supplies - We are running out of space on the voter registration panel
and a new one would cost approximately $1500. We also need a fire proof two
drawer file. Clerk Graham moved to approve spending up to $2000 for the above
items. supported by Trustee Wiegandt. Motion Passed.
CONSENT AGENDA:
Clerk Graham moved, and Treasurer Nilsson supported: to acknowledge the
Treasurer's report of financial activities for April, 1997; approve the minutes
of the Regular Township Board meeting held April 1, 1997; and to authorize the
Clerk’s list of accounts payable on May 6, 1997 checks # 7974-8041 for a total
of $48,590.25. Supervisor Obst called for a Roll Call vote:
   Ayes:   Treasurer Nilsson, Trustee Zaban, Trustee Wiegandt, Supervisor Obst,
Clerk Graham.
   Nayes:   None.
Meeting Adjourned at 11:15 PM.
______________________________________      ____________________________________
Shirley Graham, Clerk               Susan Jennings, Recording Secretary
JUNE 3, 1997
The regular meeting of the WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP BOARD OF TRUSTEES was called
to order by Supervisor Obst on Tuesday June 3, 1997 at 7:36 PM. The Clerk was
asked to record who was present and if a quorum was present. Clerk Graham
stated a quorum was present and recorded the following: Supervisor Obst, Clerk
Graham, Treasurer Nilsson, Trustee Wiegandt, Trustee Zaban and Building
Inspector Aven.
The agenda was read over with the following additions: Proposal from Gordon
Plourde on ball field; Planning Commission meeting of the City of Williamston;
and communications on the city pool issue.
FIRE BOARD REPORT
No one present. Nothing to add to the written report. Accepted and filed.
ATTORNEY'S REPORT - Anne Skilton
Annexation petition - 30 days materials were submitted to the boundary
commission. No adjudication hearing date has been set. Will have seven days to
rebut the City's response.
Sewer litigation still ongoing. In process of general discovery.
Perkins has filed a complaint and motion to intervene as a plaintiff in our
suit against the City regarding the sewer issue. Hearing on this motion was
postponed due to a scheduling problem. Hearing has been reset for June 18th.
BUILDING DEPARTMENT - Walt Aven
Bonderenko issue - the mediation between builder and homeowner has been
resolved. The homeowner is satisfied. Activity is a little down from last year,
but still busy. Permits on houses down all over the state right now.
PLANNING COMMISSION REPORT - Mickey Martin
The Planning Commission Recommends approval of amendments to the Zoning
Ordinance regarding essential services and wireless communication facilities -
mono pole towers - to accommodate cellular phones and all other wireless
communications. Recommend acceptable areas with acceptable setbacks, fencing
and safety issues. The towers are coming. Weekly we receive communications on
this. Final draft is document dated February 26, 1997. Asking for approval for
revision to the zoning ordinance so that when a company requests a site we have
some standards and regulations. These standards will be incorporated into the
zoning ordinance so it is considered a revision. This revision will be added to
section 8.02, item X of the Zoning Ordinance. Trustee Wiegandt moved to approve
the revision of the Zoning Ordinance regarding essential services and wireless
communications, seconded by Treasurer Nilsson. Supervisor Obst called for a
Roll Call vote:
Ayes:   Trustee Zaban, Treasurer Nilsson, Trustee Wiegandt, Clerk Graham,
Supervisor Obst
Nayes:   None
Amendment has been adopted. Will become effective 7 days after publication. No
other actions required. Several things still on the docket - but nothing to be
voted on at this time.
Cherry Valle Proposed Plat Revisions & Clarifications - Mickey Martin.
Per the State Department of Consumer and Industry Services requirements, a
letter from the Township to the State is being requested that states the area
at the end of Sand Cherry Lane previously shown as a turnaround easement may be
changed to be a dedicated road right of way if approved by the Ingham County
Road Commission and that Lots 7 and 17 as adjusted meet the zoning ordinance
requirements. Per Dale Fulton in the final plat, the end of Sand Cherry Lane
was put in as an easement to the County Road Commission instead of a public
right of way to the County Road Commission. Treasurer Nilsson had a question on
the replatting of lot 13 of the old Cherry Ridge subdivision. Planning
Coordinator Martin stated that that process has been completed. A letter of
agreement from the property owner has been received that they will deed lot 13
over to lot 14 in compliance with the previous board instruction. The change
will be forwarded to the County. The paperwork is still being processed. The
difference between a dedicated right of way and an easement is that a dedicated
right of way cannot be revoked, an easement can be. Treasurer Nilsson moved to
direct the Township Supervisor to write a letter to the State of Michigan
stating that the Township concurs with the easement being changed to a
dedicated road right of way in as much as it concerns lots 7 and 17 that the
state requires, without changing our prior conditions of approval of the plat.
Supported by Trustee Wiegandt. The letter will be sent to Mr. Iverson of
Stephens Consulting Services. The motion passed unanimously.
ADVISORY COUNCIL - Rutgar Hoag
The Advisory Council’s Proposed Statement Of Purpose:
Williamstown Township Advisory Council Statement of Purpose
The purpose of the Williamstown Township Advisory Council is to provide advice
to the Williamstown Township Board of Trustees and to coordinate citizen
participation in Township affairs. The Advisory Council will, at the suggestion
of the Township Board or by its own initiative with the consent of the Township
Board, undertake the study of problems which may affect the long term health,
safety and welfare of Township residents. These problems may be those which
concern individuals, neighborhoods or the Township community as a whole.
In its regular course the Advisory Council, through its committee system, will
collect and analyze information to present to the Township Board. The Council’s
advice will be in the form of possible courses of action including an
assessment of the probable impacts of alternative decisions.
From time to time the Advisory Council will advise the Township Board on the
appointment of citizen volunteers to various Township Committees.
Treasurer Nilsson moved to accept the statement of purpose as submitted by the
Advisory Council. Supported by Trustee Wiegandt. Motion passed unanimously.
Transportation and Communications Committee - Suggestion to appoint Mr. Brian
Jennings as the acting chair of the Transportation and Communications Committee
and to appoint Mr. Jim Ballard to the committee. Treasurer Nilsson moved that
Brian Jennings be approved as acting chair of the Transportation and
Communications Committee; supported by Trustee Wiegandt. Approved unanimously.
Trustee Nilsson moved to appoint Mr. Ballard to the Transportation and
Communications Committee; supported by Trustee Wiegandt. Motion approved
unanimously.
Open Land Committee - The Advisory Council would like to request that the
Township Board appoint a committee to study the future of open land in the
Township. Proposed committee members are Dan Kraft (Chair), Ger Schultink,
Nancy Fink, Dwight Kampe, Chuck Cleland, Jerry Eidt, Mickey Martin and George
Petrides. The first meeting will be June 11. Mickey Martin estimates the
committee will meet for 9-12 months. Nancy Fink thinks it will possibly be less
based on the information already accumulated. Mr. Kraft will be delegating
different areas to different people; he will not be doing all the research
himself. There will be a member of the Advisory Council at the Board meetings
every month to keep the Board up to date on this and the other Committees'
activities. Committees will be abolished once they have achieved their purpose,
with the exception of a few Committees who would have ongoing responsibilities,
such as the Transportation and Communications Committee.
The Open Land Committee would be concerned with the following tasks:
1.   Conduct a survey to find out what is meant by the term “rural atmosphere”,
the degree to which open space is valued, what kinds of open spaces are desired
and what citizens are willing to sacrifice for “rural atmosphere” and open
space. The survey would also find out if citizens are willing to financially
support the acquisition of open space.
2.   Explore the various reasons for preserving open spaces such as ground
water recharge, conservation easements for the preservation of natural habitat,
recreation uses, preservation of farmland and other commercial uses of open
space, as well as the containment of residential development.
3.   Update the Township Master Plan in regard to open space by reviewing the
location and amount of existing open space and suggesting what portion of this
space should be preserved, for what purpose and how it would be maintained.
4.   Suggest the mechanisms for the preservation of open land such as
conservation and farm land trusts, purchasing of development rights and
associated issues. Among the latter are the ordinances, holding foundations and
funding which are necessary to maintain open space.
5.   As a result of this study the Advisory Council would from time to time
suggest various actions by the Township Board which would promote the
preservation of open space in the Township.
6.   Inventory if the current open space in the Township.
7.   Estimate of build up potential of open spaces.
8.   Soil analysis of current open spaces in the Township.
Treasurer Nilsson suggested that it would be a benefit to the community to make
educational efforts through the Township Newsletter, The Lansing State Journal
and the Enterprise to define the items that this committee would be
considering, different zoning methods, etc. Nancy Fink would like to see an
article in the next newsletter defining Local Easement Open Space and how it
might benefit our community. The committee will not need funding at this point.
If a survey is to be included in the newsletter, it will need to be to the
editors by mid July. Treasurer Nilsson moved to create an Open Land Committee
to study open land issues as listed above and to appoint the people suggested
by the Advisory Council to said committee. Supported by Trustee Wiegandt. The
motion was approved unanimously.
Supervisor Obst received a letter from Mr. Cox requesting to be appointed to
the Park And Recreation Committee because he lives directly across the river
from the park. Mr. Cox’s letter will be submitted to the Advisory Council for
action.
Clerk Graham will publish a notice that the Advisory Council will be meeting
the third Monday of every month. Meetings will be posted. The office secretary
should be notified of all subcommittee meeting dates, so that she can
effectively handle requests that come into the office about these open
meetings.
Katherine Lo had a question on the closed meeting between the City and the
Township. This meeting was an informational hearing only. Since no voting nor
deliberations took place it did not violate the open meetings act.
ASSESSORS REPORT - Norm Obst
The State Department of Treasury has identified 50,000 parcels where the
homestead exemption claim made by the owner has been rescinded by the owner
because they have moved or because the use of their property has changed. A
valid form must be submitted by the property owner. If these properties do not
have a homestead affidavit claim from the new owner (or are agricultural
property), the treasurer in possession of the tax roll (at this time that is
the County) will have to generate a bill for additional non-homestead taxes
due. There are approximately 50 parcels in this township that the State has
identified. Assessor Obst sent letters to the property owners involved in an
attempt to get the situation cleared up before a tax bill is sent. There has
been a lot of concerned response to date.
Zoning Board Of Appeals (ZBA) - Norm Obst
There are strong differences of opinion among Board members on how the they
should carry out their duty. Norm Obst wrote a letter to the Board of Trustees
and the Planning Commission asking for clarification on what the ZBA has the
authority to do. The Zoning Ordinance, in Supervisor Obst’s view, states two
different standards for allowing the ZBA to grant requested “non-use”
variances:
1.   ...by varying or modifying any of its rules or provisions so that the
spirit of this Ordinance is observed, public safety secured and substantial
justice done.
2.   ...only upon a finding that practical difficulties exist.
There is confusion among the Board of Appeals members as to whether both
standards need to be met before granting a variance, or if only one of them
needs to be met. Mr. Obst would like the Planning Commission to take a look at
this and provide some direction to the ZBA. Clerk Graham requested 60 days to
study the issue - Supervisor Obst suggested that even 90 days may be more
appropriate. The ZBA description was changed between the old Zoning Ordinance
and the New One, that is why this issue has come up at this time.
PUBLIC COMMENTS
Haslett Rd, Meridian Rd And The Proposed Secondary Commercial Network
Several citizens voiced concerns that the Ingham County Road Commission (ICRC)
had misled them and/or the Township Officials in regard to what construction
will actually be done on Haslett Road and funding of roads that are designated
as part of the State’s Secondary Commercial Network (SCN). They were Dr. Terry
Braden, Mr. David Doyle, Mr. David Nico, and Mr. Robert Kendall, Jr.
Concerns voiced were:
·One of the main objectives of the ICRC was to make Haslett a safer road to
travel. Belief was that taking out the hills would make the road faster, and
therefore not necessarily safer.
·Residents of Haslett Road were led to believe that construction was going to
be more minor than what they are now hearing will be done, especially with
Haslett being on the list of roads for the proposed SCN.
·Residents being told at the Tri-County Planning Commission that there was no
funding connected to a road being designated part of the SCN and the Township
having been told that roads not on the SCN will not be eligible for category D
funds from the State.
·Concerns over trees to be removed. ICRC taking property without condemnation
or compensation to the property owners. Belief that the ICRC is not necessarily
acting in an ethical manner. Request that the Township officials must document
and follow up on all issues to make sure the Board’s considerations are taken
care of.
Walt Aven, who lives on Haslett Road related his latest experience that
demonstrates a very serious safety issue with the current condition of the
road. Most recently he and his wife were traveling on the road and when they
came over the top of a hill there were two cars headed straight for them, one
in each lane. He swerved to miss the oncoming car and missed it by only a
couple of inches because he didn’t have far to swerve before he would have
landed in a ditch or hit a tree. He has also witnessed two fatal accidents in
front of his house on Haslett Road.
Concern About The Gun Club - Larry Hughes, 4292 Dobie Road
Mr. Hughes’ property backs up to the Gun Club. His children have told him about
shots being fired in the trees over their heads on several occasions while they
were playing at the back of their own property. On Saturday, April 26, 1997 Mr.
Hughes personally experienced this situation himself. He went over to the Gun
Club to check out the situation and found two cars there: a Ford with license
plate number XP9 943 with three kids between the ages of 14 and 19 shooting
pistols; and a Chevy with license plate number FAY 681 driven by two men who
said that they were leaving. Mr. Hughes suspects the shots on his property came
from the kids, but he has no proof one way or the other. He is concerned for
his family's safety. People who use the Gun Club need to be careful about where
they shoot. At the east Mr. Hughes’ property is higher than the Rifle Club's
property. This was not an isolated incident. His children have reported several
other times where they had a similar experience on their own property. His son
had it happen to him on April 2, 1997 at about 4:30. The Board agrees that this
is a very serious situation and they will follow up with the Gun Club.
OLD BUSINESS:
Ingham County Road Commission (ICRC) 1997 Road Improvements Agreement:
There was a question last month as to the developers cost and requirements.
Vince Somalia of the ICRC said the answers are in their blue book - it is the
developer’s responsibility. The Township has never paid for paving of a new
subdivision. There may be an 11% over all increase on the Rowley/Beeman road
project, but the developer is responsible for the $7900 that they put in escrow
to cover this road. A $2 per ton increase in the price of asphalt accounts for
the 11% increase.
A letter was received by the Township from Mr. and Mrs. David Wood of 4725 N.
Branch Road stating that they are in favor of paving Branch Road at any time.
Trustee Zaban moved that the agreement drawn up by the ICRC for 1997 road
improvements in Williamstown Township be signed by Supervisor Obst and Clerk
Graham. Supported by Trustee Wiegandt. Motion passed unanimously.
Trustee Zaban had a question on Haslett Road already being an All Season Road,
so isn’t changing it to a road in the SCN just a name change? Brian Jennings
stated that he believes there is state funding involved.
Park Surveys - Mickey Martin
As of June 2nd, 95 park surveys had been received by the Township. More were
received today. This is approximately 6% of the total number of surveys that
were sent with the Spring Newsletter. The national average for direct mail
surveys is only 3-4%. Based on this, the Park Committee is very happy with the
response.
The preliminary results so far are between 80 and 90 % positive toward the
park. 3 that are totally unhappy about the park - upset that the Township
bought the property. 75% were willing to support it financially. The responses
are more in favor of non-sporting uses for the park - picnics, family reunions,
canoeing, having an open area there. Least was for sporting activities. A
variety of age groups and family situations responded.
Township Sidewalk Ordinance - Brian Jennings
Recommendations were previously made to the Board from the Transportation
committee. The Board sent these recommendations to the Township Attorney for
review. Somewhere near this point in the process the Sidewalk Ordinance was
lost in the cracks. Mr. Jennings will resubmit the Transportation Committee’s
original recommendations.
City Pool
The pool will be open this year, and may still be reopened next year, depending
on the progress of construction of the new pool at the High School. Treasurer
Nilsson commented that she does not feel comfortable with reimbursing Township
residents the difference between the city rates and the non-participating
rates. She would like to see the Township be a participating entity, but feels
that the $4,400 the City is requesting is too high. She would like to propose
to the City that the Township put in $1,000 towards the pool. Trustee Wiegandt
stated that we have tried to do that in the past and the City has refused our
proposals. He believes we should reimburse the difference. Trustee Zaban stated
that he would not agree to the City’s request for $4,400. The City set those
rates without any consultation with the neighboring Townships. Treasurer
Nilsson had the board read her proposed response to the City. Mickey Martin
stated that things for kids to do are being eliminated all the time. She would
much rather see the residents that use the pool be reimbursed than to not do
anything. Last years reimbursement program only cost the Township approximately
$300.
Clerk Graham moved that the Township be non-participating in the pool and that
receipts be saved and sent to the township between Sep. 15 and Oct. 15 for
reimbursement of 100% of the difference between the City rate and the non-
participating rate. Supported by Trustee Zaban. Motion passed unanimously.
Because the next Township Newsletter will not be published until August an
article will be written for the Enterprise that the Township will reimburse the
difference between the City rates and the non-participating rates.
            City Rate      Non-Participating   Reimbursement
Open Swim; Child     $1.75          $4.25          $2.50
Open Swim; Adult       $2.25          $5.00          $2.75
Family Discount Card       $35.00 / 30 Swims   $60.00 / 20 Swims    $36.60
             ($1.17 per Swim)   ($3.00 per Swim)    ($1.83 per Swim)
Lessons
First Family Member       $28.00         $40.00          $12.00
Additional Family Members       $22.40         $32.00          $9.60
Uninterruptable Power Supplies (UPS) - Brian Jennings
Mr. Jennings was asked to review the proposal from Central Michigan Consulting
for purchasing UPS’s for the three computer workstations in the Township Office
that do not have them. Mr. Jennings stated that in his experience, which has
been primarily with much larger networks than what the Township currently has,
UPS units have only been installed on the servers. He suggested that people
should be careful to save their work frequently. Flickering of power here is
frequent and hard on the computers.
IRS Criminal Investigation - Internal Revenue Service Special Agent Gary
Patterson
State commission suggested he come back and ask for SEV's which are public
instead of sale prices which are confidential. This is currently not a Freedom
of Information Act (FOIA) request, but the request could be written as such.
Supervisor Obst will respond that the Board feels it would be inappropriate to
generate this type of information for a private individual or another
government entity, but that you are welcome to come in and look at our records.
Traverse Bay Land Company - Wireless Communications. - Solicitation for
business. The Township need not, and will not, respond.
One Way Asphalt Paving & Excavating - Circle Driveway Repair Bid - Price is
fair per Trustee Wiegandt and Building Inspector Aven. Trustee Zaban moved that
we accept this bid of $3595 for repairing the circle driveway from the mail box
to the other end of the circle at the Township Hall. Supported by Treasurer
Nilsson. Motion passed unanimously.
Michigan Township Association (MTA) - Request for Township officials to
consider running for the State House of Representatives. There were no takers.
Constable’s Report - Howard Dahlstrom
Report read and accepted by the board. Discussion followed on several of the
complaints with Board and/or Building Inspector action required on the
following:
2165 Mitchell - Fence not only violates Zoning Ordinance, but is also in
building code violation. Any fence over 6 feet must have a building permit.
Building Inspector to follow up on this.
6975 Foster - Long term remodeling project. Construction materials in yard and
house viewed as possible hazard. Supervisor Obst and Building Inspector Aven
will visit the site.
4115 Vanneter - Complaint regarding geese and ducks kept on the property.
Property owner contesting complaint, saying that they are pets and are not
causing an offensive situation. Supervisor Obst will visit the site.
Request For Exclusive Use Of Township Baseball Field - Gordon Plourde
The Township will respond that we do not have a means of policing the use of
the field and do not get involved in scheduling the use of the field. Ball
field must be available for the use of all Township residents.
CONSENT AGENDA
Mickey Martin, acting on behalf of Nancy Fink who had to leave earlier,
requested a change in the third paragraph from the bottom of page one of the
minutes to read “Other citizens voicing statements....” Trustee Wiegandt moved
to approve the minutes of the Regular Township Board meeting held May 6, 1997
as amended above; to acknowledge the Treasurer’s report of financial activities
for May, 1997; and to authorize the Clerk’s list of accounts payable on June 3,
1997 checks # 8042-8099 for a total of $32,224.29. Motion was supported by
Clerk Graham. Supervisor Obst called for a Roll Call Vote:
Ayes:   Trustee Zaban, Trustee Wiegandt, Treasurer Nilsson, Clerk Graham,
Supervisor Obst
Nayes:   None.
Motion carried.
Katherine Lo had several questions for the board:
·Question on the budget projecting deficit spending. Supervisor Obst assured
her that the Township will not go into debt. We have an accumulated surplus.
Clerk Graham added that when we budget we minimize revenues and maximize
expenditures to forecast a worst case scenario.
·Freedom of Information Act - A citizen can just come into the office with an
FOIA request. They do not necessarily have to put it in writing. According to a
new law, a formal FOIA request must be in writing.
·Also question about the closed session the Board had in their special meeting
of March 18. The purpose of the meeting being closed was to discuss settlement
strategies with the Township’s attorney regarding the pending litigation
against the City of Williamston and for the reason that such discussion in an
open meeting could be financially detrimental to the Township in the final
settlement.
MEETING ADJOURNED AT 10:53 PM.
_____________________________________      _________________________________
Shirley Graham, Township Clerk         Susan Jennings, Recording Secretary
JULY 1, 1997
Presentation by Ellen Ney, Groundwater Program Director, Ingham Conservation
District.
The regular meeting of the WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP BOARD OF TRUSTEES was called
to order by Supervisor Obst on Tuesday July 1, 1997 at 7:56 PM. The Clerk was
asked to record who was present and if a quorum was present. Clerk Graham
stated a quorum was present and recorded the following: Supervisor Obst, Clerk
Graham, Treasurer Nilsson, Trustee Wiegandt, Trustee Zaban and Building
Inspector Aven.
The agenda was read over with the following additions: New Business - Gypsy
moth problem and the possibility of the office secretary becoming a notary.
FIRE BOARD REPORT - Walter Keilholtz
Trustee Zaban asked how much of the property around the fire station is owned
by Mr. Cox. Clerk Graham stated that he owns the house directly to the north of
the fire station and the next house over from there which fronts onto High St.
He is making improvements to these houses. The Fire Board is still researching
options for expanding their facilities.
ATTORNEY'S REPORT - Anne Skilton
Received a letter regarding the possibility of setting up a Fire Board
Authority to have one source available for assessing a millage to fund the
facility expansion instead of going to the three communities individually.
Hide-Away Woods has been given the OK from the Court to intervene in the
lawsuit with the Township as a plaintiff against the City.
BUILDING INSPECTOR REPORT - Walter Aven
51 new homes built last year. 15 to date this year.
PLANNING COMMISSION - Mickey Martin
Airports - The Planning Commission recommends with regulations approval of the
revisions to the Zoning Ordinance which allows landing strips and airports for
the safety of all residents. Clerk Graham moved that we approve and adopt the
recommended changes to the zoning ordinance per the Planning Commission minutes
of May 27. Supported by Trustee Wiegandt. Motion passed unanimously.
Proposed Pub and Grill/Office Center from Spagnulo's Enterprises. Spagnulo’s
needs a Special Land Use Permit for the offices and the pub and grill. The
Planning Commission recommends approval of the permit with the restrictions
stated in the Planning Commission Meeting Minutes of June 17, 1997 The permit
is to be granted for one year to begin when the restaurant opens with a
projected date of October. Detroit Edison will be providing lighting that will
shine directly on the lot and will not spill over into the neighborhood. The
Planning Commission will hold another public meeting at the end of one year to
renew the Special Land Use Permit indefinitely or for a specified time again.
No fee will be assessed to Spagnulo's for this review, since it is a condition
of the board. Clerk Graham moved that we approve the land use permit for the
pub and grill at 1268 E. Grand River Road with the stipulations provided by the
Planning Commission for one year once the restaurant opens to be up for review
with no fee at that the end of a year to be extended indefinitely at that time
or to have the permit extended for another year to be up for review again at
that time. Supported by Trustee Wiegandt. The Township is responsible to notify
Spagnulos and hold a public meeting in a timely manner so that the permit can
be renewed on time. Motion passed unanimously.
Larkin Country Side Acres - Tentative Preliminary Plat approval. The Planning
Commission recommends approval with conditions as stated in the minutes of the
July 17, 1997 Planning Commission Meeting. Commissioner Kraft mentioned a
situation where a basement could not be dug on a lot due to groundwater
problems and thought this was another site where such a problem could occur
because of the poor soils. Attorney Skilton did not think that the ruling in
that case would be applicable here. She stated that due to the Governmental
Immunity Rule the Township would not be liable in such a case, only the
developer would be liable. Additional trees may need to be planted along the
rail road tracks. That area is fairly densely populated with plants already.
This was a concern of Supervisor Obst. Planner Martin stated that it was early
in the process, and further discussion of this type of concern would be
appropriate in future stages of the process. This is the Tentative Preliminary
Plat. Those types of issues will come up for discussion in the Planning
Commission before approval of the Preliminary Plat. At this time we are just
looking for approval of the basic layout of the subdivision. Clerk Graham moved
that the Township Board grant approval for the Tentative Preliminary Plat with
the 5 conditions specified by the Planning Commission in their minutes of June
17, 1997. Supported by Trustee Zaban. Question from the Board on the reasons
behind Planning Commissioner’s Fink dissenting vote. Commissioner Fink stated
her vote was because the zoning was not recommended by the Planning Commission
and she still does not believe that the subdivision should be approved at this
density. Motion passed unanimously.
Steeplechase - Formerly Mr. Bruner's property on Zimmer Rd. The Planning
Commission recommends Tentative Preliminary Plat approval with conditions as
stated in the Planning Commission Meeting minutes of June 17, 1997. The lots
are clustered on a smaller area with 50% open space. Detailed landscaping has
to be submitted before Final Preliminary Plat approval. Ownership name on the
plat has to be corrected. Approval subject to the necessary agencies.
Clarification of the lot layout and where there would be problems with on site
water disposal. The water map and the lot layout map show slightly different
areas, so it is misleading in that some of the lots appear to be in the
unbuildable area. Differences were clarified. Also strongly supported that a
deceleration lane not be put in - people would tend to use it (illegally) as a
passing lane. Street Lighting not recommended for this subdivision. There will
be a Homeowners Association with very restrictive covenants, particularly
regarding the use/non-use of the common open areas. The developer proposed
waving the 25 year right to change the use of the open space and also may allow
a conservation easement of the river front area. Sufficient guarantees to the
Township that the open space will remain that way in perpetuity. The Homeowners
will be assessed a small fee for maintenance of the walkway and entrance sign.
Trustee Wiegandt moved that the Township Board approve the Tentative
Preliminary Plat with the conditions specified by the planning commission.
supported by Trustee Zaban. Motion passed unanimously.
ADVISORY COUNCIL REPORT - Rutgar Hoag
Report submitted. Additions to the written report:
Park Committee - May Newsletter included a questionnaire on park use. The
committee received back about 100 of them. The first 75 have been compiled, the
committee just received the other 25 in the past 3 days. The committee has
tentative plans to meet with the Williamston Schools, Red Cedar Rec. and the
City of Williamston to see what they have in mind as recreation needs for the
general area and to get representatives from each of these organizations. The
Council hopes to have a recommendation for the Board in about 5 weeks. The
Committee would like to develop a contact with the Landscape Architecture
Department of Michigan State University and get some students involved with
this. They would not be available until the fall term. A recommendation for the
Board should be available at the end of the first semester. It would cost
nothing to use the students. It would cost about $10,000 to use a professional
architect.
Public Input on the park: Katherine Lo does not want the input from the other
organizations. She is of the belief that it is a Township park and the Township
should decide how it should be used.
Trustee Zaban stated that the city is complaining that Township residents put
undue stress on their parks and services and it would be a good gesture on the
part of the Township to consider the other area organizations’ needs for a
park.
Agriculture Committee - Mr. Herner has agreed to chair the Agriculture
Committee. Discussion of procedures for appointing people to committees. Clerk
Graham moved to approve the recommended appointment of Mr. Herner. Supported by
Treasurer Nilsson. Motion approved.
Open Lands Committee - Meeting is July 22. Some feeling that as diverse of a
community as we are it is recommended that we look at what direction we are
going Joe Lessard from the Ingham County Extension Office is coming out to the
meeting on the 22nd.
Break at 9:15.
Meeting reconvened at 9:25.
ASSESSOR'S REPORT - Norman Obst
Cherry-Valle is on the assessment roll. Report from the state, 10% increase of
residential assessed values. The sale of a home in Woodview one year after the
initial homeowners moved in showed a 6.2% increase in value.
BOARD OF APPEALS - Norman Obst
Meetings with Judge Giddings tentatively set for July 16th at 7:30 PM. Possible
addition of two more items.
City Of Williamston Council Minutes - accepted.
OLD BUSINESS
Township Sidewalk Ordinance - Flaws in the numbering system. Send back to the
committee to get it straightened out. Context is fine. Would like it to come
back at the next meeting with the numbering system revised so that it matches
our ordinance numbering instead of Meridian Township’s. Also delete the first
line of text.
Swimming Pool Reimbursement For The Swim Team.
No one could establish how Red Cedar Rec. established pool fees except that
they were based on last year's fees. Mr. Barrett will have information specific
to how those fees were set. Will report back next meeting.
Park Land Rental Agreement - Farm Lease for 1997 season.
Clerk Graham wrote a letter to the Hitchcock's and spoke to Mrs. Karen
Hitchcock. Have not heard back from Jean Powers. Note back was dated 5/20. They
do have the intentions of paying. Money should be coming in December 15, 1997 -
$2156.25.
Response to Special Agent Patterson. Welcome to come up and gather the
information himself.
NEW BUSINESS
Dwight Kampe - Called to Mason - have not been able to reach him. Suggested he
sell whatever land he didn't want to the Steeple Chase Subdivision. Section
line copy of 1948 plat map followed the River. At some point after that the
county put in a straight line section line. Ingham County is not going to make
the determination. Clerk Graham moved that the Township accept the Red Cedar
River as the Section Line as it was in the 1948 Survey. South of the River goes
with the Subdivision and North of the River goes to the Kampe property.
Attorney does not know if the Township has the authority to determine this
boundary. The Boundary Commission goes to the Office of the Great Seal to make
such determinations. Motion withdrawn. Agreed that the Office of the Great Seal
would be a good place to start.
Horizon Cablevision - Fees for Basic Service will be increased in next month’s
billing.
Ingham County Chapter of MTA - Meeting notice for July 16th at 6:30 PM.
Ingham County Road Commission - Mr. Cimala said that they want to bring it to
the Township’s attention that with the State’s new land division act that if
you have 40 or 80 acres you can run in a straight road to a cul-de-sac and your
neighbor can do the same. They would like to see better planning when it comes
to this type of thing. Plan for better networking of the road connections. The
Township would have to make this change in the land division ordinance. The new
act allows a lot of splits without platting a subdivision. The Planning
Commission will contact Mr. Cimala and Chris Doozen.
Secondary Commercial Network - Ingham County Road Commission (ICRC) was asked
if they intended to make any roads in our area 4 lanes. The only 4 lane plan is
for Williamston Road from the I-96 interchange to Linn Road. The City of
Williamston has proposed making Linn a County Road so that the traffic can dump
there and ultimately onto Zimmer Road. Clerk Graham has serious objections to
putting the traffic onto Zimmer. The Township will express its concerns in a
letter to Mr. Cimala of the ICRC and will also request further clarification of
what will be happening on Williamston Road at the I-96 interchange.
Soccer Week - Dave Grunwald from the Red Cedar Rec. called the Township to see
if they could use the ball field for their soccer week scheduled July 14-18.
They were originally going to hold it at the schools, but due to construction
they are not able to use those facilities. Clerk Graham told Mr. Grunwald that
they were welcome to use the field, but that we cannot reserve it. However,
office staff have not noticed much activity on the field between 10:00 and 1:
30, so there should not be a problem. All the Township asks is that the
participants try to stay out of the building during their event.
Newsletter - All entries should be submitted by 10:00 AM Friday July 18th.
Gypsy Moths - Cindy Winter from Pebblebrook (president of the homeowners’
association). Residents of one house cannot sit on their deck because of the
severe infestation. Other neighbors also have severe infestation. Have wrapped
the trees, scraping, etc., but have not had any luck. A lot of people are
complaining this year about the moths. The Township will look into spraying for
next year. The sprays kill all the butterflies and caterpillars, not just the
gypsy moths. Some viruses and fungi do seem to just kill off the gypsy moths.
Mrs. Winter was asked to go back to the residents of Pebble Brook and get their
opinion on funding options for spraying next year. Clerk Graham suggested a
survey in this quarter's newsletter to see what areas are involved and if
people would be willing to pay a small assessment for Township wide spraying.
Too late this year to do anything. Spraying needs to be done in late May,
depending on the season/weather. Can kill the individual bugs this year, but
you need to spray before they come. The Board realized it was too late to get
an assessment on the ballot this year for spraying, so will put an item in the
newsletter asking if the spraying was done if people would be willing to
voluntarily pay a small fee for it.
Notary Public - Agreed to the $100 expense for Carol Lowe, the office
secretary, to become a notary.
NAT&T - Annual Meeting In Washington, D.C. - disappointment in the past
compared to the state meeting in Detroit. No one attending from the Township
this year.
Following Up On Last Month’s Constable Report
Need to follow up on Mr. Hughes’ complaint against the gun club.
Property owner of 6975 Foster will provide a time table to the township as to
when the brush pile and other outside debris will be cleaned up.
Meridian Township - July 12 10-2 open house for new fire station in Meridian.
Thank-You Note received from the Wiegandts for the flowers sent to Olive
Wiegandt’s funeral.
CONSENT AGENDA
Trustee Zaban moved to approve the minutes of the Regular Township Board
Meeting held June 3, 1997; to acknowledge the Treasurer’s report of financial
activities for June, 1997; and to authorize the Clerk’s list of accounts
payable on July 1, 1997 checks # 8100-8160 for a total of $45,365.72. Motion
was supported by Clerk Graham. Supervisor Obst called for a roll call vote:
   Ayes:   Supervisor Obst, Clerk Graham, Treasurer Nilsson, Trustee Wiegandt,
Trustee Zaban
   Nayes:   None
MEETING ADJOURNED AT 10:30 PM.
_____________________________________      ____________________________________
Shirley Graham, Clerk               Susan Jennings, Recording Secretary
AUGUST 12, 1997
The regular meeting of the WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP BOARD OF TRUSTEES was called
to order by Supervisor Obst on Tuesday August 12, 1997 at 7:35 PM. The Clerk
was asked to record who was present and if a quorum was present. Clerk Graham
stated a quorum was present and recorded the following: Supervisor Obst, Clerk
Graham, Treasurer Nilsson, Trustee Wiegandt, Trustee Zaban and Building
Inspector Aven.
The agenda was read over with the following additions: reimbursement for the
swim team. Pines Office Park. The Rifle Club.
PUBLIC COMMENTS
Auditor’s Report - Mr. Michael T. Gaffney
Submitted the report from the audit of financial statements and went over some
of the highlights. On page 1 of the Audit Report the Township received an
unqualified and clean opinion. This is the best rating you can get. The General
Fund detailed statement starts on page 22 with the General Fund Statement of
Revenues. On page 23 the Total Revenues in the General Fund for 1997 were
$819,000, compared to $472,000 for 1996. The difference is mostly due to the
DNR Grant for purchase of the park land. On page 27 the Total Expenditures were
$927,000. This is an Increase of approximately $500,000 over the 1996 figures
mostly due to purchase of the park land for $400,000. Some of the other areas
that accounted for the increase were Legal fees up $17,000; Building Inspection
fees were also up. Bottom line on page 27 was that expenditures exceeded
revenues by $107,000. The ending fund balance is $855,000. The Township is in
good solid financial condition. There are no cash flow problems.
Also submitted was a Highlight Report of Internal Control Structure. This
report contains comments related to the accounting systems. Two areas that were
commented on can be found on the 2nd page of the letter: 1) The budgeting
process of the DNR Grant - the Township only budgeted the net cost of the park
land rather than the gross revenue and expenditure (i.e. did not include the
grant in the budget); and 2) Accounting for escrow activities. The Township
changed the policy for plat fees that are being collected. We are now tracking
the amount collected vs. the amount actually used. However, there was not
sufficient information being maintained to track the expenditures correctly.
The systems are operating efficiently and effectively.
Trustee Wiegandt commented that he enjoyed reading the report. It was put
together in a very clear and easy to read format. Treasurer Nilsson questioned
if the Escrow accounts in question were the Planning Department’s accounts.
Planning Coordinator Martin stated that the auditor had been given hand written
accounts which admittedly were not sufficient. Computer records were kept that
are more complete, it was just an oversight that these were not made available
to the auditor. The situation has been discussed with the auditor who was here
and it has been determined that the Township actually does have a sufficient
recording of the hours and other expenses associated with the escrow accounts
and that these computer records will be made available at the time of the audit
in the future to be balanced out as of March 31st every year.
FIRE BOARD REPORT - Harold Powell
Other than everyday housekeeping the board is just studying the facilities
issue at this point. Other than the current location there appears to be only
one other location in Williamston on the water line that would be available.
This site is on Corwin Road one lot off of Grand River on the City side. There
are other properties possibly available at the present location. Everything is
still very tentative. Supervisor Obst stated that he received a call from a
Township resident who suggested that no other equipment is required except for
possibly Tankers. Mr. Powell responded that the Fire Department should have a
ladder wagon or snorkel gun to get to the top of some of the newer buildings in
the area. Trustee Wiegandt stated that the department had been talking about
new equipment for over a year. One truck is over 30 years old and another one
is over 20 years. They both currently function well, but parts are not readily
available for them. They need to be replaced with updated equipment so that if
something does go wrong we are not caught without spare parts to fix the trucks
quickly. The biggest concern is that we need to update/replace some of the
older equipment rather than adding anything else. Outside of the light truck we
are not asking for any more units, just updating some old equipment. Supervisor
Obst suggested that this would be a good topic for the next Township
newsletter.
ATTORNEY'S REPORT - Anne Skilton
Discovery continues in the litigation with the City. The City was required to
respond within 28 days and they did not do so. The Township has filed a motion
to compel in the sewer litigation. There is a hearing scheduled for August 28th
with the Judge on this motion. Supervisor Obst stated that the City has
suggested that they would like to resolve the sewer issues involving Hide-Away
Woods to reduce the court costs. 50 lots are the maximum that Hide-Away Woods
is requesting. The Township Board has told Hide-Away Woods that even if they
built a lift station, capacity would only be provided on an as needed basis,
that we could not reserve all 50 units ahead of time. That would possibly be
unfair to other developments in the Township that were seeking water and sewer
capacity. The current plat for phase 4 of Hide-Away Woods has 14 lots. The
Township has only approved sewer capacity usage for these 14 lots.
BUILDING INSPECTOR REPORT - Walter Aven
Mr. Aven has attended 152 hours of furthering education. Total house permits
are still down from last year. Total permits are going to be up. Busy as usual.
Report placed on file.
PLANNING COMMISSION REPORT - Mickey Martin
The Planning Commission is seeking a Board Vote on Mr. Tom Johnson’s, of Barton
Road, request for a Special Land Use Permit for an accessory building to exceed
the 2400 sq. foot maximum. The Planning Commission recommended approval without
any conditions. Neighbors were in favor, there was no opposition voiced. The
accessory building would house his antique cars. Trustee Wiegandt moved that
the Township Board approve the Special Land Use Permit. Seconded by Treasurer
Nilsson. Motion passed unanimously.
Want to modify the fee schedule for the Escrow accounts. The new fee schedule
includes the grading permits because the grading regulations must be
established by resolution of the Township Board. The Building Inspector
currently figures the amount. The other change is the separation of commercial
fees from residential fees. Building Inspector Aven said there should be no fee
for the 50 cubic yards or less because no permit is required in that case.
Clerk Graham motioned to adopt the fee schedule effective August 12th striking
the 50 cubic yards or less fee. Seconded by Trustee Wiegandt. Motion passed
unanimously.
ADVISORY COUNCIL REPORT - Rud Hoag
Supervisor Obst received a letter and Phone call from Gove Associates, Inc.
recommending update of the recreation plan. Mrs. Mickey Martin also received a
call from them. Supervisor Obst wanted to pass this information on to the park
sub-committee.
1.   Recommend appointment of Mr. John McLaughlin to the Transportation
committee - so moved by Clerk Graham; seconded by Trustee Wiegandt. Motion
approved unanimously.
2.   Nancy Fink - will arrange for Tom Ellis, a Gypsy Moth expert, to give a
presentation to interested residents sometime after November 1 that will be
advertised in the November Township Newsletter. Supervisor Obst has the names
of several residents who are very interested in this topic and they will also
be sent personal invitations to this presentation and discussion. A possible
committee to study the issue and plan of action for the Township to follow will
be formed following this presentation.
3.   Mike Nestell - Chair of the Park Subcommittee presented a conceptual map
for the proposed park. The park will possibly include a walk way along the
River a few feet above high water marks; a canoe launch at an appropriate spot
according to the bank of the river, and as close as possible to the parking
area; a water supply near and around the ball fields and picnic pavilions; a
building for rest rooms, storage, and a small concession. Jim Crumb, a turf
management expert, is more than willing to work with the committee on the park.
As suggested by acting chair of the Transportation Committee, Brian Jennings,
traffic use will also be studied. There are rough estimates of number of cars
attending various events provided on the map. Concept idea on how it would be
laid out. MSU students will work on the actual site plan lay out. Prof. Paul
Nieratko will have two or three grad students take this on as a fall semester
project. They will need to see soil sample maps, planning documentation, will
work on site, etc. If approved by the Board this project will be turned over to
the Professor and his students by next week for them to work on. Questions on
If there is a building who is liable, does it need to be policed? Will check
with the property owner who is surrounded by the park to see that if there is a
gate, would they be willing to open and close the gate, etc.? Have not
discussed this with them yet. Sheriff's department does offer these type of
services as well on their regular rounds. This was 3-4 years ago, might check
to see if this is still available. Treasurer Nilsson moved that the plan as
presented be approved as a general concept of what we want the park to look
like and turn it over to the class to work on details of several proposed site
plans. Supported by Trustee Zaban. Supervisor Obst brought up the idea in our
applying for funding, if anyone thought of the possibility of a band shell?
Hadn't been thought of before, but was received well by people present at the
meeting. Class will be walking the site August 26th and 28th. Another
suggestion was to make sure parking is expandable. Clerk Graham would like the
playground more centrally located so that little kids don't wander off into the
natural areas unsupervised. No hunting allowed. Accepted as a friendly
amendment to the motion to accept the band shell. Motion passed unanimously.
4.   Intergovernmental Affairs Committee - Meeting of the area planning
commission chairs. - Nancy Fink filled in for Mickey Martin. Should have a
workshop with the Planning Commissions and the Township Boards to discuss
issues of mutual interest and concern. Would like to hold it at the
Williamstown Township Hall. If everyone agrees to this, Bob Reed will arrange
the meeting. Feel it is best to have meetings on specific topics as a group.
Their idea was if we are going to grow, then we should grow together and
support each other. Look at things regionally to get a big picture. Treasurer
Nilsson supports the idea of all the townships getting together. Wheatfield,
Locke, Leroy and Williamstown Townships are the entities involved. Trustee
Zaban moved that we plan the meetings with the other three townships to be held
at this facility. Supported by Trustee Wiegandt. Motion passed unanimously.
5.   Sidewalk Ordinance - Clerk Graham suggested that Supervisor Obst write a
letter to the property owner/builder that the sidewalk was in A-1 condition
before the construction of the driveway on Vanneter Rd, that the construction
trucks broke it up and that the property owner/builder be advised that the
sidewalk needs to be fixed and please advise the board as to the plan to have
it corrected. Trustee Wiegandt moved that we hold a public hearing at the
September 2nd meeting for the Sidewalk Ordinance - Article 30. Clerk Graham
seconded. Motion passed unanimously.
6.   August 27th Brian Jennings will be chairing a public meeting at 8:00 PM
with the Michigan Department of Transportation, Ingham County Road Commission,
United States Post Office, State Police, and Ingham County Sheriff’s Department
to determine what needs to be done at the intersection of Grand River and
Zimmer Roads. The objective of the meeting is to determine how to come up with
a plan of action for the intersection and determine all possible options.
Though this is a public meeting, comments from the general public will be
limited so as to make the most effective use of the time of the experts
assembled.
Next meeting of the Advisory Council is September 15th.
ASSESSORS REPORT - Norman Obst
Board of Appeals - another meeting was held Wednesday, August 14th to work on
the criteria of the Board of Appeals. Treasurer Nilsson suggested to include
the size of the property in the minutes for the Board of Appeals.
OLD BUSINESS
Ingham County Road Commission - tentatively scheduled to attend the Township
Board meeting of 9/2/97 with the Haslett Road Plans. Clerk Graham has a copy of
the tentative preliminary plans from the architect available for public
viewing.
Pine Office Park - Mickey Martin
Site Plan was approved in 1996 and will expire soon. They have asked for an
extension of another 12 months. There have been no changes in the area that
would affect the site plan. The Board has the option to send it back to the
Planning Commission, but the Chair and Consultant don’t feel that this is
necessary. So moved by Clerk Graham to approve the extension. Supported by
Trustee Wiegandt. Approved unanimously. Building Inspector Aven commented that
there is an Off Site sign that does not have a permit, requests that it be
removed or applied for a permit. Planning Coordinator Martin will check it out.
They either need to get a permit or it is an illegal sign, in either case it
needs to be followed up on before any building permits will be issued.
Swimming Pool Reimbursement For The Swim Team - Chris Nilsson
Treasurer Nilsson talked to Tom Barrett from the Red Cedar Rec. Township
residents were charged $20 more than City residents and $15 less than other Red
Cedar Rec. non-participating Townships. Mr. Barrett recognized that the Red
Cedar Rec. made an error. The City was not involved with the charges. Their
next meeting is not until September 3rd. Apologized that it took so long to
follow up on this. Mr. Barrett still hopes to have something to the Township
Board by our September meeting. Mr. Barrett realizes they made an error and
believes it will be rectified.
NEW BUSINESS
Abraham & Gaffney Proposal To Correct Software Problems. Treasurer Nilsson
moved to accept the Abraham & Gaffney proposal to assist in getting Fund
Balance set up correctly as proposed in their July 29th letter. Supported by
Trustee Zaban. Motion passed unanimously.
COMPLAINTS - Written report submitted by Constable Howard Dahlstrom
Concrete Dumping On Aker Property. Constable posted it, but has not talked to
anyone yet - there was no one there. Need to write a letter to Mr. Aker. Need
to follow through on the purpose of the concrete that was dumped.
Audit Of Cemetery Board Received - discussed the cemetery loitering. Both the
city and sheriff's department will be making periodic sweeps through the
cemeteries to resolve the situations.
McNitt - Storage of recreational vehicles other than the property owner's are
not allowed. If they are all his, then there is no legal problem. Will be
investigated.
Election Update - The August Library Election cost the Township about $8.00 a
vote.
CONSENT AGENDA
Modifications to the minutes of the July 1, 1997 Board Meeting: Attorney's
Report on page 1 - replace given the OK from the City of Williamston to given
the OK from Court. Page 1 - replace Plaintive with Plaintiff. Add Motion passes
and change review to renew. under the proposed pub and grill on page 1. Page 3
- remove spray and replace with virus and fungi in the Gypsy Moth report. Page
2 - Lessard not Lassard.
Clerk Graham moved and seconded by Trustee Wiegandt to approve the minutes of
the Regular Township Board Meeting held July 1, 1997 with the above changes; to
acknowledge the Treasurer’s report of financial activities for July, 1997; and
to authorize the Clerk’s list of accounts payable on August 12, 1997, checks
#8161-8249 for a total of $74,277.34. Supervisor Obst called for a roll call
vote:
   Ayes:   Supervisor Obst, Clerk Graham, Treasurer Nilsson, Trustee Wiegandt,
Trustee Zaban
   Nayes:   None
Meeting Adjourned At 10:31 PM.
_____________________________________   ________________________________________
Shirley Graham, Clerk            Susan Jennings, Recording Secretary
SEPTEMBER 2, 1997
The regular meeting of the WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP BOARD OF TRUSTEES was called
to order by Supervisor Obst on Tuesday September 2, 1997 at 7:38 PM. The Clerk
was asked to record who was present and if a quorum was present. Clerk Graham
stated a quorum was present and recorded the following: Supervisor Obst, Clerk
Graham, Treasurer Nilsson, Trustee Wiegandt, Trustee Zaban and Building
Inspector Aven.
The agenda was read over with the following addition: Septic System
requirements.
OLD BUSINESS
Red Cedar Rec. Swim Team Reimbursement - Tom Barrett
Mr. Barrett stated that the Red Cedar Rec. Board would discuss the Swim Team
reimbursement issue at their meeting on Sept. 3rd in an effort to come up with
an equitable solution to the problem of residents of Williamstown Township
being charged more to participate on the swim team than residents of other
participating municipalities. The Township provides $15.00 per child registered
in all Red Cedar Rec. activities. This money is used for year round
programming, not specifically for the swim team. Williamstown Township, the
City of Williamston and Locke Township all contribute $15 per participant. No
other municipalities are contributing at this time. Mr. Barrett acknowledged
that there was an inequity in the fees that were charged. Williamstown Township
residents paid more this year to be on the swim team than they did last year.
All other municipalities paid the same fee as last year. There is a $300
surplus in the swim team’s budget this year. There were 40 Township residents
on the swim team this year. The $300 surplus does not include the $15 per
participant being paid from the Township. The Township Board will wait until
the October meeting to make a final decision on reimbursement after the Red
Cedar Rec. makes their decision.
PUBLIC COMMENTS
Haslett Road Project - Robert D’Alcorn, Ingham County Road Commission (ICRC)
The Township has received a revised set of plans from the ones received earlier
in the year. The ICRC tried to save more trees and disrupt less area. Changed
overall width of the shoulder where it was possible. The Michigan Department of
Transportation (MDOT) wants a 6 foot shoulder, but they will allow a 5 foot
wide shoulder where trees are involved. Ditches changed from 2.5 feet to 1.5
feet. Slopes changed from 1 on 4s to 1 on 3s. Curb and Gutter will be put in
where there are major cuts (2 feet or more and the banks are high). There will
be 4 feet of paved shoulder with the remaining 1 to 2 feet being gravel. The
ICRC will put in retaining walls where appropriate. Bob Peterson, a design
engineer with the ICRC, was also here. He showed a graph that displayed the
differences in the two plans. Referred to George Durak’s report and the walk
through and found there is little change, and actually an improvement in
drainage to the property area. There will be a passing lane going in at Haslett
and Shoeman Road. This is the one major change that hadn't been previously
discussed. The ICRC now has to get with the residents of Haslett Road and show
them what is going to happen on their individual properties. The ICRC will
replace trees that are being removed. They need to get with the residents to
see where they want the new trees planted. The Jacubiak property has the most
trees coming down. The ICRC will contact them to work out tree replacement
plans. The ICRC will be doing essentially the same type of thing that was done
between Williamston Rd and M-52 on Haslett Road this year. They will curb and
gutter intersections. This defines the intersections better, especially at
night, and keeps the gravel from being wiped out by school busses, trucks and
farm equipment. This will be the same cross section as the section that was
just done. Supervisor Obst asked how the trees were chosen for replacement. It
will be up to the property owner to pick out the types of trees that they want
planted. Dr. Morgan has taken the revised plans and is researching which trees
will be able to be left alone based on how much the roots will be covered and
other changes that some varieties may be able to withstand and others may not.
With the combination of category D funds (State) and urban STP funds (Federal)
there are enough program dollars through the Tri-County to improve Haslett Road
from Meridian to Zimmer and then Zimmer to Williamston in just 2 years.
Street Lights In The Woodview Subdivision - Doug Price
Mr. Price has been working with Detroit Edison to get the street lights
installed in Phase II of the Woodview Subdivision. The Township special
assessment has been paid to Detroit Edison to get the street lights installed.
Detroit Edison is saying that it is a contractor problem. Mr. Price would like
to see the Township pressure Detroit Edison to get the lights installed. One
suggestion was for the Township to go through the Public Service Commission. We
might also want to remind Detroit Edison that we are coming to a time when we
can choose our own utility companies and that good service now would help them
keep customers in the future.
REPORTS
Fire Board Report - Harold Powell
They have received their audit report and it looks very good. Facilities - a
new generator has been installed. It has not been wired in yet. The generator
will be valuable in case of a major storm or other local disaster so that the
fire barn can be used as a central command center. The architect was
hospitalized, so there is no update on the building plans. There was a comment
made at the last Township Board meeting about the Fire Department may better
spend their money on another water wagon. Every water truck in the county is on
call when there is a fire. Mr. Powell believes the fire department’s money
could be better spent on replacing some of their 20-30+ year old equipment.
Attorney Report - Steve Schultz
Annexation - the 30 day materials have not been served by the Boundary
Commission so there is no date set for adjudication.
Law Suit pending against the City of Williamston - met with the City in an
effort to resolve the issue. Was supposed to receive a proposal last Friday
from the City, but it has not been received.
Litigation last Thursday on information requested from the City on their
records of our sewer usage. The Township never received the requested
information. The Township filed a motion in July to compel the City to provide
it. The Township received a draft of information saying that the information
requested was attached, but it wasn't. All discovery must be completed by Dec.
18. The Township needs the information to know if the settlement negotiations
are based on a mutually agreed upon set of facts. The Court extended discovery
through Dec. 5 and directed the City to provide all requested information by
September 10th or the Court will rule in favor of the Township including all
court fees incurred by the Township to be paid by the City. Attorney Schultz
did receive a disturbing summary of what the City of Williamston believes the
Township’s sewer usage to be. He still needs to view the underlying documents
to know how the City came up with these numbers. It might be beneficial to
delay another meeting with the City until after the 10th so that we would know
where we stood.
Building Permit Activities - Walt Aven
Mrs. Kruger's property at 5660 N. Williamston Road - she is not in good health
and the house is in bad shape (small fire there). She is back in the house.
Fire Chief thinks the house should be condemned. Building Inspector needs to be
invited in before he can do this. Thinks there may be other alternatives for
her housing that her medical advisors would have to arrange.
The Jablonski's do not have a certificate of occupancy (C of O) for their home.
The house is now up for sale. If the new owners do not obtain a C of O, there
could be major problems with any potential future insurance claims if there
were a fire or other problems. The Building Inspector does not have the
physical means of keeping the owners out of the house. He may have better luck
keeping the new buyers out. The house is located east of Zimmer on the south
side of Sherwood Road. The current owners are on record as having been notified
of the situation. There is a definite tax disadvantage for not obtaining the C
of O. A homestead exemption cannot be granted until a C of O is issued.
Planning Commission Report - Mickey Martin
Steeplechase - Mr. Bruner's property off of Zimmer road. The Final Preliminary
Plat had a few issues remaining. OK’s by Conservation Easement Subcommittee. In
Aug. 22nd letter asked for several changes. They have all been made. Three
minor revisions to the greenbelt landscape plan have been made. County and
State agencies final approvals will be coming. MDEQ has been applied, papers
should be coming. Have submitted to the local utilities. Recommend Approval
with condition that all items in letter of Aug. 22 be realized. All items have
been addressed with the exception of some points in the declaration and
restrictions that Attorney Schultz is going over. We need to clarify the legal
description of the property included in the conservation easement. The language
needs to be clarified that the Township has the right to control the use of
that land and the ability to prohibit the construction of any permanent
structures on that property. The scope of the rights of the township need to be
clarified. The Township does not want to get into a situation where it needs
the approval of the property owners. Significant concern regarding reservation
of rights. The intent is not to allow the property owners association to repeal
the easement. The conservation area needs to be defined. All of Attorney
Schultz’ issues are easily fixable. They just need to change the language for
approval from the property owners. The Township Board can grant approval of the
final preliminary plat on the condition that the attorney and the applicant
come to an agreement on these covenants. Mr. Obst had a question on a planning
commissioner’s concerns of ground water issues. Mr. Dean stated that he does
not feel that this is an uncommon thing in Ingham County. You just have to
raise the level of the homes to avoid this problem. The septic systems have
been approved by the health departments of the County and State. Most of the
parcels would have systems that are below grade, some are at grade. Lot 6 would
have a backup system. The property is well above the flood plain. There were
some changes in the size of certain lots to meet the county requirements for an
alternative system. Lots 15 and 22 were always larger than 40,000 sq. ft. Lot 6
was required to be enlarged to 2 acres. Clerk Graham inquired if the county's
requirement for a drain field size being in line with the subdivisions square
footage requirement for the houses is being met, and the answer was yes. There
was a question on the tax assessment of the common conservation easement area.
The land will be part of the association lands. The value of the open space
will be included in the value of the lots, so there wouldn't be any extra
assessment.
Trustee Zaban moved that the Board of Trustees approve the final preliminary
plat for the Steeplechase Subdivision with the conditions as stated; with the
attorney and applicant coming to agreement over the covenants and restrictions;
and the approval of the county and state agencies and the permit by the MDEQ.
Supported by Trustee Wiegandt. Treasurer Nilsson questioned when they could
start selling lots - not until after final plat approval. Motion passed
unanimously.
A-1 Rental - Site Plan approval and Special Land Use approval. The parcel is
zoned B-2, and a rental business is a permitted use in this zoning. A Special
Land Use Permit is required for the mini storage part of the business. Phase 1
would be the rental building and 85 storage units; Phase 2 is an additional 190
storage units; and Phase 3 is slated for 240 storage units. The size of the
units may change based on consumer demand. There is a limit on the total square
footage for storage and a maximum number of units. The Township would require
an easement for a service drive along Grand River in case there is more
development in the area. The sign has been designated as a total height of 6 ft
and square footage of 96 sq. ft. The sign on the building will be a back lit
sign. The Planning Commission has required an extensive amount of landscaping
for the different phases. The property is across the street from the new
Township park and near a residential area. There will be no outdoor storage of
any kind allowed (e.g. motor homes, boats, etc.). This includes no outdoor
storage of the rental equipment as well. The parking lot cannot be used for
storage. Attorney Schultz needs to look at the document that pertains to a
drain easement on the property.
Mr. Helfmann stated that with the current conditions of improving the building
and doing all the landscaping in phase one that this is no longer a feasible
project. The building improvements required by the Planning Commission are for
brick walls on the Grand River side and a pitched roof. Mr. Bill Jacovack also
spoke on behalf of A-1 Rental. He stated that the recommendation to do all the
landscaping for all three phases required a significant amount of money that
may never be necessary if phases 2 and 3 are never done. If the additional
landscaping could be done at the same time as phase 2 and phase 3 then A-
1 Rental does not have a problem with the additional requirements. Mr. Jacovack
proposed that all the Grand River landscaping be done with phase 1, with the
additional landscaping to be done in phase 2. If phase 2 is not done then the
landscaping on the south side of the property would be done within 3 years. The
Planning Commission wants the landscaping all the way around the property, not
just on the south and Grand River (north) sides. The property to the west is
currently zoned Ag-Commercial, but the master plan proposes it to be zoned
residential eventually. Mr. Jacovack believes it to be grossly excessive to
have to front $20,000 in landscaping costs when the land to the west may never
be developed. He also has a problem with going to a customized building when
the landscaping protects the building from road front visibility anyway. They
have worked out the situation on loading space and have complied with the
revisions to the best of their ability. He believes the current recommendations
are excessive and make the cost of the project prohibitive. He would like to
see item 2 of the requirements for a Special Land Use Permit removed. This item
calls for the improvements to the building, which the applicant feels is
redundant and unnecessary when the requirements for the landscaping accomplish
the desired effect of screening the building from the road. With the
requirement that the exterior must be a finished quality and design compatible
with structures on surrounding property the applicant can no longer order a
stock building from the manufacturer. Exterior of the mini-warehouse must be a
finished quality and design compatible with structures on surrounding property
is a requirement of the Township’s Zoning Ordinance. Mr. Jacovack believes the
combination of the screening and the improvements to the building is excessive
- one or the other would be fine, but not both.
Comments from the audience included: All up and down Grand River will see much
worse looking buildings with absolutely no screening than what they are
proposing for this building. Believes the design is compatible with the area.
The people that are looking into buying the property have put in a lot of time
and money into the project and the screening they are proposing would make the
additional changes to the building unnecessary. Could put in the initial
screening now and plant smaller trees for phase 2 and phase 3 so that they
would grow to screening size by the time they are needed. The issue is one of
redundancy. The Planning Commission has taken it upon themselves to dictate the
design of the building. Have to go with either the building or the screening,
but cannot dictate both. Compatibility is a matter of opinion, not a hard fact.
Being redundant.
Board Comments: Trustee Zaban stated that the only change he would make if a
decision were to be made tonight would be to go to 15 feet on center rather
than 10 feet on center for spacing the trees. This would cut down on the
expense of trees. Clerk Graham stated that she is having a hard time with what
the planning commission is asking for. Ask you to put in the berm and
everything so that it cannot be seen from the road. This would make an
effective visual barrier. All parties agree to that. She does not understand
why the Planning Commission wants the gable roof, which would increase
visibility of the building from the road. What the Commission agrees to in one
aspect they are contradicting in the other aspect. We are wasting time here.
Treasurer Nilsson stated that there are a lot of bits and pieces that still
need to be worked out. Clerk Graham moved that the issue go back to the
Planning Commission to work out the differences between the applicant and the
Commission. Seconded by Treasurer Nilsson. Per Supervisor Obst the Planning
Commission has not come back to the board with enough "why's" answered. There
is not enough guidance from the planning commission. Mr. Jacovack stated that
he needs to know tonight, their time restraints do not allow them to wait for
another month. He would rather have the Planning Commission’s recommendations
passed and they would then make their decisions from there. Trustee Weigandt
stated that he realizes we are running out of building time for the year, but
the plans he saw tonight are very different from what he has seen in the past.
He can't digest it all in the 45 minutes he has had to view it. He thinks this
is a project that would work, but we have jammed ourselves together to a point
where nothing works anymore. Motion to send the issue back to the Planning
Commission was defeated unanimously.
Site Plan - Clerk Graham moved that the Board accept the Planning Commission’s
recommendation to approve the Site Plan with the following changes; 1) Grand
River Landscaping be completed with phase one with full sized trees as
specified on the plan; 2) the landscaping on the west and south be completed
within 3 years regardless of phases 2 and 3 being completed, with 6 foot trees
spaced 15 feet on center; 3) receive approval from the Township Attorney of the
private drain easement from the adjacent property owner; and everything else
from the planning commission stay the same. Treasurer Nilsson seconded the
motion. Motion passed unanimously.
Special Use Permit - Treasurer Nilsson moved that the Board approve the Special
Land Use Permit subject to the three conditions as specified in the
recommendation from the planning commission. Supported by Trustee Wiegandt.
Clerk Graham voiced the opinion that she still has a problem with requiring
both the screening and the gable roof. The East Side of the building will not
be screened. They will be visible from the side from the road. Trustee Zaban
believes the design The Planning Commission is requesting is compatible with
the area. Supervisor Obst clarified that the second condition from the Planning
Commission is only requiring brick on the Grand River side of the building. The
applicant stated that the level top is eight feet, after you put a gable roof
on the building will be about 12 feet high. This is twice as high as what six
foot screening will screen. Motion passed with Clerk Graham casting a
dissenting vote.
Septic Systems - We are starting to develop lands that are in marginal areas.
According to Attorney Schultz the Township has the authority to have stricter
regulations for septic systems than what the County requires. The Planning
Commission would like to have some stricter standards, not just the minimums,
because of the marginal land in the Township. The Commission would like a joint
meeting with Bruce Gruner of the County Health Department and a sub committee
to see what he believes are marginal areas. The Commissioners have questions
such as can viruses be passed to the ground water when there is only a 2 foot
difference between the septic system and ground water, etc. With the stricter
requirements the Township would still ideally have Mr. Gruner inspecting our
systems, but he would use our higher standards. Our standards would be
incorporated with his. The Commission would like to have the go ahead to set up
this sub committee. Marginal land for a septic system is heavy clay soils,
something that would not infiltrate in less than 24 hours. Don't want to
reproduce problems that the Quinlan Subdivision had several years ago.
Engineered systems do require more maintenance than a regular drain field or
below ground systems. We may or may not end up with stricter requirements. We
will at least have the county requirements. According to Attorney Schultz for
bona fide health, safety and welfare reasons the Township does have the right
to deny building based on their own criteria as opposed to the County's
criteria. It should be site specific, stating that such and such a lot requires
a specific system. Trustee Wiegandt moved that the Planning Commission go ahead
with their septic system regulation planning. Treasurer Nilsson seconded.
Motion passed unanimously.
ADVISORY COUNCIL - Chuck Cleland
The MSU students have been engaged for the park. The Intergovernmental Affairs
Committee is attempting to set up another meeting with the area Township
Planning Commissioners. The Road Committee is working away. Mr. Cleland asked
if there was anything that the Board would like the Advisory Council to study
during the next year. One idea is Charter Township status. Another was to look
at the way in which business is conducted in the Township. There appear to be a
lot of practices that have grown up in these meetings that are not very common
in other locations. Supervisor Obst suggested the gypsy moth issue. It was
agreed that the Township does not need another committee to study the issue.
The problem is one that we are all familiar with. Some residents fear another
year of defoliation will kill their trees. Nancy Fink is already running with
this issue and is very knowledgeable on the subject. Decided it is an
Informational thing, rather than a plan of action committee.
OLD BUSINESS
John Kane Refund Request - Mickey Martin
Mr. Kane’s original site plan determined null and void. He applied for another
one at a cost of $1500.00 which he paid in April of 1996. Mr. Kane would like
to have the $1500.00 he paid for the second site plan refunded to him. The
Township Board waived the fee for the Special Use Permit. Mr. Kane applied for
a Special Use Permit for a sign. The Board would not give approval or non-
approval until the site plan had been approved. Since Mr. Kane was given a
building permit, he went to the Zoning Board of Appeals in January for an
administrative review. No decision was made at this time. Supervisor Obst made
a determination that the original site plan was still in effect. Mr. Kane had
12 months from that time to get the site built. The Board voted to split part
of the fee and to waive altogether the fee for the special use permit. The
Board of Trustees authorizes Clerk Graham and Planning Coordinator Martin to
figure out what money he his owed and take it from there. Building Inspector
Aven stated that Mr. Kane has until November to have the house removed from the
property. Clerk Graham sent Mr. Kane a check for $1,078.62 and a notice
pertaining to the model house removal deadline.
NEW BUSINESS
Planning Commission Appointments
John Schwartz has requested to not be reappointed to the Planning Commission
due to his current class schedule. He would like to reapply next year. The
Board has received two requests for new appointments: one from Chuck Cleland,
current chair of the Advisory Council; and one from Rex Lamore, a professor in
the school of urban planning at MSU and recommended by John Schwartz. Bob Hayes
and Mickey Martin have requested to be reappointed for another term.
Supervisor Obst nominated Mr. Hayes, Mr. Cleland and Mrs. Martin to the
Planning Commission and will ask Mr. Lamore to join the Advisory Council. Rud
Hoag has agreed to take over as Chair of the Advisory Council with Mr. Cleland
being appointed to the Planning Commission. Treasurer Nilsson raised a concern
about Mr. Cleland being gone all summer. She feels he needs to make a
commitment to be here year round. His current plans are to be here unless his
work schedule dictates otherwise.
The above mentioned are nominated for 3 year terms beginning at the Sept.
meeting. The nomination was seconded by Trustee Zaban. The motion approved
unanimously. Mr. Lamore will be written a letter asking him to serve on the
Advisory Council. Clerk Graham moved that Mr. Hoag be nominated to be the new
Chair of the Advisory Council. Seconded by Trustee Zaban. Motion approved
unanimously.
Pollution Prevention Week
Clerk Graham moved that the attached proclamation regarding Pollution
Prevention Week be declared by the Township Board. Seconded by Treasurer
Nilsson. Approved unanimously.
MTA Meeting - Treasurer Nilsson and Clerk Graham will be attending the Fall
District Meeting. Supervisor Obst will check his schedule.
COMPLAINTS - Constable Dahlstrom
2454 Haslett Road - Appears the property is being used illegally as a Used Car
parking lot. Clerk Graham thinks they should be served a legal notice telling
them to cease and desist.
651 Sherwood Road - There are only three trailers parked there. The other two
are gone and belong to his family. They are only there a couple of months
during the summer.
Mr. Aker - Posted warning notice to stop dumping of concrete on his property. A
letter was also written to Mr. Aker. The Township has not had any response yet.
The Board resolved that they need to support Constable Dahlstrom’s efforts and
follow through on his suggestions.
CONSENT AGENDA
Clerk Graham moved and seconded by Trustee Wiegandt to approve the minutes of
the Regular Township Board Meeting held August 12, 1997; to acknowledge the
Treasurer’s report of financial activities for August, 1997; and to authorize
the Clerk’s list of accounts payable on September 2, 1997, checks # 8250 - 8298
for a total of $20,903.78. Supervisor Obst called for a roll call vote:
   Ayes:   Supervisor Obst, Clerk Graham, Treasurer Nilsson, Trustee Wiegandt,
Trustee Zaban
   Nayes:   None.
Meeting Adjourned at 11:22 PM
____________________________________      ___________________________________
Shirley Graham, Clerk               Susan Jennings, Recording Secretary
Pollution Prevention Week
September 15-21, 1997
WHEREAS, the Township of Williamstown takes great pride in the state’s natural
resources and supports a clean and safe environment; and
WHEREAS, pollution prevention, also known as source reduction, is a progressive
approach that eliminates or reduces pollution at its source; and
WHEREAS, pollution prevention is the most environmentally sound method of
protecting our natural resources; and
WHEREAS, pollution prevention can improve environmental conditions and maintain
the health and safety of workers in the workplace; and
WHEREAS, pollution prevention can increase industrial efficiency, commercial
competitiveness, and can save participating businesses time and money; and
WHEREAS, by focusing on rigorous pollution prevention, Michigan can meet the
challenges of having both a healthy community and business environment for its
citizens; and
WHEREAS, Pollution Prevention Week is an opportunity for government to join
forces with business, industry, environmental groups, community organizations,
and the citizenry at large to take action toward a prosperous and sustainable
future;
THEREFORE, be it resolved that September 15-21, 1997, is Pollution Prevention
Week and the Township of Williamstown does hereby urge all community members
and businesses of Williamstown Township to participate in local and regional
celebratory and educational activities.
Dated:____________________      ____________________________________
                  Shirley Graham, Township Clerk
OCTOBER 7, 1997
The regular meeting of the WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP BOARD OF TRUSTEES was called
to order by Supervisor Obst on Tuesday, October 7, 1997 at 7:34 PM. The Clerk
was asked to record who was present and if a quorum was present. Clerk Graham
stated a quorum was present and recorded the following: Supervisor Obst, Clerk
Graham, Treasurer Nilsson, Trustee Wiegandt, Trustee Zaban and Building
Inspector Aven.
The agenda was read over with the following additions under New Business -
Detroit Edison and a road closing application for Hart Road between Germany and
Haslett.
PUBLIC COMMENTS
Sue Creagh - Red Cedar Rec Director
Ms. Creagh was hired as the new Director of Red Cedar Rec (RCR) in July and
reports to Jeri Mifflin, Director of Williamston Community Education. RCR will
be offering all the same programs they did last year with a few additions. Ms.
Creagh’s goal is to keep an open line of communication between the City of
Williamston and the surrounding Townships so that RCR can more effectively
respond to the recreational requirements of the community. It is no longer the
Townships’ and City’s responsibility to appoint members to the RCR Board.
Billing of the local participating municipalities will also be reviewed.
Currently RCR is only billing for Baseball and Swim Team. The scope of
activities offered by RCR has increased greatly and their requests for
reimbursement from the municipal units needs to be updated to reflect this
change. RCR is looking for input from the Townships and City on how billing
should be handled. This year RCR has decided to send out the request for
reimbursement based on the past philosophies because that is what the current
budget is based on. RCR will be reimbursing $20 to each of the members of the
swim team who were charged $98 instead of $78 to participate on the 1997 team.
RCR plans on issuing these checks by Dec. 1, 1997. Delays are due to processing
paper work and coordinating with the Williamston School District, who manages
the account that the reimbursement funds will come from.
FIRE BOARD REPORT
Treasurer Nilsson had a question on whether a decision had been made to buy the
property on Mullett Street. Clerk Graham, who also serves on the Fire Board,
stated that the property is up for sale at a reasonable price. The Fire Board
is looking favorably at obtaining it for a parking lot. Even though a gas
station used to be located there, the site has been certified to be clean. This
lot is located directly across the street from the present Fire Barn. Moving
parking over there would enable expansion and remodeling of the current
building. Supervisor Obst had a question regarding water capacity. Trustee
Wiegandt, a volunteer firefighter for the department, stated that the tanker
carries 2500 gallons and each of the two pumpers carry 800 gallons of water.
There is a mutual aid pact with all of the fire departments in Ingham County
and throughout the Tri-County area plus Laingsburg and Perry to respond in
cases where more water would need to be carried in than what the local
department can provide.
ATTORNEY'S REPORT - Steve Schultz
Quiet month at the Township.
Received notice of a hearing on the annexation case for October 30th. Picked up
the 7 day materials last Thursday, they are due this Thursday. Strictly
argument on the 30th - not a public hearing. The Boundary Commission will have
two findings of fact, one approving annexation and one denying it. They will
recommend the staff adopt one of those two orders. The Commission will vote on
this issue at their next meeting. A final decision should be made before the
end of the year. The October 30th hearing is at the Mercantile Building, off of
Cedar St. in Lansing, and is scheduled for 1:50 PM. Treasurer Nilsson will be
unable to attend because she will be attending a class on the Tax Program that
day. The rest of the Board will make every effort to attend the hearing so that
the Township is well represented. Supervisor Obst’s draft of a rebuttal letter
regarding docket #96-AP-11 is being edited by the attorneys.
Litigation with the City of Williamston - City has proposed a settlement.
Attorney Schultz has concerns about some of the items in the proposal, but is
encouraged by others. A reply still needs to be drafted. Attorney Schultz
apologized for the delay. He has been involved with some other pressing legal
matters that are quickly coming to a close and will be able to devote more time
in the very near future to the Township’s business.
BUILDING INSPECTOR REPORT - Walter Aven
1997 Uniform Building Code should be adopted shortly.
Regarding the Jablonski property - the Building Code does not require a
Certificate of Occupancy for a residence, only for a commercial property. The
Township’s Zoning Ordinance requires a C of O for residences as well. A
statement in the minutes of last month’s meeting that a Homestead Exemption
could not be issued without a C of O appeared to be attributed to the Building
Inspector. It was actually Supervisor Obst who made the comment.
PLANNING COMMISSION - Mickey Martin
John Kane has applied for a Special Land Use Permit for a sign. The Planning
Commission’s recommendation is to approve the sign. Trustee Wiegandt moved to
approve the Special Land Use Permit as recommended by the Planning Commission
on September 16th. Supported by Clerk Graham. Trustee Zaban stated that the
increase in height of the sign is due to limited sight distance at the
location. The square footage of the sign is smaller than allowed by the
Ordinance with a Special Land Use Permit. Motion passed unanimously. Treasurer
Nilsson questioned the time frame allowed for construction. Per Planning Chair
Martin the Site Plan will expire in February. Building Inspector Aven stated
that Mr. Kane already has a building permit application.
Parcels Of Less Than 40 Acres In The Ag Commercial District. To allow parcels
as small as 74 acres to be split into a 40 acre lot and a 34 acre lot.
Supervisor Obst stated that the Lot Split Ordinance has to conform to the
Zoning Ordinance. Clerk Graham moved that the Township Board approve the
recommendation of the Planning Commission to allow lots of less than 40 acres
in the Ag Commercial Zone. Supported by Trustee Wiegandt. Motion passed
unanimously.
Signs And Billboards Zoning Ordinance Amendment- Billboards will still be
allowed in the Light Industrial Zone. The Planning Commission is recommending
that the maximum size of such signs be reduced from 300 sq. ft to 72 sq. ft.,
which is a standard bill board size called an 8 sheet. This would make the
signs more appealing to the residents and still have the advertising available
to businesses who would like to use them. Trustee Zaban moved to accept the
proposed amendments as provided by the Planning Commission regarding signs and
billboards. Supported by Clerk Graham. Motion approved unanimously. Effective
upon adoption.
Williamstown Estates - Site Plan Approval Expires This Month - Oct. 1997.
Attorney Green has asked for an extension on behalf of his client, Mr.
Runquist.. Nothing regarding the property has changed. The Planning Coordinator
and Consultant recommend that the extension be approved. Mr. Runquist realizes
this is the only extension he can have and if he does not move forward, then he
would have to start the process over. He has received final preliminary plat
approval. The Zoning Ordinance has not changed since the original approval
regarding this property. Site plan is still effective if there is a new owner
of the property. Treasurer Nilsson moved to grant a twelve month extension as
of October 1, 1997. Supported by Clerk Graham. Motion approved unanimously.
ADVISORY COUNCIL - Mickey Martin
Parks - Chris Nilsson, Nancy Fink and Mickey Martin attended the MSU class
presentation. There were 8 different parks proposed. A time in the fall or
early winter will be established for models of the 8 proposals to be at the
Township Hall for public viewing. All of the presentations were very
impressive. The students conducted soil tests, drainage, parking routes in and
out, handicap accessible, etc. Each of the plans was different from the others
and they were all very good.
Appointments - Rex LaMore has agreed to be a member at large of the Advisory
Council. Helen LaBlanc has been asked to serve on the advisory council. The
Board agreed that they would like to have her on the environmental and
recreation committee because of her background and experience. Bob Reed has
asked to resign from the council. Clerk Graham moved to appoint Helen LaBlanc
to the environmental and recreation committee. Supported by Trustee Zaban.
Motion approved unanimously.
New Items For The Council To Address
Clerk Graham suggested looking into how to handle the junk issue. Junk cars are
causing an environmental hazard on a grand scale. It was suggested that the
Township Board adopt an ordinance to handle this issue and that it was not one
the advisory council should address. Treasurer Nilsson will put an article in
the newsletter that the constable will be writing citations for junk cars in
the township.
Supervisor Obst suggested that the Township’s dealings with Detroit Edison need
to be addressed. They were clear cutting property without prior notice, which
is a violation of the Township’s franchise agreement with Detroit Edison. Clerk
Graham suggested that Consumers Energy needs to be addressed for getting gas in
areas of the township that are not currently being serviced.
Grand River And Zimmer - The letter written by Brian Jennings as a result of
the August 21st meeting will be forwarded by the Board to MDOT and the MI State
Police.
BOARD OF APPEALS - Norman Obst
Held a workshop meeting on September 30 to help clarify the Board of Appeals’
mandate.
OLD BUSINESS
Pool - only 11 people have requested refunds for the 1997 season. The time to
obtain a refund will be extended 1 month (through October).
Aker Site Complaint - The sign posting the violation has been taken down. There
has been no communication between the Township and Mr. Aker. Planning
Coordinator Martin believes the dumping of the concrete for grading is in
violation of the Zoning Ordinance. Page 2-20 of the Ordinance states that clean
fill shall be free of debris, junk and waste. Other than clean fill means he
has a land fill, which requires the land owner to go through the permit
process. No permits have been applied for. Supervisor Obst will write a letter
letting Mr. Aker know that he is in violation of the Zoning Ordinance and that
he has 30 days to comply. The letter will be sent registered mail, return
receipt requested.
Jeff Foote - Gulick Road Property. The Drain Commission has a meeting with Mr.
Foote on Monday. He also needs to get site plan approval from the Township.
Appears to be digging out a lake on the property and is piling all the dirt
they are digging out on the banks of the hole.
Gypsy Moth Program - Nancy Fink.
Sent mailing to 60 people. Called the Enterprise. They are interested in doing
an article. There is a meeting scheduled on Thursday October 16th at 7:30 PM at
the Township Hall. Mr. Tom Ellis will give a short presentation before opening
the meeting up to questions.
Sherwood Road - The extra trailers and fifth wheelers are back. They appear to
be parked on an easement, not on the property. Constable Dahlstrom will be sent
out to the site again.
NEW BUSINESS
Newsletter Deadline - Entries for the November Newsletter are due on Treasurer
Nilsson’s desk by 4:00 PM October 17th.
Leaf Complaint - Mrs. Kingsley on Agate Way found someone to pick them up.
Road Closing Application - The MSU Highway Traffic Safety Program would like to
close Hart Road between Haslett and Germany Roads on Monday, October 20, 1997
from 6:00 PM until 11:00 PM. The purpose of the closure is for MSU’s Highway
Traffic Safety Program’s Police Traffic Accident Investigation 11 training
course (night visibility factors and lighting requirements). Trustee Wiegandt
moved that the Township allow the closing. Supported by Trustee Zaban. Motion
approved unanimously.
Mrs. Stover’s Property - The City would have to prove necessity and then pay
fair market value for the property before they could condemn Mrs. Stover's
property for a new bridge over the Red Cedar River. If she sold the property
willingly to the City then they would not have to annex it, the City would own
it out right. She is under no obligation to sell. The Ingham County Road
Commission has not seen anything about this yet. The City does not have
jurisdiction to condemn this land without County involvement.
Mrs. Kruger - Will not accept the new furnace that the county has offered to
give her. Without the furnace, her home will be a fire trap this winter.
According to Attorney Schultz, someone needs to find a family member willing to
begin guardian proceedings since Mrs. Kruger is no longer able to take care of
herself.
Fire Department Fund Raiser - The Modern Woodmen of America Camp 6066 is
sponsoring a Matching Fund Fund Raiser in the form of a Chili Dinner on
Saturday, October 11, 1997 from 5:00 to 7:00 PM at the Williamston Fire
Department.
CONSENT AGENDA
Clerk Graham moved to approve the minutes of the Regular Township Board Meeting
held September 2, 1997; to acknowledge the Treasurer’s report of financial
activities for September 1997; and to authorize the Clerk’s list of accounts
payable on October 7, 1997, checks # 8299-8365 for a total of $43,129.08.
Supported by Trustee Wiegandt. Supervisor Obst called for a roll call vote:
   Ayes:   Trustee Zaban, Trustee Wiegandt, Treasurer Nilsson, Clerk Graham,
Supervisor Obst.
   Nayes:   None.
Trustee Zaban moved to adjourn the meeting. Supported by Clerk Graham.
Meeting Closed at 9:36 PM.
_____________________________________      ____________________________________
Shirley Graham, Clerk               Susan Jennings, Recording Secretary
NOVEMBER 4, 1997
The regular meeting of the WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP BOARD OF TRUSTEES was called
to order by Supervisor Obst on Tuesday November 4, 1997 at 7:38 PM. The Clerk
was asked to record who was present and if a quorum was present. Clerk Graham
stated a quorum was present and recorded the following: Supervisor Obst, Clerk
Graham, Treasurer Nilsson, Trustee Wiegandt, Trustee Zaban and Building
Inspector Aven.
The agenda was read over with the following additions: under New Business - A-
1 Rental, and the Tri-County Planning Commission; under the Advisory Council -
a Parks and Recreation sub-committee update.
REPORTS
FIRE BOARD REPORT - SHIRLEY GRAHAM.
The Fire Board has entered into an agreement to purchase the lot across the
street from the current location for $65,000. The closing is scheduled for
Friday, November 14th at 10:00 AM. AAA of Michigan has donated money towards
the purchase of Jaws-of-Life equipment. The board also needs new hoods and
helmets for the firefighters. Trustee Zaban had a question about the proposed
bridge over the Red Cedar River mentioned in the Fire Board minutes. According
to Clerk Graham the Ingham County Road Commission has not been officially
advised of the City’s plan’s in this matter.
ATTORNEY REPORT - STEVE SCHULTZ
Annexation hearing in front of the Boundary Commission. A supplemental hearing
has been scheduled to discuss certain sewer and fire protection issues.
Attorney Schultz believed the Township had a fair hearing from the boundary
commission.
The attorney has a counter proposal to be reviewed by Supervisor Obst and
Trustee Wiegandt regarding the City issue.
Looked at the sidewalk ordinance.
Attorney Schultz believes the Boundary Commission's decision to hold an
additional hearing was beneficial to the Township considering the issues that
will be raised at the future hearing. Proposal is for a very dense development.
Residents of Riverwood are interested in what is going to be next door to them.
Will address issues of the width of the road in Riverwood and the fact that the
Fire Truck cannot maneuver the cul-de-sac if there are any cars on the road or
snow on the ground. Fire service will be the same whether the property in
question is part of the City of Williamston or the Township of Williamstown.
Since we operate under a joint fire department, the same people and equipment
will be responding in the same manner regardless of which entity eventually has
jurisdiction of the land.
Depositions of Supervisor Obst and Clerk Graham by City Attorney Joe Cox have
been indefinitely postponed due to a scheduling conflict on the part of
Attorney Cox.
BUILDING PERMITS - WALT AVEN
The number of permits issued is still down from this time last year. Inspector
Aven suggested that there be a policy to not charge for building permits for
charitable organizations such as Lion's Club, Rotary, Habitat for Humanity,
etc. Per Attorney Schultz - It might be better to deal with these requests on a
one on one basis. The Board agreed to waive the fee for the Lion's club
building of a ramp for a resident’s home.
PLANNING COMMISSION - MICKEY MARTIN
Sidewalk Ordinance - waiting for Attorney Schultz to write up liability policy.
The Planning Commission’s charge was to remove liability from the Township and
place it on the property owner. Except for subdivisions, some commissioners did
not believe that the property owner should be responsible for maintaining the
sidewalks in front of their property. The Commission needs the Board’s view on
this and the Commission is also holding a public meeting to discuss the issue.
Per Attorney Schultz, in general the property owner is responsible, either
directly or through special assessments. Per Treasurer Nilsson and Trustee
Wiegandt - the Township does not have a public works department to handle
maintenance of sidewalks. It would have to be done by the property owner. If
the Township was responsible it would have to be contracted out. Clerk Graham
would like to prevent the Township from being liable for injury lawsuits, but
thinks the Township should have the sidewalk inspected at least twice a year
and maintain the sidewalk since the Township is who had it installed.
Commissioner Jennings pointed out that the Sidewalk Ordinance is going to be
around a long time and in the future will most likely be used primarily in new
subdivisions. Inspector Aven suggested that if the Township hires someone to
clean the sidewalk, then they should be the same people responsible for the
inspections.
ADVISORY COUNCIL REPORT - RUDD HOAG
The Council welcomed two new members at their October meeting - Rex Lamore,
member at large and Helen LaBlanc who will be serving on the environmental
committee.
The Wetland program for the computer goes back to 1939 and includes water
flows. Meridian township is almost done. Our computer is ready, just waiting
for the rest of the data. Also looking at a well inventory for the Township.
Will work with the County Health department on this.
The Recreation Committee went over the master plan for the park. They need to
come up with an initial Site Plan. The Township can have the model parks from
the MSU class come out here and then use those ideas to come up with a plan.
McKenna and Associate can draw up a plan. Parks and Rec. Plan must be updated
before March of 1998 in order for the Township to still be eligible for grant
money to develop the park. The Township can request up to $500,000 for
development. The State had 200 applications for the grant money last year.
McKenna gave Planning Coordinator Martin an estimate of $3900 for updating the
recreation plan. The Township would have to hold public hearings on a proposed
plan. The cost of a Site Plan for the park would be above and beyond the $3900
and would be charged on an hourly basis. It would help if the Township was as
prepared as possible before McKenna arrived. The time estimate is for 2 people
being here for half a day doing sketches, plus time back in their office to
turn the sketches into plans. The State requires that the Recreation Plan be
updated every 5 years. Supervisor Obst questioned the direction the Park
Subcommittee was going in. He thought the subcommittee was going to be doing
fund raisers to raise the money to help cover development of the park.
Treasurer Nilsson stated that you can't really fund raise until you have a
plan. Applying for the grant is a fund raising activity. Per Trustee Wiegandt -
there is some money available for the park from the lease of the land for
farming in the first year that the Township owned the property.
Transportation Committee - next goal is to look at the Mitchell and Vanneter
road area. Hope to walk it in mid November with Bob D'Alcorn from the ICRC and
talk to the schools about their plans for the land they purchased off of
Mitchell Road.
Gypsy Moth - Tom Ellis presented an excellent program. Started taking a survey.
The Township now has some materials that they can hand out to people who
inquire about the moths.
Open Land Committee - Nancy Fink will take over the chair from Dan Kraft.
The issues of Detroit Edison violating their franchise agreement and junk cars
have been handled by the board.
Commercial And Residential Committees - will look at getting natural gas
extended throughout more of the Township.
New Topic for the Council to investigate - Putting the Township on the
Internet. There are two separate issues that need to be looked at. The first is
putting the Township on line so that it has access to the information available
on the Internet/World Wide Web. This would include cost factors for a dedicated
modem line and fees to subscribe to an Internet Service Provider. Clerk Graham
believed the cost for an additional phone line would be approximately $35 per
month. The second issue to address would be having a web page created for the
Township. Items involved here would be cost of having the page created and
maintained; cost of having the page hosted by a service such as Voyager; and
what information would the Township like to provide on its website.
Trustee Zaban asked for a clarification on what constitutes a “junk car”. To
NOT be considered junk a vehicle has to have a current license plate, 4 tires,
working battery, motor, etc. The Township does not allow an unlicensed vehicle
to be covered by a tarp. That is considered open storage, which is prohibited.
It was agreed that all of the facts of the Ordinance pertaining to junk cars
should be stated in the next (January, 1998) issue of the Township Newsletter.
Per Clerk Graham - the Township needs a bid from McKenna before we can give
them the go ahead to work on the park project.
ASSESSORS REPORT
Received equalization study for agriculture. 16% range for increases on
agricultural land. Inflation rate is going to be around 2.7 % per Roger Roty.
Residential increase are on the order of 8-10%
A-1 Rental - New Business
Mr. Gary Helfmann received a bill from the Township for $637 that covered half
the cost of a special Planning Commission meeting held on August 26, 1997 to
discuss his project. Another project was also discussed at this meeting and the
cost of the meeting was split between the two parties. No escrow account was
set up for Mr. Helfmann. His was the last project started before the escrow
account policy went into effect. Mr. Helfmann does not believe he should be
held responsible for the cost of the meeting. He stated that he was not made
knowledgeable that the fee was going to be charged ahead of time. He had left
the Planning Commission meeting before the special meeting was set up, but his
representatives remained and were made aware of the cost of the meeting per the
Planning Commission meeting minutes. Mr. Helfmann appeared to agree with the
Township Board that there was a lack of communication between himself and his
representatives at the planning commission meeting as to the cost of the
special meeting. Mr. Helfmann is requesting a reduction in his bill for the
meeting. Supervisor Obst stated that he would like to hear what Mr. Fouty (Mr.
Helfmann’s representative at the Planning Commission meeting) has to say on
this issue before a vote could be taken.
Mr. Helfmann also requested to put in maple trees instead of crabapple trees.
Planning Coordinator Martin stated that the request would need to be made in
writing, and that the Planning Coordinator and Building Inspector may have the
authority to authorize that type of change, if considered minor in nature.
OLD BUSINESS
Red Cedar Rec. Letter Of 10-15-97
The Red Cedar Rec. is looking at ways to level the fee structure in the future
no matter the residence of the applicant. They are proposing to ask for a
stipend from each governmental unit. Clerk Graham edited the list of Township
residents that participated in the Summer 1997 season and was requested to pay
from the corrected list. The Township and the School district use the same
auditor. They require to have everything listed on a per person basis. The
Township is currently paying $15 per person for only softball/t-ball/baseball
and swimming. Soccer and other programs are not included. The Red Cedar Rec.
plans on including the other programs in future funding requests. The Township
Board is willing to consider a policy of prior 5 years’ average payment as next
year’s stipend.
John Kane - building is gone as of Nov. 1.
COMPLAINTS
The letter to Mr. Aker was returned undeliverable. The Township has not
received a return receipt yet.
The previously unlicensed car in the Cherry Ridge Sub now has a current license
plate.
651 Sherwood - The property owner stated that the trailers have been on this
same site for the past 15 years with no problem. He also said that they will be
gone by the end of January. Supervisor Obst will advise the owner that the
Township needs a statement from him in writing that the trailers will not be
put back on that site after they have gone south for the winter.
City Of Williamston Regarding The Post Office Sewer. Regarding the City’s
statement in a letter to the Post Office that the sewer system is "under the
jurisdiction of the City"; the permit fee has to be paid to the Township prior
to the City authorizing the hookup. Since the Post Office is a Federal building
they are not required to take out a building permit (which is when the hookup
fee is normally paid), however they are still required to pay the sewer hookup
fee to the Township. Supervisor Obst will write to the Post Office advising
them of this policy.
Detroit Edison - the Township received nice letter from the company. Need to
clarify that the township would like advance notification in writing of any
tree trimming that Detroit Edison plans on doing in the Township.
NEW BUSINESS:
Clerk Graham moved that we accept Walter Keilholtz’s letter of resignation as
of November 4, 1997 with regrets. Seconded by Trustee Wiegandt. Treasurer
Nilsson suggested that a letter of appreciation is in order. Motion approved
unanimously. The Township Board unanimously appointed Mr. Darrell Brown to the
Fire Board as the Township’s representative, replacing Mr. Keilholtz.
Tri-County Planning Commission- Mickey Martin
The Commission is looking at the overall plan for the Tri-County area. They
have documented all the trends from 1970 until now. The population is not
increasing - just moving around. The Commission would like to do a total
overall project, including plans for developing roads and other aspects of the
area’s infrastructure. The area is building more houses. At the present rate of
development there will be no farm land left in Ingham County in about 30 years.
Harold Powell’s hip replacement on Friday went well. The Township sent flowers.
CONSENT AGENDA
Trustee Wiegandt moved to approve the minutes of the Regular Township Board
Meeting held October 7, 1997; to acknowledge the Treasurer’s report of
financial activities for October 1997; and to authorize the Clerk’s list of
accounts payable on November 4, 1997, checks #8366 - 8417 for a total of
$25,813.31. Supported by Clerk Graham. Supervisor Obst called for a roll call
vote:
   Ayes:   Trustee Zaban, Trustee Wiegandt, Treasurer Nilsson, Clerk Graham,
Supervisor Obst.
   Nays:   None.
Meeting adjourned at 10:05 PM.
__________________________________      ___________________________________
Shirley Graham, Clerk               Susan Jennings, Recording Secretary
DECEMBER 2, 1997
The regular meeting of the WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP BOARD OF TRUSTEES was called
to order by Supervisor Obst on Tuesday, December 2, 1997 at 7:35 PM. The Clerk
was asked to record who was present and if a quorum was present. Clerk Graham
stated a quorum was present and recorded the following: Supervisor Obst, Clerk
Graham, Treasurer Nilsson, Trustee Wiegandt, Trustee Zaban and Building
Inspector Aven.
The agenda was read over with the following additions: Jon Chick Letter -
requesting hunting privileges on the Township park land. Wayne Siegel - Burning
issue. Budget - sanitary sewer and replacement fund and our first six months
status.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Hunting on the Township Park Land - Mr. Chick contacted Township Attorney
Schultz regarding hunting on the park property. Mr. Chick is requesting hunting
privileges for at least the remainder of this year. The property is currently
posted for no hunting. One of the stipulations of the DNR grant the Township
received to help purchase the property is that hunting is prohibited. The
Township cannot grant Mr. Chick’s request.
FIRE BOARD REPORT - Darrell Brown
The Fire Board was surprised to learn that the Library Committee wanted the
Fire Department to move to a new site and building and have the Library take
over the current Fire Board's building. The Fire Board has researched the issue
and found the present site to be the best location in the area for a Fire
Station. The Fire Board believes that it is a separate entity from the Library
and wishes to remain so. The Board voted to purchase the Beech property across
the street from the current location. It was decided to put the title into the
three municipalities names. The Attorney for the City of Williamston stopped
the sale at closing. The Fire Board is still working with the architect. They
can’t go much further without knowing what kind of zoning variances they may
need from the City. The Strata Company is waiting for further payment before
repairing the fire wells that were not capped properly. Treasurer Nilsson asked
who owns the current property. The current Fire Barn property is jointly owned
by Williamstown Township and the City of Williamston, with Wheatfield Township
paying monthly rent to both municipalities. The current charter of the Fire
Board prevents them from holding title to any real estate directly. Per
Attorney Schultz - The real estate is held by the constituent municipalities. A
Fire Authority (incorporation of the current Fire Board) or Fire District
(which could also include Locke and Leroy Townships) can be voted in that would
have the authority to ask the voters directly for a millage or bonds for
additional building for the Fire Department.. Per Clerk Graham the question
would have to be put to the voters next August to form either a Fire Authority
or District, then it is the District or Authority that can call the vote.
Should the authority or district pass a millage or bond issue then a Fire
Building Authority would be created to administer the funds and bid the
construction. Harold Powell questioned who can sit on the Building Authority.
Elected officials, and members of the Fire Department and Fire Board/Authority/
District cannot serve on the Building Authority. The building authority would
not be discharged until all outstanding bonds are paid off. The Fire Authority
would be like a separate corporate entity. The Fire Board is looking to obtain
their own counsel to put the issue of creating a Fire Authority or District on
the ballot in August. The Fire Board did not favor a joint building authority
with the library.
PLANNING COMMISSION REPORT - Mickey Martin
Jeffrey Foote Property - Proposed Pond
Mr. Foote has appeared before the Planning Commission and the Township has
received a letter of complaint regarding the property. Supervisor Obst wrote a
letter to Mr. Foote on Nov. 24 requesting that he stop all work on the
property. Mr. Foote asked if he could drill a well on his property to test if
other wells would be affected when he filled his pond. The Township has
subsequently discovered that Mr. Foote does not need to dig another well to
determine if there would be negative impact to neighbors. He can perform the
required draw down test with the currently existing wells. Mr. Art Schultz
asked that If water does go down in the other area wells, what is the Township
going to do? Planning Chair Martin stated that one of the things on a study
would be testing as many wells as possible - i.e. have the neighbors
participate in the draw down test. They will also look at well logs in the
stratosphere of where he is tapping into the water. Once the pond is filled,
the estimation is that Mr. Foote’s wells will be pumping 70 gallons per minute
to keep it full during the summer. There is a question on how far out other
people's wells in the area will be affected by this project. Planning
Commissioner Fink stated that there was no way to know exactly where, or how
many, other wells may be affected. Mr. Harold Powell said that when Meridian
Township put their community wells down his well went from a 40 foot draw to an
80 foot draw. Mr. Foote told Supervisor Obst that no work had been done since
Oct 8. Mrs. Gerre Imhoff said that their main concern is how their well will be
affected, which is currently around 450 ft. They are also concerned about the
ecological impact of the project to the area - not just the wells. Supervisor
Obst stated that Mr. Foote is currently in violation since he has no building
permit or site plan approval. Anyone here tonight that is interested will be
notified of the site plan review. Normally it is just neighbors within 500 ft
that are notified. The Township may also post notification of the meeting in
the paper since this issue could affect a much larger area than the immediate
neighbors.
Other than the City of Williamston, the only other large wells in the immediate
area are the 2 - 10 inch wells servicing Eagle Point Condominiums. Mr. Foote’s
pond will have an 8 inch well running continuously. Planning Chair Martin said
the Planning Commission has requested a hydrological study. The Planning
Commission is concerned about the slopes and soil erosion. The Planning
Commission also requested an engineered design of the site to include the
slopes’ design and maintenance so they can evaluate for erosion and run of -
they have not received one yet. Visually, there is an impact for the neighbors
already. Supervisor Obst stated that the standards for site plan approval need
to be looked at. Mr. Gerald Imhoff asked if Mr. Foote had received a building
permit to remodel the barn? Building Inspector Aven stated that he has a permit
to redo the roof. Mrs. Gerre Imhoff asked if there are any state laws that are
being violated and aren't privacy fences limited to six feet? If a fence is
limited to 6 ft, then how can you just shove the dirt up 14-16 feet? A fence
would have to follow the contour of the land. Despite what Mr. Foote had told
Supervisor Obst, that his neighbor, Jim Sikarskie had no problems with what Mr.
Foote is doing; Mr. Sikarskie said that he does have some concerns. He is very
concerned about the run off that is running into his garden and barn yard. The
land is wet now, where in the past it would not have been. Mr. Sikarskie is
also concerned about his well. Mr. Sikarskie stated that Mr. Foote has been
rational in dealing with his concerns to date. Mr. Fred Rupp asked if the Board
has been out to look at the property? He believes it has the makings of a land
fill. Mr. Rupp asked that anyone on the board who hasn't already visited the
site to please do so. Supervisor Obst stated that the issues that have to be
addressed are the fence violation, site plan approval/building permits, and
township nuisance ordinance violations. Clerk Graham stated that it is not
legal to put water on your neighbor’s property. Attorney Schultz stated that
the water run-off could be considered a trespass violation that would be
remedied through civil action. The neighbors stated that they do not want an
adversarial relationship with Mr. Foote and prefer not to pursue civil legal
action against him. There was a question on neighbors protesting the site plan
approval. Attorney Schultz stated that they have every right to make any
arguments they want. Can we adopt a new ordinance tonight to make him undo what
he has done? No. Law can't undo if it what was legal when it was done. But we
have a number of issues that may suggest it was not done legally. Supervisor
Obst referred to the Williamstown Township Zoning Ordinance. Page 27-13 F.3
“Appearance - Landscaping, earth berms, fencing, signs, wall and other site
features shall be designed and located on the site so that the proposed
development is aesthetically pleasing and harmonious with nearby existing or
future developments.” And page 27-15 F.11 “Drainage - Appropriate measures
shall be taken to insure that the removal or drainage of surface waters will
not adversely affect adjoining properties or the capacity of the public or
natural storm drainage system. Provisions shall be made for a feasible storm
drainage system, the construction of stormwater facilities, and the prevention
of erosion. Surface water on all paved areas shall be collected at intervals so
that it will not obstruct vehicular or pedestrian traffic and will not create
nuisance ponding in paved areas. Final grades may be required to conform to
existing and future grades of adjacent properties. Grading and drainage plans
shall be subject to review by the Township Engineer.” Mr. Sikarskie stated that
he appreciates getting along with his neighbors and does not want an
adversarial relationship. But the mounds of dirt are intimidating. It's like a
mountain range. Mr. Sikarskie would much rather not sign a petition or sue Mr.
Foote, but would rather have the township take the actions to enforce the
ordinance. Attorney Schultz stated that Mr. Foote does not have vested rights
because he started the project illegally. Mr. Rudd Hoag had questions on if the
project was done illegally, how can Mr. Foote have any legal recourse.
Supervisor Obst stated that Mr. Foote has now started to go through the
process. The last letter sent to Mr. Foote by Supervisor Obst was not as strong
as it could have been. The Township has the authority to order a stop work,
rather than just requesting a stop work order. Attorney Schultz said that the
Township is on firm ground saying that he cannot fill the pond. Drilling the
well comes under the auspices of the County. At the Planning Commission meeting
Mr. Foote was told that he did not need to drill the new well, that he could do
the draw down test with his current wells. Neighbors with shallower wells will
potentially have problems before the immediate neighbors who have deeper wells.
Chair Martin also stated that the Township is waiting for more information from
Mr. Foote while at the same time gathering as much information as possible on
how the project will affect the area. Mr. Foote must have site plan approval
before he goes further. Supervisor Obst stated that the issue tonight is
whether we should tell Mr. Foote to not fill up the pond in more clear terms.
Trustee Zaban stated that his first thought when looking at the property was
that it looked like a fortress. The Township should send Mr. Foote a clear stop
and desist order. Darrell Brown asked that since Mr. Foote needs a permit from
the county to dig a well, why can't they stop him? It was stated that Mr.
Foote’s attitude is that he has money and will do whatever he wants to do. It
was also brought to the Board’s attention that the 70 gallon per minute figure
was based on a 75 degree day with 8 mile per hour winds. In this area he would
be more likely to encounter 30 mile per hour winds and warmer than 75 degree
days in the summer. Planning Commissioner Fink said that the drain commissioner
had drainage concerns that needed to be addressed. Doesn't sound like the
county’s specifications have been satisfied either. Building Inspector Aven
stated that Mr. Foote would have to get a grading permit after site plan
approval, which requires an engineering soil and geological report from a
certified engineer. The engineer would be the responsible party at that point.
The question was raised as to what is the Township Board going to do if Mr.
Foote does not obey the stop work orders? Attorney Schultz stated that once Mr.
Foote has received the order, if he then proceeds we go to court and make him
stop and put things back to the way they were when we told him to stop work. If
he does not follow that, then go back to the status quo which would mean
filling the pond. The DNR and Attorney General have been successful in getting
property owners to put their land back in the original condition . The Township
does have an aerial photo of how the property looked before the project began.
Neighbors are more in favor of mediation. They agree that Mr. Foote has to make
some changes. Mr. Foote would need to meet the current ordinances before the
Township would approve the project. Question was raised about the construction
companies having the responsibility to make sure the proper permits are pulled?
They do, but not all townships have grading permit ordinances, so the
contractors may not realize that we do require a grading permit. The consensus
of the board is that Mr. Foote should stop at this point and he will have to go
back to some extent. Planning Chair Martin stated that she received a call from
Mrs. June Imhoff, who lives across the street from Mr. Foote and was not able
to attend the meeting this evening. She is very concerned about her well, and
asked if there was a fine that can be imposed for doing work without the
required permits. There are provisions for imposing fines in our Zoning
Ordinance. Mr. Keith Litchfield stated that the Township needs to enforce the
ordinance, that's why we have it. Harold Powell stated that the exclusive use
of well water to fill and maintain this pond is a huge waste of our natural
resources. Dave Pingel at the DNR Land and Water Mgt. has a complaint number.
Their organization has the power to require Mr. Foote to put the property back
in its original condition. He will be out to look at the property. Chair Martin
will accompany him when he visits the site. Attorney Schultz stated that Mr.
Foote was in statutory violation. Clerk Graham said Mr. Foote should be put on
notice to cease and desist in a registered letter with very strong verbiage.
Supervisor Obst will write the letter emphasizing concern from neighbors and
stating that he is ordered to stop, not just requested to. Trustee Wiegandt
said that we need to have Attorney Schultz write the letter with Supervisor
Obst using very strong wording. Per Board consensus the letter will be written
with Supervisor Obst’s signature and Attorney Schultz’s input. The Township
does have the criteria to come out with what the neighbors want to have happen.
[The letter was drafted and mailed on Dec 3, 1997.]
Litchfield
The Planning Commission recommends approval for the pole barn on Mr.
Litchfield's property. It is related to the business that is already existing.
The barn will be used for storage of inventory. There will be no power or water
run to it. The Drain Commission gave their approvals. Mr. Litchfield will put
in a tree line barrier. There is a sufficient tree screening in some areas to
block the view of the neighbor's house. The Planning Commission put the
following stipulations on their recommendation for approval - paving of parking
lot would not be required; additional screening to be added at north and south
property lines; and compliance with state barrier free laws in respect to
parking to be ascertained by the Building Inspector. The new building will be
75 ft wide and 120 ft long. It will not stand out any from the current
building. Clerk Graham moved that the Board recommend approval of the site plan
with the stipulations listed. Seconded by Trustee Wiegandt. Unanimously
approved.
NEW BUSINESS
Community Septic Systems - Mickey Martin
November 6th there was a meeting held to discuss the long term management and
care of community cluster septic systems and the role the Drain Commission may
play in this management if the Township will agree to the liability and
responsibility of them. Present at this meeting were Bob Godbold, Bruce Gruner
and Gary Rowe from the Ingham County Health Department; John Catterino and
Holly Mercer from the State of Michigan DEQ; Eric A. Schertzing, Deputy Drain
Commissioner; Bob Hayes and Mickey Martin from the Williamstown Township
Planning Commission.
Pine Knoll and BAAN.GAN.AKA are the only developments in the township that
currently have community septic systems. No new developments with this type of
septic system will be permitted until the township agrees to accept full
responsibility and liability for the approval of the systems, the proper
installation and on site inspections, continuing operation, all maintenance and
drive by monitoring, etc. This would be a major responsibility and liability
for the township to undertake. The County and State are of the opinion that
these are not permanent systems. The Township should agree to accept this
responsibility by allowing the community septic systems only if they are
looking to hook these sites up to a public waste water treatment plant. If
that's not in the future of the township, then the township should not take on
this responsibility. The Township can hire the Ingham County Drain Commission
to do the drive bys, monitor the alarms, etc. We would have to write our own
ordinance and have the Ingham County Drain Commission agree to provide the man
power to monitor the systems. The Health Department would also need an
agreement to know what their function would be and how they would be kept
informed.
Pine Knoll’s system has already failed with only 6 houses on it. Neighbors were
annoyed and turned off the alarm. No one who needed to know about the problem
knew until the next house was going to hook up to the system. Livingston County
will no longer allow new developments to have community septic systems because
of problems with existing systems and assessing limitations. This would be a
big responsibility for this township to take on. We would need more staff.
Current mechanisms in effect are reactionary. The homeowner can be assessed if
something goes wrong. The County and State wants the Townships to take the
responsibility and liability for the systems and not homeowner associations.
Treasurer Nilsson stated that she could not vote to have the township take on
this responsibility right now and that the systems do not fit with the goals of
the township to contain growth. Clerk Graham stated that if we go forward with
these systems, then starting Jan 1998 we would have to do a study and make an
assessment based on the people that are already connected to these systems.
Mr. Chad Walter stated that these septic systems are an issue all down the I-96
corridor. The developers are looking to extend from Brighton. He was here to
support the community disposal systems. Mr. Walter is a resident and the
developer of the BAAN.GAN.AKA land condominium community, which uses a
community septic system. In his view a large part of the problem is financial
and political. We have the means to handle almost any system that the soil
might demand. BAAN.GAN.AKA’s system has an enormous amount of redundancy and is
expected to last forever. They have 4 drain fields and use them in alternating
years. Problems arise when you have a poorer quality of design, maintenance and
monitoring. If the township waits until the demand hits, then they will be in a
reactionary position. If you see the development coming and plan for it now,
you will not be in a reactionary position. Soils dictate what can and should be
done. Mr. Walter believes soils will dictate that the community system can be
done. If not, then go with mound systems which are costly and must be rebuilt
periodically. If you have a community system then you have the ability to
assess the property owners using the system for future problems so that you
have the money when you need it. There are standards available for the
construction, maintenance and monitoring of these systems. The township has the
authority to require higher standards, but they would not have to reinvent the
wheel. Monitoring has to be done regularly. The County has the staff to provide
the service as long as the Township will fund it. There are also other
individuals around who the Township could contract with to provide monitoring
services. There are several firms that are starting up maintenance contracts
throughout Michigan that could be hired for maintenance work. As the projects
are coming on line these companies are sculpturing services to provide them to
whomever requires them. There are also some very qualified engineers in the
area to design the systems. Access to money - if you have a home owners
association in the form of a land condominium you have the taxing authority in
place. Can this liability be bonded? Don't know yet. Mr. Walter asks that the
Township look at the issue carefully before voting on it. Feels that it is an
excellent solution for the soils in this area. The Township will not have a
sewer system for a long time because of how land is partitioned in this
township. Biggest issues are the vehicles for politics and the vehicles for
money to make it work. Supervisor Obst asked if the Township wanted to pursue
this issue further? Planning Chair Martin stated that it will cost money to
investigate the issue. These systems have the potential to increase development
twice as fast in the area than if we don't allow them. The State is not going
to control our growth, we need to do it ourselves. Need to consider the
responsibility and liability. There was a question from the audience on a
central system disposing into the Red Cedar. Clerk Graham confirmed that the
feasibility system did dispose into the river. It is an issue of looking at
water course disposal or on site disposal. Planning Commissioner Fink raised
the concern of needing to convert all green fields from Detroit to Chicago to
development. At what risk do we allow this to happen? Trustee Wiegandt
commented that this is still a general law township. We are on the verge of
growing, but we don’t have to grow too quickly at this point if we don't want
to. Taking on policy at this stage of the game is a little premature. He would
like more time to study the issue - maybe 6-8 months. Supervisor Obst moved
that at this time the Township does not want to go forward with the community
septic systems. Supported by Clerk Graham. The two developments that we have
are both quite nice. Clerk Graham stated that if you have an owner operator it
is much better than a tenant. Planning Chair Martin stated that these systems
will encourage higher density. Trustee Wiegandt stated that if the State of
Michigan doesn’t want to get involved in these systems then why should this
little township do it? Clerk Graham stated that the Township should not have to
pay for this, it should be self supporting. Planning Chair Martin stated that
it would be the townships responsibility to make sure that it is self
supporting. Clerk Graham would like more information. Mr. Walter stated that
each parcel in the township already has a density figure attached to it. In
BAAN.GAN.AKA the system did not increase the density, it allowed more of the
land to be kept as a natural area where the drain fields are. Every parcel
already has a density figure on it. Now the question is how do you do it the
best way you can? Preplanning puts the township in a stronger position to
handle the growth in the future. Vote taken on the motion - motion passed
unanimously. Trustee Zaban brought up the Larkin development where the county
has vetoed every proposal put to them so far for septic systems. Mr. Walter’s
development is working wonderfully. Problem is that not all developers are as
conscientious. Planning Chair Martin should talk to Mr. Walter to determine how
the system is proceeding and then report to the Board before researching
community systems any further.
ATTORNEY’S REPORT - Steve Schultz
An additional public hearing on the Annexation Case will be held on Dec. 11 at
2:45 PM at 6500 Mercantile Way, Lansing.
Friday the 5th the lawyers for the Township and the City will meet in mediation
before a panel of three other attorneys in an attempt to settle the Sewer
lawsuit. The Attorneys will each make a 15 minute presentation to the panel.
Pled as an alternative that if the City won't honor the contract they should
pay the Township funds sufficient to build a waste water treatment plant. Only
the attorneys are allowed to attend the mediation. The panel will probably find
that this should not have been deferred to mediation. But going through the
process is mandatory in Michigan. The Township submitted a proposal to the City
a couple of weeks ago. We have not received any response one way or the other.
The proposal was taken to the City Council at their last meeting on November
24th.
Sidewalk ordinance - Attorney Schultz is reviewing the language on variances.
BUILDING PERMITS - Walt Aven
Only 1 new house last month. Overall the building permits for new residences
are down this year.
ADVISORY COUNCIL - Rudd Hoag
The Planning Chair now also makes a report to the advisory council.
Environment and Recreation committee is very active. Asked to write a
recommendation to set up a township wide well inspection. Gerr Schultink is
working with the county on this.
Red Cedar River - impact on the area - water environment.
Park plans from the MSU students are at the Township hall - presentation will
be on the 11th. Advisory council is not going to meet because of this meeting.
Still looking for someone to serve on the intergovernmental committee.
Transportation and Communications - Web page - Clerk Graham received a bid
proposal of $375 for an additional CO card to get 4 more phone/modem lines
installed at the Township Hall. This card is required for the Township to be
able to have a dedicated line for a modem. The Transportation and
Communications sub-committee recommends the Township get on line. Brian
Jennings will check with Ingham County to see if the Township can attach to
their web page. Will still need a service to get e:mail connected in the
office. Whether or not the Township has a web page at this time it is still
important that we hook up to e:mail
Nancy - monitoring gypsy moth.
Open Land committee very active. Will try to have something in every
newsletter. Have formulated a survey in draft form. 4 page survey. Insert it in
the newsletter? Separate mailing? How to distribute it.
Library issue - need to have Gerald Eidt report back to the advisory council.
Community Center seems like a logical place to most of the advisory council.
ASSESSORS REPORT - Norm Obst
Need to finalize the form for next March’s Board of Review. - Tabled until next
month.
1998 Poverty Exemption Guidelines - to be researched and updated.
OLD BUSINESS
Red Cedar Rec. - Sent letter.
Russell Aker - Claiming the concrete he is dumping isn’t harmful. He is
claiming that since it isn’t hazardous waste, that it is not unlawful dumping.
Planning Coordinator Martin referred Mr. Aker to the Township’s Planning
Consultant, Chris Doozen. Mr. Aker requested to know who filed the complaint
against him. Trustee Wiegandt stated to respond to Mr. Aker that the Township
Board was made aware of the situation, was concerned and the Board filed the
complaint. Supervisor Obst will draft the letter of response to Mr. Aker.
NEW BUSINESS
Williamston Community Schools Tax Collection
Clerk Graham suggested we quote the school district the $4.50 per parcel that
was paid 3 years ago, with a prorated share being paid by Ingham Intermediate
and the rest paid by the school districts. Treasurer Nilsson does not feel
comfortable quoting a rate at this time. Treasurer Nilsson, Supervisor Obst,
and Clerk Graham will put together the figures and make a proposal to the
school district.
Spagnuolo's
The Township has received a request from the Michigan Department of Consumer
and Industry Services, Liquor Control Commission, Licensing Division for a
Local Approval Notice & Resolution to transfer the ownership of the 1988 Class
C licensed business with Dance-Entertainment Permit, located at 1268 Grand
River, Williamston, MI 48895, Williamstown Township, Ingham County, from
Spagnuolo Enterprises (a holding company) to Spagnuolo Management, Inc. (the
active company). Clerk Graham moved to approve the requested resolution.
Supported by Trustee Wiegandt. Supervisor Obst called for a Roll Call Vote.
   Ayes:   Trustee Wiegandt, Trustee Zaban, Treasurer Nilsson, Clerk Graham,
Supervisor Obst
   Nays:   None
Resolution passed unanimously.
Rowley Road Sidewalk
The terrain in the area does not make a sidewalk on Rowley Road feasible.
Budget and Septic Sewer and Replacement Fund - Clerk Graham
Septic Sewer and Replacement Fund preliminary budgets presented by Clerk
Graham. Brief review and discussion. Moved and seconded by mutual consent of
the Township Board to approve these as presented.
The Township is over budget on Constable Dahlstrom's payroll, which comes under
the category of the Zoning Administration. Clerk Graham recommends taking $1000
out of contingency and placing it in account 101-411-702, Zoning Administration
- supported by Trustee Wiegandt. Approved unanimously.
Wayne Siegel - Burning Issue
Scott Fienup was burning without a burning permit. There was black smoke. The
Township should investigate what he was burning. Trustee Wiegandt said that the
Township should impose a fine. Constable Dahlstrom should investigate. On Epley
Road. There were pails there. Seems like he is burning illegal materials.
Christmas Bonus
Trustee Wiegandt moved and Trustee Zaban supported that the Christmas bonus for
office staff remain $75 this year. The office staff includes the office
secretaries, the deputies, the planning coordinator and the planning commission
secretary. Motion passed unanimously.
Township Calendar & MTA Legislative Updates
The Michigan Townships Association (MTA) requested the Township Board pass a
resolution regarding legislation for future road jurisdiction options.
Treasurer Nilsson moved and Clerk Graham supported that the Board adopt the
following resolution:
WHEREAS, Michigan township officials are elected to represent over four million
citizens; and
WHEREAS, There are in excess of 85,000 miles of primary and secondary roads
located within the boundaries of townships; and
WHEREAS, The comprehensive transportation fund, Public Act 51 of 1951, created
a formula to distribute transportation funds for road creation, repair and
improvements among governmental units having jurisdiction over roads; and
WHEREAS, Because townships do not have jurisdiction over roads, they receive no
direct funding from Act 51; and
WHEREAS, However, without being obligated by statute to contribute any funds
for road purposes, townships annually send millions of dollars from their
general and special funds and/or special assessments to assist in road
construction, repair and maintenance; now, therefore, be it hereby
RESOLVED, That the township of Williamstown support legislation that would
include townships in the Michigan Transportation Fund distributions; and be it
further
RESOLVED, That a township planning fund be created within Act 51 from the urban
and rural road set asides provided for in the Michigan Transportation Fund
spent only with township input and without matching funds; and be it further
RESOLVED, That a copy of this resolution be sent to Representative Gustafson,
and Senator Byrum, Governor Engler and the Michigan Townships Association.
Resolution was passed unanimously.
CONSENT AGENDA
Trustee Zaban moved to approve the minutes of the Regular Township Board
Meeting held November 4, 1997; to acknowledge the Treasurer’s report of
financial activities for November 1997; and to authorize the Clerk’s list of
accounts payable on December 2, 1997 - checks # 8418 - 8477 for a total of
$29,977.80. Supported by Trustee Wiegandt. Supervisor Obst called for a roll
call vote:
   Ayes:   Trustee Zaban, Trustee Wiegandt, Treasurer Nilsson, Clerk Graham,
Supervisor Obst.
   Nays:   None.
Meeting Adjourned At 11:25 PM.
________________________________         ____________________________________
Shirley Graham, Clerk               Sue Jennings, Recording Secretary
1998 Meeting Minutes
JANUARY 6, 1998
The regular meeting of the WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP BOARD OF TRUSTEES was called
to order by Supervisor Obst on Tuesday, January 6, 1998 at 7:36 PM. The Clerk
was asked to record who was present and if a quorum was present. Clerk Graham
stated a quorum was present and recorded the following: Supervisor Obst, Clerk
Graham, Treasurer Nilsson, Trustee Wiegandt, Trustee Zaban and Building
Inspector Aven.
The agenda was read over with the following additions: Budget review; request
from Ingham County Saddlemates 4-H club to use the hall; request from
Manchester Plastics to use the hall;. sanitary sewer district #2 - compilation
of monies paid; Fire Board minutes from 12-11-97; and the January newsletter
deadlines.
REPORTS
Fire Board Report - Darrell Brown
The Fire Board agreed to reinvest the CD that came due into another 12 month CD
at the best available rate. They have received bids for the generators that
were up for sale. The Board has agreed to accept a bid of $1000 for the main
generator. They have also informed the interested party that there is another
generator available if they are interested. The Board has informed their
architect firm that things were to be put on hold due to the property
acquisition situation. The person that purchased the Beech property will not
use it for a couple of years and may be able to work something out where the
Fire Board could use the property in the mean time. It is still hard for the
Fire Board to understand why the members representing the City had not
conversed with the City Council about the proposed property purchase. The Fire
Chief and Board still believe the current location is the best location for the
Fire Department to serve the community. There are concerns among members of the
Fire Board that the Library seems to be of greater concern to the City than the
fire department. The Fire Board had to give up the $1000 deposit because of
what happened with the attempted purchase of the property. The Fire Chief
believes the Fire Board should hire an attorney unrelated to any of the
municipalities around. Mr. Lounsbury purchased the property the fire board was
interested in purchasing. Treasurer Nilsson asked what the general feeling of
the Fire Board was in regards to combining with the Library. The Fire Board
does not believe they are compatible entities and does not want to risk having
a bonding issue defeated because of the Library being included. The Fire Board
questioned why the City doesn't put the Library in the US Plastics building
where they are already moving the Police Department and DPW? There is certainly
no more room to add the Library at the current Fire Department location. Mr.
Harold Powell raised some fundraising issues in combining the Fire Board and
the Library. The two entities serve the community in different ways. Half of
Wheatfield and part of Williamstown are in school districts other than
Williamston. People tend to use the libraries associated with the school
district that they belong to. That could drastically hurt a millage issue if
they try to combine with the fire department, especially since there is already
a new 1 mill millage rate at the county level for the library district. The
Fire Board serves three different municipalities and at least 5 different
school districts. This is not quite the same situation as Delhi Charter
Township, where the Library, Town Hall, Police and Fire Departments are all
located in the same new facility.
Attorney's Report - Steve Schultz
Brief Delivered On The Foote Pond Issue. The Township is in a position to
prevent the drilling of any wells until site plan approval. Flooding would be
private cause of action. The property owner would have to file a trespassing
suit. The Township could not be involved. Blight and nuisance ordinances do not
apply.
Sidewalk Ordinance - Can the Township, through the ordinance, require the
property owners to accept the responsibility and the liability to accidents on
the sidewalk due to the sidewalk not being maintained properly? The Township
does have the ability to do this. It is a policy issue for the Township to
decide whether or not they want to do this and to what extent they may want to
do this. This does not mean the Township could not be sued. It means the
property owner would also be sued. In most cases the plaintive is looking for
their damages, and they don't really care where it comes from. Typically our
insurance carrier and the property owner's insurance carrier would be sued. It
is up to the Board to decide how they want to distribute the risk and
responsibility.
Annexation And Ongoing Litigation With The City. There was a public hearing at
the Boundary Commission on December 11th. The 30 day materials are due Monday,
January 12th. Attorney Schultz will put together a letter to address the water
issue and the scurrilous attack of the City's Engineer. The Engineer himself
was not happy with how his comments were taken out of context. The Township
does not want the record left with some of those erroneous statements left
unchallenged. Attorney Schultz met with Supervisor Obst and Trustee Wiegandt
with respect to the proposal received from the City to try to resolve the sewer
litigation. The Township is still working on its response.
MTA Convention - The law firm will have a dinner for clients on Tuesday,
January 20th. Wednesday and Thursday Attorney Schultz and a couple other
attorneys from the firm will be speaking at some of the workshops.
Treasurer Nilsson had a question about the Sidewalk Ordinance mentioning a
civil infraction vs. criminal misdemeanor. The Township can make it a civil
infraction to fail to maintain the sidewalk in front of your property. Also,
special assessment districts can be used to fund sidewalks and their
maintenance, but private property owners can challenge districts set up by the
Board.
Supervisor Obst is concerned about high attorney fees. He realizes the current
situations with the City of Williamston have necessitated an increase in the
time required of the attorney in the past year. However, he would like to
improve communication between the Township office and the Attorney’s office to
have estimates on services requested ahead of time.
A neighbor in the Foote situation (if flooded) would have to file a civil
lawsuit for trespass. This would be to stop the trespass and to be reimbursed
for damages. This is a private dispute between two people and the Township's
ordinances would not apply, since it is not a "public" problem. The Township
can require a lot in terms of site plan review to help prevent the problem from
occurring in the first place, but once the problem occurs it is a private
dispute. The Township can prevent drilling of the wells until a site plan has
been approved.
Building Permit Activities - Walt Aven
There were 27 building permits issued for new homes and 2 demolitions, for a
net gain of 25 new homes in the Township in 1997. In 1996 there were 51
building permits issued for new homes in the Township.
Planning Commission - Mickey Martin
Proposed Changes To Zoning Ordinance Dealing With The Zoning Board Of Appeals
(ZBA).
Instead of all five criteria having to be met, the proposed change would
require that there be unique circumstances and the ZBA will consider the
remaining 4 criteria in making their determination. The request must be unique
to the property and the general area. This will give the ZBA a little more
flexibility to make their determinations on a one on one basis. Self created
circumstances will be looked at a little more in depth. The Planning Commission
is looking for the Board to approve the changes or send them back to the
Planning Commission for further modifications. Trustee Wiegandt made a motion
to approve the proposed amendments. Supported by Clerk Graham. Roll Call vote:
   Ayes:   Treasurer Nilsson, Trustee Zaban, Trustee Wiegandt, Clerk Graham,
Supervisor Obst
   Nays:   None
Lot Splits - Fee Schedule
Because of the new State Land Division Act it is possible to obtain up to 16
splits very quickly without platting. Currently the Township charges $75 for
the application and then $50 for each resulting parcel. The Planning Commission
would like to retain this fee for the first 4 splits. When there are 5 or more
resulting parcels involved in a split the Planning Commission would like to set
up an escrow account under the same guidelines as are currently in place for
the platting of subdivisions, so that the lot split request can be sent to the
Township’s planning consultants and any other organizations deemed necessary
for a review without cost to the Township. The initial amount put into escrow
is $1500. When this is used up, the account must be replenished in $500
increments before further action would be taken on the part of the Township.
These larger lot splits are starting to come in. Planner Martin received one
today with 5 splits, and is expecting at least 2 more in the near future, one
with 9 and the other with 16 splits. Some of them are quite complicated. The
money left in the escrow account at the end of the process would be returned to
the applicant. Treasurer Nilsson moved that the Board approve revising the fee
schedule for lot splits to $75 plus $50 for each resulting parcel up to 4. Any
splits that have 5 or more resulting parcels would be put into an escrow
account of $1500 replenished at $500 increments per current policy when
necessary with fees assessed as according to the current policy. Seconded by
Trustee Zaban. Motion passed unanimously. Effective immediately.
Foote Property - Supervisor Obst wrote a letter informing Mr. Foote that he
must stop and desist all work. Mr. Foote asked how he could do the hydro test
if he doesn't drill the well? Planning Chair Martin responded that Mr. Foote
needed to provide a work study plan for the hydro test. This plan would have to
show how they planned on conducting the test and explain why the well would be
necessary to perform the test. The Township received a reply last Friday from
Mr. Foote’s engineers that was inadequate. The Township will send
recommendations from Planning Commissioner Hayes to RC and Associates to give
them a spelled out version of the phone conversations and the first letter. At
this point RC is saying that the study requested is cost prohibitive and they
are not going to do it. The Township is still requiring the work study plan
before they will allow the drilling of the well. Commissioner Hayes suggested
sending the study to STS for review, since Commissioner Hayes himself is not
personally bonded to represent the Township as an engineer.
The stop work order stands. The letter received from RC associates was not
sufficient to be considered a work study plan. Planning Chair Martin’s response
will emphasize that the stop work order will not be removed except by action of
the Township Board at such time as the conditions for the study have been met.
The current excavation at the site has the proposed pond built up like a dike.
Water will be held above the original grade. An engineering review will be
required to determine the stability of the pond. Mr. Foote could be held liable
in civil litigation should water seep out the sides and flood the neighbors.
Per Building Inspector Aven, Mr. Foote needs to have a review of how well the
walls are constructed and what they are constructed of. He would also be
required to pull a building permit should he receive site plan approval. The
building permit requires an engineered plan by a certified engineer who is
bonded and would be liable for the integrity of the proposed pond.
Building Inspector Aven also pointed out that the work study plan will have to
explain what Mr. Foote is going to do with the water he pumps for the draw down
test. He will not be allowed to put the water from the draw down test into the
pond. Mr. Foote needs an engineered drawing that shows the slopes, the perk
test, etc. that show the pond will hold the anticipated water. He will have a
difficult time changing things if required after the pond is filled.
The letter from Planning Chair Martin to Mr. Foote’s consultants is going to
reinforce the issue that there is a stop work order in effect and that
construction plans drawn up by an engineer are required for site plan approval,
and if approved, a grading permit.
Community Pool - Planning Chair Martin met with Al Gooch who was hired by the
school district to do an assessment of pool costs, possible programs,
management, personnel, etc. Mr. Gooch has run community pools for the last 25
years in the Midland area. The scheduled opening date for the pool is May 1998.
The pool is 75’ by 42’, and handicapped accessible. There is also a 12 person
hot tub connected to the pool. It would be possible to have 4 different
functions occurring simultaneously at the pool. The Township would like a good
accounting of costs. Mr. Gooch indicated that it should be fairly easy to track
costs. Chemicals and personnel would be fixed costs. Utilities would have to be
prorated since they share meters with the rest of the high school. Mr. Gooch is
looking at ways to inform the Townships of their usage. He will propose some
sort of a sign in. He is looking at a card with a bar code on it. People could
then buy a membership, or get a day card. It would then be easy to track who
used the pool when and for what. Should easily be able to generate the usage
reports that the Township would be looking for. Mr. Gooch asked how the
Township would want to pay their allotment - one lump sum or monthly billing.
One lump sum would be preferable by the Clerk and Treasurer who cut the checks.
His goal has been for user fees to pay most of the funds. The Midland pool is
currently 67% user fees, 22% United Way supplements, 11% foundation and
corporate funding. Mr. Gooch is not in favor of multiple rates. He would like
one rate across the board regardless of where you live. He is going to every
group who would likely use the pool to see what they want to have. The Township
will send him a copy of the agreement we set up with the school for funding.
The Park - Parks And Rec. Plan And Site Plan Time Table
January 13, 1998   1:00 PM   Planning Commission to walk Township park land
with Lori Leland-Kirk of McKenna Associates to plan goals.
January 13      7:00 PM   Planning Commission workshop to review afternoon
session, discuss proposals for park, and sketch preliminary site plan. Please
review proposed plan models and come to meeting with recommendations.
January 16            Draft plan submitted to Township and MDNR by McKenna
Associates.
January 20      8:00 PM   Regular Planning Commission meeting. Draft plans to
be reviewed.
January 27      8:00 PM   Special Planning Commission meeting. Public hearing
on park plan. Recommendations prepared for Township Board.
February 3      7:30 PM   Township Board meeting. Review and adoption of plan,
if possible (If needed, a special meeting could be scheduled.).
March 1               Adopted plan submitted to MDNR by March 1, 1998.
Clerk Graham moved to adopt the time table as presented for the parks and
recreation plan and call for the public hearing as designated on January 27th
at 8:00 PM. Supported by Trustee Wiegandt. Motion passed unanimously.
Advisory Board - Mickey Martin
No December meeting. Class from MSU came out December 11 to present their plans
for the park. Advisory Council meeting this month is January 19th. Will be
talking to the library people that evening - Mr. Noonan and Mr. DeForest.
Meeting at 7:30PM.
NEW BUSINESS
Ingham County Road Commission - Governors Proposal Of Jurisdictional Transfer
Of Various County Roads. - Joe Pulver, Ingham County Road Commission
Mr. Pulver is addressing all 16 townships in the County to let them know the
changes that MDOT and the Governor would like to see. The following is the
outline of his presentation:
·Loss of Local Road Revenue - The $2 million of primary road revenue
transferred each year to local roads will not be available.
·Loss of Federal Revenue for Primary Road Improvements - MDOT’s goal in the
takeover of Ingham County primary roads is to get control of all Federal
revenue available and use it on projects throughout the State. Federal money
that has been available may not be used to fund projects needed in Ingham
County.
·Need to Increase Local Taxes and/or Special Assessments - With MDOT
controlling all Federal revenue and the State revenue generated by these
primary roads, the only source of revenue for improvements on the roads
remaining under road commission jurisdiction will be from local taxes and/or
special assessments. The revenue we receive from the remaining roads may not
cover all maintenance costs.
·MDOT Will Not Provide Better Service - For roads taken over by MDOT, townships
and residents will lose their local contact. With 500 less MDOT employees, the
State will not be able to respond in a timely manner. When comparing the
condition of State roads to Ingham County roads, you will find most roads
maintained by the Ingham County Road Commission to be in better condition.
·It Will Cost More to Maintain Roads Taken Over by MDOT - MDOT plans to
contract the maintenance for roads they take over. Private contractor costs
will be much higher than those charged by public agencies and MDOT will need to
create another level of costly bureaucracy to administer these maintenance
projects.
·Jobs Could Be Lost to County Residents - If MDOT does contract the maintenance
of the roads they takeover, jobs could be lost to contractor employees from
outside Ingham County.
The Board agreed to review the proposed resolution from the County Road
Commission along with the proposed resolution from the MTA and adopt a
resolution favoring the County at the next meeting.
REPORTS
Assessors Report - Norm Obst
The Assessor is requesting that the Township adopt the federal poverty income
standards. Moved by Clerk Graham and supported by Trustee Wiegandt to adopt the
following federal poverty income standards as of 12-31-97 for use in setting
poverty exemption guidelines for 1998 assessments. Motion passed unanimously.
   # Of Persons Residing               Poverty
   In Homestead                  Threshold
   1 person (if age not considered)            $ 7,995
   1 person under 65 years               $ 8,163
   1 person 65 years and over            $ 7,525
   2 persons (if age not considered)            $10,233
   2 persons with householder being under 65 years      $10,564
   2 persons with householder being 65 years and over   $ 9,491
   3 persons                  $12,516
   4 persons                  $16,036
   5 persons                  $18,952
   6 persons                  $21,389
   7 persons                  $24,268
   8 persons                  $27,091
   9 persons                  $31,971
(The required asset level test of PA 390 of 1994 associated with these poverty
guidelines is to be determined after further study on the part of the Board.)
OLD BUSINESS
Russell Aker - Mickey Martin.
Mr. Aker refused the certified letter sent to him by the Township. The letter
stated that Mr. Aker had ten days to come up with a plan or clean up the site.
Attorney Schultz stated that the Township had a couple more options to attempt
to notify Mr. Aker: 1)Fax the letter to him; 2) mail it in a plain envelope
with no return address; or 3) send the constable out to hand deliver it.
North Williamston Road - Change Of Ownership. The new owner will receive a
letter informing him of Township requirements regarding his parcel. This is the
same type of dumping situation as Mr. Aker’s.
Summer School Tax Collection - The Township has not heard back from Williamston
Schools yet. The Board has also received requests from Perry and Ingham
Intermediate. The Board agreed to wait until the February meeting to hear from
Williamston Schools before responding to Perry and Ingham Intermediate.
NEW BUSINESS
Horizon Cablevision - refinancing letter of Dec 5, 1997. Response drafted by
Steve Zaban and Norm Obst complaining about the 15% increase in cable rates in
the past 12 months when the rate of inflation is only 1.8%. The letter will be
forwarded to the cable commission for their input before being forwarded to the
Horizon Cablevision Company.
Ingham County Drain Commission
The Board has received a Board of Determination Notice of the creation of the
Jeffries, Hepfer Branch Drain per section 280.72 of Public Act 40 of 1956 as
amended. The Township has also received notice of a hearing on the Shoeman
Barry Road Drain - McKeon Branch 1 and 2. The hearing will be held at the
Township hall on January 14th at 5:15 PM.
Proposed Zoning Ordinance Revision To Require Fire Hydrants - Norm Obst.
Supervisor Obst is asking the Planning Commission to investigate requiring
irrigation wells to provide fire hydrants to subdivisions of a certain size.
Bruce Gruner of the Ingham County Health Department has informed Supervisor
Obst that this type of well, which would not necessarily pump potable water,
would be allowed for fire hydrants. The Fire Department requires that the wells
provide at least 40 lbs of pressure at the hydrants. Supervisor Obst is making
this proposal based partly on discussions held at the Boundary Commission
Meeting. The Boundary Commission may believe having fire hydrants is a superior
method of fire protection to other methods. Trustee Wiegandt, a volunteer fire
fighter in Williamston disagreed. He believes the current tanker system is just
as safe and efficient as hydrants would be. Planning Commissioner Brian
Jennings was concerned about the seeming conflict of the Township not wanting
to allow community septic systems, but still wanting to promote community water
for the hydrants. If the hydrants were put in place it would be the home owners
associations that would be responsible for the cost and maintenance of the
hydrants. Treasurer Nilsson thinks the proposal is a little reactionary.
Attorney Schultz stated that the fire rating would be the same for the parcels
involved in the boundary dispute whether the property was in the City or the
Township, regardless of whether or not the Township had an ordinance requiring
hydrants. Trustee Wiegandt said the only irrigation well systems he has seen
are out west in areas where there was no other readily available water to fight
fires, and in that case the wells were used primarily for irrigation, which
would not be the case in the subdivisions here. The Planning Commission will
investigate the possible benefits and costs of requiring hydrants in
subdivisions.
It was left to the Planning Commission to determine what size subdivisions and/
or which zoning districts the hydrants would be required in, if it was
determined that it would be beneficial to the Township to require them.
According to Attorney Schultz the earliest time for the Boundary Commission’s
adjudicated session would be March, more likely April. The final decision would
be made at the following meeting. April or May would be the very earliest that
a decision will be made.
Commercial Business Meeting - Manchester Plastics has requested to rent the
hall for the next three Saturdays for training. The business is located in the
city of Williamston. There is no Township connection other than probable
resident employees. $100 security deposit and $75 per meeting. The Board agreed
to allow the rental since it is such short notice and there are no other
rentals on the books for those days.
4-H - Saddlemates - This group is interested in using the hall on the following
Sundays: November 16, 1997 (prior approval given for this date); January 11 &
25, 1998; February 8 & 22, 1998; March 8 & 22, 1998; and April 5 & 19, 1998.
Trustee Wiegandt would like to come up with some sort of project for the group
to do as a community service in lieu of rent for the hall. It was decided that
the Board will leave it up to the Saddlemates to propose a suitable project.
The schedule was approved pending the proposal of a project.
Thank You Letter Was Sent To Paul Nieratko for the park plans from his class.
Newsletter - Treasurer Nilsson
The next newsletter is scheduled to be mailed out Feb. 1st. Deadlines were sent
to all interested parties.
Sanitary Sewer Number 2 / East Side Project. 1987-89
The contract was entered into on the 3rd of February 1987 for an amount of
$103,005.81
Monies received to date are:
   Smiths      1st tap         $1,000.00
   Kane      2 taps water & sewer    3,029.60
   Klapp      1 tap 1997        1,514.80      $ 5,544.40
   9/13/93 Willow Village Agreement    2,000.00
    1994 “ “ “       2,112.78
    1995 “ “ “       2,539.10
    1996 “ “ “       2,302.36
    1997 “ “ “        2,480.21      $11,434.45
 
Total received to date / 17% received to date:            $16,978.85
         8 years since final payment on Contract
Waste Management, at the time an Ingham County Facility, was allowed to connect
at no cost for the tap-in fees, per then City Manager Paul B. Goode.
Budget Review - There is no place in the current budget where we are over that
needs to be amended.
CONSENT AGENDA
The minutes of the December 2, 1997 meeting were amended to include brackets
around statements that were added to the minutes after the meeting. Treasurer
Nilsson moved to approve the minutes of the Regular Township Board Meeting held
December 2, 1997 as amended; to acknowledge the Treasurer’s report of financial
activities for December 1997; and to authorize the Clerk’s list of accounts
payable on January 6, 1998 - checks # 8478 - 8552 for a total of $41,733.63.
Supported by Clerk Graham. Supervisor Obst called for a roll call vote:
   Ayes:   Supervisor Obst, Trustee Wiegandt, Trustee Zaban, Treasurer Nilsson,
Clerk Graham
   Nays:   None
Meeting Adjourned At 11:05 PM.
___________________________________      ___________________________________
Shirley Graham, Clerk               Susan Jennings, Recording Secretary
FEBRUARY 3, 1998
The regular meeting of the Williamstown Township Board of Trustees was called
to order by Supervisor Norman Obst on Tuesday, February 3, 1998 at 7:35 p.m.
The Clerk verified that a quorum was present. Supervisor Obst reviewed the
agenda, adding discussion of the community pool report. Present were:
Supervisor Norman Obst, Clerk Shirley Graham, Treasurer Christine Nilsson,
Trustee Ronald Wiegandt, Trustee Steven Zaban (8:00 p.m.), Township Attorney
Stephen Schultz, and Building Inspector Walter Aven.
FIRE BOARD REPORT - Darrell Brown
The Fire Board had decided it needed the guidance of an attorney in the matter
of creating a fire district, and had interviewed Mark Adams. He had attended
the January 28, 1998 meeting with the City of Williamston and surrounding
townships to discuss the possibility of setting up a fire district for the five
areas. The Mayor of Webberville had also been present. It had been decided to
ask for approval from the City and Townships for a representative from each
municipality to serve on a new District Fire Board Committee which would
proceed with researching the setting up of a fire district. Mr. Brown reported
that the meeting was a positive step toward cooperation between the
governmental units. The amount of money to be contributed would be discussed at
a future meeting.
Supervisor Obst said the issue was whether the present Fire Board had legal
authority to hire an attorney. Members of the municipalities, acting via the
District Fire Board Committee, could hire someone, and send representatives to
attend meetings. Trustee Wiegandt said a resolution was needed, to state that
the Township’s current representatives were authorized to make a decision to
employ an attorney and spend the necessary funds. He felt practices of the past
47 years had worked well, but now other procedures must be followed. IT WAS
MOVED BY TRUSTEE WIEGANDT, SECONDED BY TREASURER NILSSON, THAT THE PRESENT
TOWNSHIP FIRE BOARD REPRESENTATIVES BE AUTHORIZED TO MAKE DECISIONS FOR
REASONABLE EXPENDITURES FOR THE USE OF AN ATTORNEY IN THE MATTER OF
ESTABLISHING A FIRE DISTRICT. THE MOTION WAS AMENDED TO ADD APPROVAL OF
ADDITIONAL EXPENDITURES FOR A RECORDING SECRETARY.
Attorney Schultz said two agreeing municipalities could not compel the third to
participate. If agreement could not be reached the present Fire Board would
probably disband and a new arrangement would need to be adopted. [Trustee Zaban
entered the meeting] THE BOARD VOTED ON THE ABOVE MOTION, ALL VOTING IN FAVOR.
The Board appointed Trustee Wiegandt to serve as the Township’s representative
on the District Fire Board Committee, which was a separate entity from the Fire
Board, and would only remain in effect until a decision on fire district had
been made.
ADVISORY COUNCIL REPORT - Intergovernmental Concerns - Rutgar Hoag
The Council had met with City of Williamston representatives to discuss fire
and library concerns. An intergovernmental committee was proposed, to include
one board member and one member at large from each municipality, to discuss
mutual concerns. Municipalities asked to join were the City of Williamston, and
Williamstown, Wheatfield, Leroy and Locke Townships. The Advisory Council
recommended that Jim Ballard be appointed chairperson of the Township’s
Intergovernmental Affairs Committee. IT WAS MOVED BY SUPERVISOR OBST, SECONDED
BY TREASURER NILSSON, PASSED, THAT JAMES BALLARD BE APPOINTED CHAIR OF THE
TOWNSHIP INTERGOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS COMMITTEE. Mr. Hoag then asked that the
Board agree to participate on the proposed intergovernmental committee with the
other four municipalities. He suggested appointing two members for that
committee, and recommended James Ballard as the at-large member. Treasurer
Nilsson agreed to serve as the Board representative for one year.
IT WAS MOVED BY CLERK GRAHAM, SECONDED BY TRUSTEE ZABAN, PASSED, THAT JAMES
BALLARD AND CHRISTINE NILSSON BE APPOINTED TO SERVE ON THE PROPOSED
INTERGOVERNMENTAL COMMITTEE WITH OTHER MUNICIPALITIES. Treasurer Nilsson said
she would inform the City Mayor that the Township was ready to proceed with the
committee.
ATTORNEY’S REPORT - Stephen Schultz
The Boundary Commission has scheduled an annexation adjudicative session on
February 12, 1998; the Township was the only party which had filed a rebuttal
to the 30 day materials. Proposed Zoning Ordinance revisions submitted by the
Planning Commission had been reviewed and were legally acceptable. Letters of
credit from Steeplechase Subdivision were also satisfactory. A new master deed
for The Pines Office Park had just been submitted for his review. A
counterproposal to the City regarding the sewer agreement lawsuit needs to be
prepared.
Regarding a fax sent in error to the another office instead of Supervisor Obst,
Mr. Schultz explained the circumstances and the procedures which had been put
in place to prevent a recurrence. He also said Mr. Obst’s proposal to insure
preapproval of work assignments was acceptable, and he would insure that all
work was approved before it was done.
BUILDING INSPECTOR’S REPORT - Walter Aven
Building permits for five homes had been issued in January. Report placed on
file.
PLANNING COMMISSION REPORT - Mickey Martin
Steeplechase Division: Final plat approval was requested. The Planning
Commission had recommended approval with two conditions, and those requirements
had now been met. The mylar plat was ready to be signed. IT WAS MOVED BY
TRUSTEE WIEGANDT , SECONDED BY TRUSTEE ZABAN, PASSED, THAT THE BOARD APPROVE
THE FINAL PLAT FOR STEEPLECHASE SUBDIVISION AND AUTHORIZE THE CLERK TO SIGN THE
MYLAR COPY.
Zoning Ordinance Revisions: Supervisor Obst had expressed concern about some
proposed changes, and Planning Coordinator Martin had reviewed them with
Planning Consultant Christopher Doozan. Side yard setbacks - Mr. Obst felt
reducing them to as little as ten feet could cause a nuisance. According to
Planning Coordinator Martin, the proposed use of the building could be
ascertained when a building permit was granted, and use as a home occupation
would be regulated by the Zoning Ordinance. Shared driveways - Maintenance
problems could arise. Wording was added to include joint use “and maintenance”
of driveways. Attorney Schultz said maintenance problems would clearly be a
private dispute and the Township should not be involved. Use of nonconforming
lots - Mr. Schultz said changing wording to “lacks sufficient frontage” could
create a situation where access to a nonbuildable lot, which may have been
created specifically as such, could be obtained via an easement on neighboring
property. He suggested the revision not be approved, and additional
consideration be given at a later time. Recreational vehicles - Supervisor Obst
suggested screening from the street be required, and inside storage be
necessary over a certain number of vehicles. Ms. Martin said limits would need
to be set for each zoning district and size of parcel, and an enforcement issue
would be created. Audience member Velma Oesterle suggested the Board not
undertake additional enforcement responsibilities if it did not intend to
require compliance. It was agreed that the wording would remain as submitted.
IT WAS MOVED BY CLERK GRAHAM, SECONDED BY TRUSTEE WIEGANDT, PASSED, THAT THE
BOARD ADOPT PROPOSED REVISIONS TO THE ZONING ORDINANCE, EXCEPTING THE ITEM ON
NONCONFORMING LOTS, AND WITH MODIFICATION OF THE SHARED DRIVEWAYS PROVISION, TO
BECOME EFFECTIVE SEVEN DAYS AFTER PUBLICATION.
Sidewalk Ordinance: Attorney Schultz had drafted language for civil infraction
penalties. There had been much discussion by the Planning Commission regarding
the maintenance and repair of sidewalks. In its recommended form,
responsibility would be directed to adjacent homeowners. IT WAS MOVED BY
TREASURER NILSSON, SECONDED BY TRUSTEE ZABAN, THAT THE PROPOSED SIDEWALK
ORDINANCE BE ADOPTED. Resident Gerald Eidt opposed shifting maintenance of
roadsides from the Road Commission to the property owner. Potential liability
was also shifted from the Township and/or Road Commission to the resident.
Those responsibilities fell on a small number of property owners, while
benefiting a larger number of residents. Opposition to future sidewalks could
occur due to the burden on property owners. He asked that the Board reconsider
requiring homeowners to pay for the replacement of sidewalks, which could be a
financial hardship, and asked that the Township assume the replacement
responsibility. Building Inspector Aven said a problem could arise when a
homeowner had directly caused sidewalk damage, due to landscaping,
construction, etc.
Supervisor Obst said the Township could set up a special assessment district;
Mr. Eidt felt that would be appropriate because it would shift some
responsibility to people who directly benefited from a sidewalk. Clerk Graham
agreed with Mr. Eidt. Treasurer Nilsson stated that a sidewalk ordinance had
been recommended by legal counsel, and the Township should not commit to
sidewalk maintenance when it had no public works department. The ordinance
should not give the Township responsibility for clearing of snow, etc.,
although the Township could choose to provide the service, if desired. Trustee
Wiegandt stated that the Board had not set a policy on the matter. Clerk Graham
said the Township could assess all or a part of the costs. The motion was
amended to include the addition of the following wording in two places in the
ordinance: assess cost to property involved “or benefited”. THE BOARD VOTED ON
THE ABOVE MOTION, AS AMENDED, WHICH PASSED UNANIMOUSLY.
Parks and Recreation Master Plan and Park Site Plan: The plan had been approved
by the Planning Commission and recommended for approval by the Board. Some
small modifications needed to be made in the plan, as noted by Planning
Coordinator Martin. A resolution for approval was submitted to the Board. IT
WAS MOVED BY TRUSTEE WIEGANDT, SECONDED BY TREASURER NILSSON, THAT THE
RESOLUTION FOR APPROVAL OF THE PARKS AND RECREATION MASTER PLAN AND PARK SITE
PLAN BE APPROVED, WITH THE SUGGESTED MODIFICATIONS. A ROLL CALL VOTE WAS TAKEN:
AYES - TRUSTEE ZABAN, TREASURER NILSSON, TRUSTEE WIEGANDT, CLERK GRAHAM,
SUPERVISOR OBST. NAYS: NONE.
Treasurer Nilsson stated that the purpose of updating the Parks and Recreation
Master Plan had been to qualify for grants for park development. She asked that
a cost estimate be obtained from McKenna Associates to prepare such a grant.
Fire Hydrants: The Planning Commission had been directed by the Board to
consider requiring hydrants in subdivisions. After receiving a report from
Planning Consultant Doozan, the Planning Commission did not recommend pursuing
such requirements. The Board agreed that the evidence indicated tankers were
just as effective, and in some cases more effective, in providing fire
protection.
ADVISORY COUNCIL REPORT (continued) - Rutgar Hoag
The Council planned to ask for results of well samples taken by residents. The
Transportation Committee was considering an improvement plan for Mitchell and
Vanneter Roads. Supervisor Obst asked that residents be queried about the
amount they would be willing to pay for park development and maintenance.
COMMUNITY POOL REPORT - Mickey Martin
A draft of Community Pool Report had been developed, which outlined plans for
operation of the pool. The goals for the pool were to be available to all
residents and to be self-supporting. A proposed budget was also included. All
local municipalities would be charged the same fees.
ASSESSOR’S REPORT - Norman Obst
Board of Review would be held in March. Only one case had gone to the Tax
Tribunal this year, which Mr. Obst felt was a compliment to the Board of
Review.
No Board of Appeals meetings had been held in January.
OLD BUSINESS
Russell Aker, Glaser Road - No grading permit had been requested, and Mr. Aker
did not respond to the Township’s attempts to contact him. Attorney Schultz
said there was a question about whether broken concrete constituted clean fill,
and since no grading permit had been granted, Mr. Aker was in violation of the
Zoning Ordinance. Options were to file an appearance ticket and seek a fine
through District Court, or to seek an injunction through Circuit Court. If the
filling process had ceased, he suggested the appearance ticket course of
action. The Board agreed to direct the constable to serve an appearance ticket,
and take photographs of the site.
Scott Fienup, Epley Road - He had stated that would not burn construction
refuse in the future.
Paul Hallam, Williamston Road - Supervisor Obst proposed waiting another month
to see if fill materials on the site would be properly taken care of.
Jeff Foote, Gulick Road - A pump/drawdown test plan had been received and sent
to Planning Commissioner Robert Hayes for review. An engineered site plan had
also been received. The applicant proposed to pump eight million gallons of
water within a 30 day period. The well test had been required to ascertain if
Mr. Foote’s plan for a pond would have an impact on the aquifer and residential
wells in the area. The design of the proposed test must be approved before the
test can commence. Supervisor Obst suggested awaiting Mr. Hayes’ report, and
perhaps hiring an engineer to review the test results. Trustee Wiegandt
questioned how much pumping would be required, after filling, to maintain the
water level. Supervisor Obst referred the matter to the Planning Commission.
Ingham County Road Commission - The proposal to transfer jurisdiction of some
Township roads to the Michigan Department of Transportation was discussed. The
Board generally favored retaining County Road Commission’s control, but decided
to wait until March to make a decision on which proposal to support.
Township Park Development Plan Costs - A bill had been received from McKenna
Associates for preparation of the Parks and Recreation Master Plan and the Park
Site Plan. IT WAS MOVED BY CLERK GRAHAM, SECONDED BY TRUSTEE WIEGANDT, PASSED,
THAT PAYMENT OF EXPENSES FOR PREPARATION OF THE PARK PLAN BE AUTHORIZED, AS
OUTLINED.
NEW BUSINESS
John Kane - A letter had been received from John Kane, requesting an extension
of site plan approval for his office and motel. The site plan was due to expire
on February 12, 1998. Ms. Martin explained that, according to the Zoning
Ordinance, an extension could only be granted if the site plan conformed to the
current zoning standards, which it does not. If only landscaping requirements
needed to be changed, he could comply with items listed in McKenna Associates’
letter of May 18, 1996. Attorney Schultz said the ordinance did not provide for
any exception to the standards for an extension of site plan approval. A letter
should be sent, reminding Mr. Kane of Supervisor Obst’s letter of February 12,
1997 and McKenna Associates’ letter, and stating that nine days remained for
him to achieve compliance. After the plan expired, no extension could be
granted, and the site plan approval process would need to be initiated again.
He suggested faxing the letter and sending it by certified mail. [faxed and
mailed on February 4, 1998] The Board agreed that if Mr. Kane complied with
requirements of the present Zoning Ordinance by February 12, 1998, an extension
of the site plan would be granted.
Williamston Cemetery Board - Harold Powell
Mr. Powell had no budget information, and would report at the March Board
meeting.
Township Hall Rental - Clerk Graham
Use of the hall had been requested by a non-profit pony club, which had not
left the hall in good condition after their previous use. She asked if the
Board wanted to change their policy for free use to non-profit organizations.
Trustee Wiegandt said expenses were incurred by any building usage. Treasurer
Nilsson suggested not changing the policy without further review, and that a
damage deposit be required for this club, due to past experience. Supervisor
Obst said he would check on the condition of the building after their use.
CONSENT AGENDA
Clerk Graham reported that Williamston Schools would not collect summer taxes
in the Township. A budget meeting was set for February 28, 1998 at 9:00 a.m. IT
WAS MOVED BY CLERK GRAHAM, SECONDED BY TREASURER NILSSON, THAT THE CONSENT
AGENDA, INCLUDING MINUTES OF THE JANUARY 6, 1998 MEETING, THE FEBRUARY
TREASURER’S REPORT, AND THE CLERK’S LIST OF ACCOUNTS AND PAYMENT FOR CHECKS
8553 TO 8610 BE APPROVED. A ROLL CALL VOTE WAS TAKEN. AYES: SUPERVISOR OBST,
TRUSTEE WIEGANDT, TRUSTEE ZABAN, TREASURER NILSSON, CLERK GRAHAM. NAYS: NONE.
IT WAS MOVED BY CLERK GRAHAM, SECONDED BY TREASURER NILSSON, PASSED, THAT THE
MEETING BE ADJOURNED.
The meeting adjourned at 11:00 p.m.
****
_____________________________________    _____________________________________
Shirley A. Graham, Clerk          Rosemary B. Philip, Recording Secretary
MARCH 3, 1998
The regular meeting of the WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP BOARD OF TRUSTEES was called
to order by Supervisor Obst on Tuesday, March 3, 1998 at 7:39 PM. The Clerk was
asked to record who was present and if a quorum was present. Clerk Graham
stated a quorum was present and recorded the following: Supervisor Obst, Clerk
Graham, Treasurer Nilsson, Trustee Wiegandt, Trustee Zaban, Building Inspector
Aven, and Township Attorney, Steve Schultz.
The agenda was read over with the following additions: Planning Commission -
Woodview Final Plat information.
PUBLIC COMMENTS
Lisa Crozier - Michigan Groundwater Stewardship Program.
Farm*A*Syst - helps farmers assess their potential risks of groundwater
contamination. When completed they are eligible for the cost share and credits
for the pesticide program. She would like to keep the program going another
year. They are looking for more farmers to participate. Brochures are available
in the Township office for farmers who may be interested in the program.
FIRE BOARD REPORT - Darrell Brown
The Fire Board received a letter from the Lounsbury's indicating their interest
in letting the Fire Board use at least part of their property for parking. The
Fire Board has hired an attorney. The Architect asked for a recommendation from
the Fire Board to do work for the City of Williamston. There was some interest
in looking at the West Side Deli Building for moving the fire barn down there.
The size of the building is appropriate. There would not have to be any
additions. Looks favorable. Good location. New Equipment that must be purchased
due to state requirements. A resolution was proposed to the Board of Trustees
for creating the Fire District Committee and to hire Mark Adams as an attorney
to represent the Fire Board. The Fire Chief was given the authority to get
specs for a new pumper.
Fire Board Resolution - Clerk Graham moved and Trustee Wiegandt supported that
the Township ratify the proposed Fire Board Resolution authorizing
participation in a multi-jurisdictional Fire District Committee and ratifying
the actions of the Williamston Community Fire Board in contracting for legal
services and appropriating the funds. Motion passed unanimously.
Trustee Zaban had a question on what exactly the Lounsbury’s were proposing for
the use of their property by the fire department. They proposed two options -
1. The entire parcel would be for sale if they can find another location for
their business, or 2. They can locate their business on the front half and the
back half would be available to the fire department for parking.
ATTORNEY’S REPORT - Steve Schultz
Annexation Case - voted 3-1 to approve the annexation, with one member not
present. Received a draft of the boundary commissions findings of fact
supporting their decision. Believe several of the finding of facts to be
clearly erroneous. Failed to mention the loss of tap fees and tax revenues to
the township and the effect the loss of the land would have on the Township’s
Master Plan. One of the proposed findings is that the proposed density of the
development on the property in question would require public water, this is not
true. Another finding that is fairly outrageous regarding street safety stated
that the City of Williamston is subject to local, state and federal regulations
to safety. The Commission did not elaborate on what these regulations were and
they are not tied to the safety issues of the case. Proposed development is
consistent with other development in the city. The president of the Riverwood
Homeowners Association, the subdivision that the proposed development is
consistent with, sent letters to the commission stating why the development is
defective. The fire rating and availability of fire hydrants is the same
regardless of whether the property is in the City or the Township.
The February 12 hearing was to deliberate over the facts and take a vote. After
the vote is taken the Boundary Commission directs its staff to draw up the
papers to determine what the facts are to support the decision. On March 5th
the Boundary Commission will present these findings of facts. The Township has
the opportunity to refute the findings at that time and the Commissioners have
the opportunity to change their vote based on this information. It will then be
45 days before the final decision goes into effect. The case can then be
appealed.
Pines Office Park Condominium Documents - Attorney Schultz needs to talk to
Planning Coordinator Martin about the documents received.
BUILDING PERMITS - Walt Aven
Attended annual Michigan Builder's Conference on the new 1997 code. Housing
starts are down in February for single family homes. Report for February
received and placed on file.
PLANNING COMMISSION REPORT - Mickey Martin
Woodview Subdivision - asking to come to the Planning Commission for Final Plat
Approval. Their Final Preliminary Plat Approval has expired. They are asking
for an extension on the Preliminary Plat Approval along with the Final Plat
Approval. Attorney Schultz stated that the Township’s Zoning Ordinance is
stricter than the State Statute. The language in our ordinance states that the
extension may be granted if applied for prior to the expiration date. Does not
give us the flexibility to approve the extension after the expiration. The
Township would have to amend or waive the ordinance to give the extension. If
there were no problems it would take two months to get a new Final Preliminary
and Final Plat (May). Doug Price stated that he agrees the Final Preliminary
Plat did expire. He didn't realize he needed to get the extension. Mr. Price
has all the signatures required from the County for Final Plat Approval. He is
submitting today exactly what the density option states. He has complied with,
agreed to, and conformed to the agreement. He believes they fall under the
previous Zoning Ordinance. He will end up with the same product as was
originally approved. He believes the Township can approve the Preliminary Plat
and the Final Plat at the same time. Nothing has changed since the Final
Preliminary Plat was first approved. Supervisor Obst and Planning Coordinator
Martin agreed that it is probably possible to approve both the Final
Preliminary Plat and the Final Plat at the same time, even though this is not
something that has been done before.
Attorney Schultz stated that the old ordinance has been repealed. The Township
can no longer act under that ordinance. The Township cannot ignore the current
ordinance because that would cause problems for the next case. Unless the
ordinance prohibits it, it should be OK to approve both the Preliminary and
Final Plat in the same meeting. Planning Coordinator Martin will have Planning
Consultant Chris Doozen determine if this approach would be in accordance with
our Zoning Ordinance.
Cardinal Fabricating - applied for building permit for an addition. They didn't
realize they needed a Special Use Permit since it is commercial property. They
also had to get a variance from the Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA) since the
building is currently non-conforming. They have received direction from the
Planning Commission. They have been granted a variance to go into the set back
area. The Township has received only positive response from neighbors in
support of the proposed changes by Cardinal Fabricating. Cardinal Fabricating
is asking for prior approval on condition or for the Township Board of Trustees
to hold a special meeting to consider their situation after the Planning
Commission makes their recommendation. They have contractors waiting to build.
Attorney Schultz stated that he would not recommend acting on Cardinal tonight,
as it would be against the Zoning Ordinance. The issue requires a public
hearing before the Planning Commission. The Zoning Ordinance states that “the
Planning Commission SHALL review the findings and SHALL make a report and
recommendation to the board. Board action SHALL base its decision solely on the
basis of the Ordinance Findings of Fact.” This implies the Board must have the
report before they can make a decision. The Board set a special meeting date of
Wednesday March 18th at 3:45 PM to review and vote on the Cardinal Fabricating
issue.
ADVISORY COUNCIL
Helen LeBlanc - Solid Waste Planning Committee. Plan will show what is
currently being done. Current location of land fills, recycling strategies,
etc. Plan will contain future plans for recycling and waste diversion. Need
plan by June, will need to be approved by 60% of municipalities before being
forwarded to the state. The state can then approve or disapprove the plan.
State requirement to update the plan. The State has established the outline
that will be used.
ASSESSOR’S REPORT - Norm Obst
Taxable values are capped at a 2.7% increase. Assessed values are increasing
dramatically in the Township. When a property sells it is uncapped and any new
construction is assessed at current value. Equalization stated an 8.5% increase
for residential and an 18.48% increase for agricultural properties.
OLD BUSINESS
John Kane Status Report - Mickey Martin
Mr. Kane had questions on the requirements and wanted some clarifications. If
Mr. Kane agrees to the final letter Planning Coordinator Martin sent to him,
then can go on from there. Mr. Kane had a question on screening the
transformer. He agrees with other requirements. He has complied to all
requirements that the board had at their February meeting. Building Inspector
Aven stated that he can grant an occupancy permit prior to the landscaping
being completed if the money is escrowed to finish the landscaping, or a letter
of credit to finish the landscaping is obtained. Malcolm L. McKinnon, Mr.
Kane's attorney, wanted to know the dollar amount required for the escrow. An
exact amount was not available, but Trustee Wiegandt and Building Inspector
Aven thought it would probably be less than $1,000.00. Clerk Graham moved that
the Board grant a 120 day extension to meet the requirements as related to Mr.
Kane in the February 18th letter, effective Feb 12, to expire June 12. Seconded
by Treasurer Nilsson. Motion approved unanimously.
A neighbor has complained that the light from Mr. Kane’s sign shines in his
bedroom window. Mr. Kane contends that it may be the halogen light from the
manufactured home park causing the problem across the street and not his sign.
Still needs to be determined which light is causing the problem. Planning Chair
Martin will check out the situation.
Russell Aker - The Township Board has received Constable Dahlstrom’s report.
Debris seems to be gone. Mr. Aker did his own grading without obtaining a
grading permit from the Township. Clerk Graham stated that other junk there is
still a problem - rusting iron/steel and wood piles. Original complaint has
been taken care of. Supervisor Obst asked if it meets the requirements for a
nuisance under the nuisance ordinance. If it does, then that avenue should be
investigated. Building Inspector Aven stated that he needs a permit only if he
brought in more than 50 yards of material. It does not appear that he has done
that. Attorney Schultz stated that a second issue is if the concrete is
considered clean fill. If it is not, then the fact that it is covered up does
not eliminate the problem. The burden of proof is on the land owner to prove
that it is clean fill. Doug Price stated that he believes there is a greater
issue of the township being consistent. The Township should alert the health
department and the drain commission to these problems. Treasurer Nilsson asked
what our course of action is for these types of things. Attorney Schultz stated
that the Township can Issue an appearance ticket to demand that it be cleaned
up in a certain amount of time. Ticket brings him in front of a magistrate in
Mason. They give him a chance to clean it up and if he doesn't, then he can be
fined $500. Other option is to seek an injunction. The Board decided they will
contact Carol Valor of the Drain Commission and give her a list of possible
violations to investigate.
Ingham County Road Commission Review And Decision - January Issue - State Road
Control - do we agree the county should continue their jurisdiction over the
roads or should the state take control? The Board would like to go on record in
support of the Ingham County Road Commission and the excellent job they do, and
to support the Road Commission’s desire to maintain control of the roads in
question. So moved by Clerk Graham, supported by Trustee Wiegandt. Motion
approved unanimously.
Cable Commission Letter - Trustee Zaban talked to the Cable Commission Chair.
They are aware of his concerns. Trustee Zaban also questioned if the Township
is receiving franchise fees on the internet access service provided by the
cable company. Attorney Schultz stated that he was not sure the Township was
entitled to a franchise fee for this service under their current agreement with
Horizon Cablevision. Will investigate this matter with Cable Commission Chair
Wilson.
Mckenna Associates - Recreation Grant Proposal
Total fee of $3000 to be invoiced monthly to provide the DNR grant proposal for
Williamstown township. Doug Price offered his services to raise funds for the
park. Will take Mr. Price’s offer to Mike Nestell - the park and rec. sub-
committee chairman. Supervisor Obst stated that a major problem for the
Township is going to be funding maintenance of the park after the construction.
Trustee Wiegandt moved that the Township sign the agreement with McKenna
associates. Supported by Treasurer Nilsson. Motion passed unanimously.
Summit Cemetery Board - Harold Powell
1997 Income was $62,968. Expenses were over $64,000. The budget for next year
also shows a deficit. Reason for the deficits is that we are not burying as
many people per year as we had in the past. In 1996 sold 49 burial plots and
had 43 burials. In 1997 sold 30 plots and had 34 burials. Expenses are about
the same no matter how many people are buried. Will try to get through another
year with the same budget dollars. Attempting to obtain some new property.
There are three acres to the back of the cemetery that is flat and a little
wet. Would need to get some tile drain in there. Will get either Mr. Fuller or
Mr. Rector and see what can be done. Only about 900 plots left that have not
been sold.
NEW BUSINESS
Ingham County Road Commission - 1998 Local Road Improvement - Brian Jennings
Will go through the advisory council first.
Treasurer Nilsson suggested doing Vanneter Road first and waiting on Mitchell
Road rather than waiting until we have the funds to do both at the same time.
Trustee Zaban questioned the county practice of not doing any maintenance on
roads once they are paved. They do not come back and seal the cracks. Mr.
Jennings stated that the Road Commission does not feel it is cost effective
because it is very labor intensive. Chip and Seal is more cost effective. The
Transportation Committee will look into road maintenance options and come back
with a recommendation.
McKenna Associates - Professional Planning Services Contract - Mickey Martin
Increased their fees with some new additions to the contract. Planning
Coordinator Martin has some questions on the proposed contract. Expedited
reviews request - page 4 of 6 - they can charge extra for that. Page 2 of 6 -
said they will give reviews prior to the timed reviews of the township, will be
back in time for the agendas. Deadline for Tuesday before will have to be very
strict. No site plan review cost for residential only - Ms. Martin would like
to clarify this. Planning Coordinator Martin wants input and any questions that
the Board has on the contract. The contract should be signed next month. There
is a 10% increase over the old 2 year contract. Supervisor Obst asked why the
fee structure is increasing by 10%. Planning Coordinator Martin stated that
McKenna did not include the cost of attending meetings in the prior contract.
Doug Price stated that he thinks McKenna does a thorough job, but thinks some
of the letters he has received from them have been redundant. Overall, very
pleased with the company. The Board will get any recommendations to Ms. Martin
by Friday. Mr. Price’s observation will be investigated to make sure that the
Township is not being billed for work that does not need to be done.
Cathy Easley - Sanitary Sewer Hook-Up Request to the City.
The City of Williamston told Mrs. Easley there was no capacity to hook her up.
She paid the tap in fee to the Township and was encouraged to go to the City to
get hooked up. The City told her they needed a letter from the Township before
hooking her up. The County had declared this a sanitary emergency because of
the failure of her drain field due to neighboring construction. Attorney
Schultz said it was appropriate to go ahead with the letter. Letter was sent
and that afternoon the City agreed to the hookup.
Abraham & Gaffney - Auditing Company Used By The Township- Clerk Graham
$3950 - standard engagement letter. Clerk Graham recommends approving and
proceeding with this. Clerk Graham is happy with the service the Township has
received from this firm. They are charging $200 more than last year. Trustee
Zaban moved the Township accept the contract with Abraham and Gaffney.
Supported by Clerk Graham. Motion approved unanimously.
Capitol Area District Library - Bookmobile Service
The Board could not think of any locations in the Township that would be well
served by a Bookmobile.
Precinct #3 Change Of Location - Clerk Graham
Williamston Free Methodist Church has agreed to allow the Township to use their
facility at a cost of $50 per election.
ICC/MTA - April Potluck - April 15 at Leroy Township. RSVP by March 30, 1998
per notice.
Resolution for Annual School Election for Haslett Schools has been received.
Leslie Dunkel Letter - complaint on the Foote property. Will forward complaint
to Mr. Foote.
Invitation - The Board has been invited to Tyson Laumer’s Eagle Scout ceremony,
Sunday March 6, at 2:00 PM.
Keep Michigan Beautiful letter received for this year. Supported them for $25
last year. No interest expressed in supporting them this year.
Amend The Budget For The Building Inspector.
Clerk Graham moved to move $5000 from the contingency account to the Building
Inspector account (101-371-811). Supported by Trustee Wiegandt. Motion passed
unanimously.
Salary Resolution
Clerk Graham moved and Treasurer Nilsson supported that the Trustees’ salaries
for the 1998/99 fiscal year be a base of $4200 with an additional $60 per extra
meeting for a maximum of 12 meetings, or $720 each. Motion passed unanimously.
Trustee Wiegandt moved and Trustee Zaban seconded that the Clerk’s salary for
the 1998/99 fiscal year be set at $18,900. Motion passed unanimously.
Trustee Wiegandt moved and Clerk Graham seconded that the Treasurer’s salary
for the 1998/99 fiscal year be set at $18,900. Motion passed unanimously.
Clerk Graham moved and Trustee Wiegandt supported that the Supervisor’s salary
for the 1998/99 fiscal year be set at $11,916. Motion passed unanimously.
Trustee Zaban moved and Trustee Wiegandt supported that the Assessor’s salary
for the 1998/99 fiscal year be set at $18,264 plus $32 per parcel measured and
entered. Motion passed unanimously.
CONSENT AGENDA
The minutes were amended to add the word “Committee” to the District Fire Board
in 3 places on page 1 and to correct the titles of Treasurer Nilsson and
Trustee Zaban on page 2 from Commissioner to Treasurer and Trustee,
respectively. Moved by Trustee Zaban and supported by Clerk Graham to approve
the minutes of the Regular Township Board Meeting held February 3, 1998 as
amended; to acknowledge the Treasurer’s report of financial activities for
February 1998; and to authorize the Clerk’s list of accounts payable on March
3, 1998 - checks # 8611 - 8669 for a total of $54,343.14. Supervisor Obst
called for a roll call vote:
   Ayes:   Trustee Zaban, Treasurer Nilsson, Supervisor Obst, Clerk Graham,
Trustee Wiegandt
   Nays:   None
Annual Meeting - April 4th at 9:00 AM.
Meeting adjourned at 11:07 PM
____________________________________      ____________________________________
Shirley Graham, Clerk               Susan Jennings, Recording Secretary
APRIL 7, 1998
The regular meeting of the WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP BOARD OF TRUSTEES was called
to order by Supervisor Obst on Tuesday, April 7, 1998 at 7:38 PM. The clerk was
asked to record who was present and if a quorum was present. Clerk Graham
stated a quorum was present and recorded the following; Supervisor Obst, Clerk
Graham, Treasurer Nilsson, Trustee Wiegandt, Trustee Zaban, and Building
Inspector Aven.
The agenda was read over with the following additions: Library Committee
meeting minutes of March 30, 1998; notice of Perry annual school election; and
bid proposal for lawn mowing from Smiths Lawn Care.
PUBLIC COMMENTS:
Rud Hoag - a shame more citizens were not at the Annual Meeting on Saturday
since it was a very informational meeting. Needs to be marketed better and held
at a better time (not the Saturday of Spring Break).
Gary Helfmann - Believes that having a Planning Consultant is important to the
Township. However, he believes McKenna & Associates have done things to pad
their bill. He doesn’t think that McKenna knows the ordinance well enough. He
believes his time was wasted by the consultant not being prepared. He is
unhappy with the professionalism of McKenna. Not prepared to comment further
tonight. Supervisor Obst asked him to come back with facts supporting his
allegations.
REPORTS
Fire Board - Darrell Brown
Well cap issue is straightened out. Had an executive session in regards to the
West Side Deli Building. Still looking at other alternatives in the area for
another fire building site. Structure of West Side Deli is a concern. City of
Williamston engineers will look at the building. If feasible to use the
building it is in a good location and offers a lot. Bank holds the building -
it is in foreclosure. They are anxious to sell.
Building Permit Activities - Walt Aven
No new houses in March. Looking to adopt the 1997 Uniform Building Code in
about two months. The State of Michigan has passed it.
Planning Commission Report - Mickey Martin
Supervisor Obst had a question on the Planning Commission minutes not providing
the roll call vote by name or number of votes on each issue. The minutes simply
state whether or not the motion passed. This mode of reporting is stated in the
Planning Commission’s bylaws. Supervisor Obst believes it may be perceived as
hiding something at that it would be in the public interest to at least provide
the number of votes for or against, if not the actual names. Trustee Wiegandt
stated that since it is just a recommendation to the Board from the Planning
Commission as a whole, it is not a problem.
Hideaway Woods #4 - Site Plan Review Revised. Final Preliminary Plat. Went
through final plat in December of 1996. The plan was brought back to the
Planning Commission to provide only six lots that would perk with on site
septic systems since the City is not releasing the sewer and water capacity to
the Township. If the lots are not served by public sewer then they would have
to be developed at R1-S standards. The six lots do not meet those standards.
The Planning Commission made their recommendations and a variance must be
sought to create the lots.
Carl McIntosh - Not had an opportunity to do anything with the Planning
Commission recommendations. He Intends to follow through on each of the items
before the next Planning Commission meeting. Planning Chair Martin recommended
that a majority of the conditions be met before the Board votes on it. It will
be at least two weeks after the application is filed before the meeting will be
held to consider the variance. Mr. McIntosh stated that most of the information
requested is on the plat, it just is not in the table format asked for.
Supervisor Obst moved that the plat be approved per the 4 conditions set forth
in the Planning Commission minutes. Seconded by Treasurer Nilsson. Mr. McIntosh
is still looking to obtain the 55 sewer hookups. These six lots will be
available to hookup to the sewer lines, but they will not be required to hook
up until and unless the septic fields fail on those lots. Still waiting for the
City to approve the design of the sewer lines.
Doug Price asked how large the lots are. 21,000 - 31,000 square feet. R1
zoning. They are non conforming lots. That is what the variance would be
required for. This is an issue because the City has not approved the sewer that
the Township had told the developer there was capacity for. This is a unique
situation. The developer has a law suit is in the works against the City of
Williamston to obtain the necessary sewer taps. The suit is due to come up in
May, but it is the fourth item on the docket, so it may or may not come up this
year.
Planning Chair Martin pointed out that the sewer lines are not currently
designed to go past the six lots since they will have their own septic system.
Trustee Wiegandt confirmed that the development has Health Department approval
for the six lots. He thinks we may be getting a little bit ahead of things
here. He would like to give the applicant time to meet the conditions before
bringing it to a vote.
Supervisor Obst withdrew the motion. Supported by Treasurer Nilsson.
Supervisor Obst moved to postpone the decision. Seconded by Trustee Wiegandt.
Motion passed unanimously.
There may be a special meeting called to address this issue later in the month
rather than waiting for the next regularly scheduled Board meeting on May 12th.
Woodview Phase III - Final Preliminary Plat And Final Plat Approval. The Final
Preliminary Plat had expired without a request for an extension. Recommendation
is based on the current zoning ordinance. Lot sizes are met under the density
option requirement, but not under the normal zoning. Need to determine if the
density option is still in force and then can go on with the rest of the
recommendation. Requirements and changes suggested by the Planning Commission
have been met. Need to vote on the final Preliminary Plat and the Final Plat.
Clerk Graham stated that the density option does not have a time limit on it.
The option is for the entire development and not just this particular phase.
Consensus of the Board is that the density option is still in effect. The other
requirements of the Planning Commission have been met. Clerk Graham moved that
the board recognize the existing density option agreement for Woodview.
Supported by Trustee Wiegandt. Motion passed unanimously. Trustee Wiegandt
moved that the Township Board approve the Final Preliminary Plat of Woodview
III as revised March 24, 1998. Seconded by Treasurer Nilsson. Motion passed
Unanimously. Clerk Graham moved that the Board approve the Final Plat of
Woodview III as all conditions have been met and authorize the Clerk to sign
the Mylar. Supported by Trustee Wiegandt. Motion approved unanimously.
Williamstown Estates - Trustee Wiegandt stated that it is very wet in there and
wanted to know if they have asked for a grading permit? Planning Chair Martin
stated that the development created a haul road that flooded the neighbors
property. This situation has been taken care of. They are putting the top soil
back and removed the haul road. They were going to do some excavation of some
open areas that they had not applied for. The developer has decided it would be
cheaper to haul in the dirt rather than excavate it from other spots in their
development. Hopefully they will be back for Final Plat approval this summer.
Plans For The Township Park - Doug Price asked if the Planning Commission is
going to require a new Site Plan for any changes to the entrance? Treasurer
Nilsson stated that we will need an engineer’s drawing for anything that is
going to be done. Any specifics will need to go before the Planning Commission.
They are currently working on fund raising toward a possible matching grant
from the DNR. Deb Apostle - Township Resident and DNR employee has suggested we
aim for a $200,000 grant. Thinks we would have a better chance of obtaining
that rather than the maximum. Checking on if cash donations can go toward the
Township's portion of the matching grant funds. Howard Dahlstrom has
volunteered to do some mowing out there. Decision has to be made on what needs
to be put into the grant proposal. Mr. Price suggested that the way the park is
phased there is some serious up front money required. Looking at other options
that get the park usable without as much up front money. Need parking, picnic
tables, some trails cut. Trustee Wiegandt stated that the DNR wants to see some
real serious action before they will consider approving the grant. Can't wait
for the grant to start work on the project. Treasurer Nilsson stated that the
Township needs to know in kind commitments and how much money we are going to
participate with by September. However, the commitment is for a two year
period. The work does not need to be completed by September and actually can’t
be completed before the grant is approved in order to qualify for the grant.
Clerk Graham stated that the Township is required to meet the state's
specifications for the driveway.
Advisory Council - Rud Hoag
Funding For The Park - Needs to talk to Mike Nestell to get the recreation
committee working with Treasurer Nilsson and Doug Price for park funding.
Agricultural Committee - Still looking at open land issues. Rezoning of Dexter
property. Ag Committee will look at all the Ag Commercial properties to see how
the Township wants to treat them.
Transportation And Communications Committee - Working on Mitchell and Vanneter.
Looking into getting a web site through the county. Cost would be approximately
$50 per month plus installation for a dedicated modem line. Will get estimates
on an additional phone line and survey people to see how and how much internet/
e-mail access will be used.
Intergovernmental Committee - Hopeful they can find someone who can work with
the City. Treasurer Nilsson suggested they research and respond to Mr. Lammer's
letter regarding a proposed bridge by the City of Williamston over the Red
Cedar River. Treasurer Nilsson talked to Bob D'Alcorn about the bridge. The
Ingham County Road Commission has not heard anything from the City yet about
the bridge.
Assessors Report - Norm Obst
Done with everything for the year.
Board Of Appeals - no meeting
OLD BUSINESS
Complaints
Mr. Hallam has received a letter from the DEQ that needs to be complied with. A
stop work order has been issued from the DEQ pending further investigation and
the proper permits being issued.
Mr. Aker - Clerk Graham found that unclean concrete is concrete that has rerod
in it. Most drive way concrete has rerod in it to help stabilize it.
Information found out from Mr. Pingle of the DEQ. Still waiting to hear from
the DNR on the Aker property.
McKenna Associates: Professional Planning Service Contract
All questions have been answered to Planning Coordinator Martin’s satisfaction.
McKenna charges for prep time and the meeting. She does not believe that they
are misrepresenting their bills. Mr. Helfmann does not believe McKenna is
acting in the best interest of the Township. As he sees it there were three
mistakes on the part of McKenna pertaining to his situation that cost both him
and the Township a lot of money. There was a special meeting held where the
Commission was talking about a brick wall. McKenna brought back a
recommendation to put up a brick wall. Mr. Helfmann found in the zoning
ordinance that a cyclone fence would be sufficient. He submitted number of site
plans, putting down the changes that the Planning Commission had asked for.
Each time the consultant from McKenna would come back with more items. The
requirement for paving the driveway was brought up at the last minute. This is
something McKenna should have caught much earlier in the process. Mr. Helfmann
submitted an article where Handy Township found McKenna’s bills to be
excessive. He thinks the Township should recognize the consultant spends a lot
of the Township’s money unnecessarily. From his opinion the unclear wording in
the Zoning Ordinance is to force the Township to go back to McKenna for
clarification. Trustee Zaban stated that he sees McKenna as a very reasonably
priced consultant especially as compared to a lawyer. Mr. Helfmann contended
that they may not cost much per hour, but their advice is often incorrect and
may be costing the Township more money than they are saving. Supervisor Obst
stated that Consultant Chris Doozen of McKenna Associates needs to be contacted
to find out their side on these issues. Trustee Zaban stated that he thinks Mr.
Doozen does a good job. Mr. Doozen has a different perspective on things that
are valuable for the Planning Commission to see the big picture. Planning
Coordinator Martin stated that the allegation about the gravel is not correct.
Mr. Helfmann submitted several plans. Paving may not have been picked up on
every plan. Planning Coordinator Martin admits McKenna does sometimes make
mistakes - but everyone does. She recommends that the Township approve the
contract tonight. Clerk Graham stated that she sees no problem with the
contract or the rates as long as the Township keeps its rates in the same
format so that McKenna’s fees are not coming out of the general fund. Trustee
Zaban moved that the Board approve the McKenna contract and approve the Clerk
to sign it. Treasurer Nilsson stated that over billing can happen in error, and
that she believes it is a reputable firm. Motion supported by Treasurer
Nilsson. Motion passed unanimously.
Ingham County Road Commission (ICRC) - State Road Control and 1998 Local Road
Improvement Projects. Brian Jennings.
The report submitted by the Transportation and Communications Committee is
based on the same formulas used in the past two years to determine roads to be
improved.
Set another $50,000 aside for Vanneter and Mitchell Rd. Costs continue to rise
for that project, since the estimate we have is several years old. Committee
believes the intergovernmental committee should contact some of the other
municipalities to get funding. Half of the traffic on those roads is generated
by the schools. Only way to get money from Act 51 or Iced Tea funds is to put a
commercial property on the roads. Clerk Graham stated that she thinks the
school should meet the requirements for funding from the Act 51 funds.
Supervisor Obst stated that the Township needs to find out the cost of the
project in today’s dollars. The Township needs to meet with all the other
municipalities to set up a special assessment district for the school district
area.
Roads recommended for repair this year - Zimmer from Haslett to Milton needs to
be repaved. Newman Rd - committee advises against working on this road at this
time because of the empty lots in the back of the Quarton Subdivision.
Construction traffic would just tear up the road again. Maybe next year will be
a better time. Epley Road from Zimmer to Lounsbury. Rest of the roads on the
list are gravel roads. The ICRC would like to pave them. It is cheaper to
maintain a paved road than a gravel road. Recommend drainage improvements on
part of Milton Road that is a gravel road. Fairly short section. Thought this
would be worthwhile doing. $75,000 in the budget for road improvement. Zimmer
would be $80,000 minus the matching funds from the ICRC. Transportation
Committee Chair Jennings recommends doing Zimmer from Haslett to Milton and the
ditching on Milton. Trustee Zaban moved the Township repave Zimmer from Haslett
to Milton, do the ditching on Milton Road, and the required striping for
$91,160. $30,000 of which will be paid by the County. Seconded by Trustee
Wiegandt. Motion passed unanimously.
NEW BUSINESS
Public Concern - Traffic Control Petitions - Kiwanis Club
Zimmer and Grand River. MDOT has already agreed to do a study when the Post
Office opens. Brian Jennings will notify MDOT after the post office has opened.
30-60 days after that they will do the study. Will pencil it in to do sometime
in August. Mr. Jennings will write a letter to the Kiwanis club letting them
know the status of the study. Clerk Graham will forward the petitions to the
Ingham County Road Commission.
City of Williamston Cox Letter of March 30, 1998 read into the record.
John Bauckham, MTA - professional proposal. The Township Board would like him
to assist attorney Schultz in the lawsuit against the City of Williamston.
New Construction Air Conditioning - Service Contract. $300 per year. Clerk
Graham recommends approving the contract. Supported by Trustee Wiegandt. Motion
approved unanimously.
Township Office Upgrades - Planning Commission Area.
24x50 desk, 30x60 desk etc. estimated cost of $2,082.00 Treasurer Nilsson moved
to approve the request. Supported by Trustee Wiegandt . Motion passed
unanimously.
Newsletter Time Frame
Perry Public School Election - June 8th.
Library Commission Report - March 30th. Chris Nilsson. Organizational meeting
to determine how meetings will be run and what they want to accomplish.
Lawn Care - same as last year - $120 per week. $75 per bush trimming. Clerk
Graham has no problem with this organization.
Trustee Wiegandt stated that we need to contact the Ingham County Extension to
tile the field behind the hall.
Budget - Year Ended March 31, 1999. Estimated revenue $478,682. Estimated
expenditure $713,200. Treasurer Nilsson moved to adopt the proposed budget.
Supported by Trustee Wiegandt. Supervisor Obst called for a roll call vote:
Aye - Trustee Zaban, Treasurer Nilsson, Supervisor Obst, Trustee Wiegandt,
Clerk Graham.
Nay - None.
CONSENT AGENDA
Trustee Wiegandt moved and Clerk Graham supported to approve the minutes of the
Regular Township Board Meeting held March 3, 1998, the minutes of the Special
Township Board Meeting held March 18, 1998 and the minutes of the Special
Township Board Meeting held March 10, 1998; to acknowledge the Treasurer’s
report if financial activities for March 1998; and to authorize the Clerk’s
list of accounts payable on April 7, 1998 - checks # 8670 - 8727 for a total of
$35,961.41. Supervisor Obst called for a Roll Call Vote:
Ayes:   Clerk Graham, Trustee Wiegandt, Trustee Zaban, Treasurer Nilsson,
Supervisor Obst
Nays:   None.
Fire Authority Report - Ron Wiegandt
Should have articles of adoption for the Board at the next meeting.
Meeting adjourned 11:19 PM.
____________________________________      ____________________________________
Shirley Graham, Clerk               Susan Jennings, Recording Secretary
MAY 12, 1998
The regular meeting of the WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP BOARD OF TRUSTEES was called
to order by Supervisor Obst on Tuesday, May 12, 1998 at 7:44 PM. The Clerk was
asked to record who was present and if a quorum was present. Clerk Graham
stated a quorum was present and recorded the following; Supervisor Obst, Clerk
Graham, Treasurer Nilsson, Trustee Wiegandt, Trustee Zaban, Building Inspector
Aven and Attorney Stephen Schultz.
The agenda was read over with the following additions: Change of July Board
meeting date; cemetery board letter authorization regarding payments; Mitchell
Road access by the schools; Hideaway Woods 4 preliminary plat approval.
Attorney Questions - Stephen Schultz
Fairfax homes annexation was reported on previously. Pre-trial conference with
Judge Houk regarding the sewer agreement. Final Pre Trial on June 15th. Trial
Date will probably be set in July if not settled by then. Proposed site plan
for pond on the Foote property.
Attorney Schultz left at 7:50 PM.
PUBLIC COMMENTS AND QUESTIONS
Mr. Helfmann - asking for direction on his building permit application. He
wants to use Nail Lite Brick. Building Inspector Aven said that real brick was
what was agreed to by the Planning Commission. Supervisor Obst suggested
bringing up the issue with the Building Inspector at this point.
Mr. James Sikarskie had a question regarding the report from Attorney Schultz
on the proposed Foote pond site. Was told that this will be addressed under the
Planning Commission’s report.
PLANNING COMMISSION - Mickey Martin
Has two items requiring Board action tonight:
1. Approve the preliminary plat of Hideaway Woods #4. Variance was obtained
from ZBA and all other conditions of the Planning Commission have been met.
Moved by Clerk Graham to approve the Preliminary Plat of Hideaway Woods #4.
Seconded by Treasurer Nilsson. Motion passed unanimously.
2. Foote Pond Issue - held special meeting on April 28th.
Moved by Supervisor Obst and seconded by Treasurer Nilsson to approve the site
plan for a pond at 900 Gulick Rd with the following conditions:
1.   Testing is permitted in accordance with the Strata Environmental Services
outline. The Township will be fully notified in advance of the exact times and
dates of when the testing will be conducted so if the Township wishes it may
have a Township Engineer and/or representative present.
2.   The plans are to be reviewed and approved by the Township Building
Official with respect to the Uniform Building Code Requirements.
3.   The applicant is required to move forward with improvements related to the
berming and the storm drainage system; specifically the storm drainage system
as noted on the RC Associates plan. The drainage system must also be extended
forward north on the west property line to insure that the removal or drainage
of surface waters will not adversely affect adjoining properties including all
of Mr. Sikarskie’s property. This will result in changing the RC Associates
site plan with regard to drainage. This also includes in part that the toe of
the slope on the west side be set back ten feet from the property line and that
the berm along the west line be reshaped to be undulating in form, with a one
on three slope. A new site plan is required to indicate the above stipulations.
4.   Evergreen trees shall be planted at 10 to 15 feet on-center in abundance
on the exterior of the berm as indicated on the landscape illustration exhibit
A.
5.   Other berms on the property are to be reshaped in accordance with the RC
Associates plan: no steeper than a slope of one foot vertical to three feet
horizontal and no berm higher than eight feet. The site plan is to be modified
to show no berms higher than eight feet.
6.   Improvements to the berm and drainage along the west property line are to
be completed within 60 days, except drainage and berm improvements along Mr.
Sikarskie’s property line are to be completed within 30 days.
7.   A performance guarantee must be submitted to cover all indicated
improvements including assuring proper operation of the storm drainage system
and to assure that the project will have no adverse impact on groundwater
levels and quality, and no adverse impact on surrounding wells. Two years after
completion of the approved site plan, if there are no indicated adverse
impacts, the need for the guarantee will be terminated.
8.   A monitoring well must be left installed. During future drought conditions
a report from the monitoring well must be provided to the Township at its
request. A low water level must be established at the time the hydrogeological
study is submitted so that the Township knows what to look for in the future
when they ask for monitoring well data.
9.   The applicant agrees to refrain from using well water to maintain the pond
level when a water table emergency occurs as declared by the Township.
10.   The applicant understands that should the above testing indicate changes
are needed, then it is possible the RC Associates plan may need further
modifications to all aspects including possibly, the size of the pond.
The applicant’s attorney, Mr. Jeffrey Ray, said the motion is not the same as
the motion at the Planning Commission. The applicant does not agree with item 5
- a berm height of no higher than 8 feet.
Mr. Sikarskie was pleased to see that the motion addresses the issues with his
property for drainage, but believes the siltation problems still need to be
addressed. Latest rain overran the current solutions. Fences are down because
they are full of clay. Plan sounds more appropriate than what was previously
submitted. Would like to see the berms no higher than six feet to conform to
privacy fence ordinance and also to control the siltation problems.
Mickey Martin - suggesting opening it up for discussion since new information
from STS was just received today. Point number 1 of motion. Supervisor Obst
would propose to change the motion incorporating STS recommendations.
Ed Everett of Strata Environmental Services - Greatest concern would be is the
water able to migrate out horizontally? There will be some vertical leakage.
There is sand below the clay. Water will tend to stay in the clay and migrate
out horizontally. Bottom is going to be relatively impermeable. STS has
proposed installing piezometers 10 feet below the bottom of the pond. This will
give no information relative to what leakage will occur from the pond. Have
suggested that a skin will develop on soil borings. If pond leaks so much that
it permeates lower levels then the pumps will be running continuously. Pond
right now is holding rain water. Not a permeable liner, or it would have dried
up by now. Points 4 and 5 of the STS letter are what Strata is concerned with.
Problem with data logger - not much room for it in a production well. Become
much less accurate at higher levels (100 feet). Prefer to do it manually which
is acceptable to the state. Will validate their procedures. 10 - don't know
what the impact will be on the water levels yet. Before they get to an adverse
impact they will slow down pumping and/or stop pumping for a period of time. 11
- monitor levels 3 times per day. Arbitrary number. Draw down is straight curve
- time is logarithmic. If water levels are not changing then tests could get
further apart. Expect to eventually get to testing at once per day. Not adverse
to earlier readings to make sure the aquifer is responding as expected. Item 12
- evaporation rates based on the driest month of the year (July) - highest rate
of evaporation. Used as estimate for required water to maintain pond. Does not
include rainfall in the evaporation equation - only evaporation. Will monitor 3
times per day during pond filling (conductness). Changes in aquifer are
typically not instantaneous. If see changes in a day or week then the item
needs to be addressed. No need to monitor 3 times per day. Little chance of
upwelling.
Bob Hayes - Hydrogeologist with STS. Numbers 4, 5 and 6 go together of STS
letter. Suggested alternative method for testing samples and thought it
appropriate to test 10 feet below the bottom of the pond.
Bob Hayes and Ed Everett agreed to get together and work out their differences
for testing.
Mr. Sikarskie - Explains how quickly the clay seals the bottom of the lake -
that is exactly what has happened to his garden. Concerned about mounding
affecting his property. Mr. Everett stated that there are three points in the
pond that are below 95.5 feet. Test will be performed to determine whether
horizontal leakage occurs. Supervisor Obst stated it was acceptable that the
two engineers work this out.
Attorney Ray - would like the issue removed from the table at this time until
the geologists have worked things out. His client still has a problem with item
5 of the motion - berm height. Some points may exceed 8 feet due to slope of
the land. Item 7 regarding performance guarantees - no mention of an amount.
Amount to be determined by the Building Inspector. Unique situation in that 90
percent of the construction has been completed. Building Inspector Aven will
require an engineered site plan that is sealed by an engineer and determine at
that time what the amount of the bond would be.
Mr. Foote commented on Item 5 of the motion - He plans to make it more rolling
instead of just a straight edge on the west side. Will leave the road side and
the north east side the same. Proposing the changes where the current slope is
steeper than three to one.
Clerk Graham had a question about going back to original grade. Mr. Foote
stated the ten foot area will go to peaks and valleys to have catch basins. It
will be taken back to capacity that will handle the drainage. It cannot go back
to original grade.
Mr. Sikarskie - Does not believe the berm is harmonious with the area.
Unnatural looking. Too abrupt. If drainage system takes away the water that is
good, but still not happy with how it looks.
Mr. Foote - stated that the Township’s Planning Consultant, Chris Doozen has
said in the past that the privacy fence issue does not apply here.
Mr. Sikarskie showed pictures of the area prior to construction and now to the
Board. Asking for six feet maximum on the berm height. Believes they should be
treated as privacy fences since Mr. Foote himself said that the berms functions
are as a privacy fence. Attorney Ray said that he has no right to control
neighbor's berms. Mr. Foote now saying purpose of berm is for landscaping.
Mr. Foote stated that once the toe of the berm is moved back to 10 feet from
the property line he would have to lose some height to get it 3 to 1. Planning
Chair Martin stated there is no height limit - it must be a 3 to 1 ratio.
Discussion during planning commission was that they would be an average of 8
feet.
Treasurer Nilsson suggested the Board not go forward with the site plan
approval tonight. Supervisor Obst asked if height issues are not resolved, can
the drainage issues still be discussed separately tonight? Mr. Harold Powell
commented that if the Board approves only part of the motion tonight then the
Foote's are putting themselves at risk. Supervisor Obst moved to withdraw the
motion, seconded by Treasurer Nilsson. Motion was withdrawn. Discussion began
regarding alleged Zoning Ordinance violations.
Mr. Foote has a different opinion of the damage than Mr. Sikarskie. Wants to
have an engineer look at the property. Previous drainage of the garden was to a
ditch on Mr. Foote's property. Mr. Sikarskie said the elevation was raised by
the air strip put in by Mr. Ploucha. Water flow out of the garden was affected
by the air strip. They put a ditch in to drain the water off the garden and the
air strip. Grapes died this year because of standing water. Agrees that the
ditch did drain onto Mr. Foote's property. The 12 foot berm has dumped not only
water, but also clay onto the garden. The level of the land is sinking. Mr.
Foote does not believe there is currently any water draining onto the garden.
Mr. Sikarskie believes there is still water coming from the berm onto his
garden. Silt fence filled up with so much silt that it ruptured over. More clay
was dumped into the garden. Mr. Foote does not believe there have been
problems. Wants to have an engineer come out and look at the garden and take
soil samples. Supervisor Obst read Mr. Sikarskie's letter into the record.
Strata will take soil samples of the garden. Mr. Sikarskie believes the clay
has gone down further than the 6 - 8 inches proposed for the test. Will go down
further than the 8 inches in one sample. Will take 2-3 weeks to get the test
results back. Samples will be sent to an independent lab. Zoning Ordinance
states that changes will not adversely affect drainage on neighboring
properties.
Planning Commission to make a recommendation to the Township Board regarding
item 5 of the previous motion - berm height. The Planning Commission needs to
work out what is harmonious for the area.
Clerk Graham moved that item five should be amended that berm height should be
a maximum of six feet with a 3 to 1 slope. seconded by Supervisor Obst for the
sole purpose of putting the subject into discussion at the next meeting. Motion
defeated 3-2. With Clerk Graham and Supervisor Obst voting for the motion and
Treasurer Nilsson, Trustee Wiegandt and Trustee Zaban voting against the
motion.
Powell Development Rights Agreement With The State Application
Mrs. Powell - wants to make sure the letter is answered and that they can get
their application back in by the filing date of June 30th. Mrs. Powell was
assured that she would have the information back well before the June 30th
deadline.
Board Comments On The Foote Pond Issue
Trustee Wiegandt commented on the fact that Mr. Foote’s own attorney stated
that this project has been 90% constructed without a site plan or any permits.
He thinks the issue should go to the Township Attorney and the State Attorney.
He is ashamed of himself and the whole Board that it has gone this far. Trustee
Wiegandt stated that Mr. Foote has done something illegal as far as he can see.
If it was anyone else that started a project without permits and plans they
would have been taken to court. The Township is progressing at something that
is disgusting to him.
Building Inspector Aven stated that he believed a judge would say that Mr.
Foote would have to construct the pond so that it doesn't affect his neighbor.
Trustee Wiegandt thinks the whole issue should be tabled until the attorney's
deal with it. If any one else had put up a building or house without a permit,
they would be taken to court. He believes the Board needs to go to the Michigan
Township Association and see what legal measures can be taken since the man
broke the law.
OLD BUSINESS
Complaints 525 Gulick Road - No action taken yet. Noticed on April 20th, was to
check back in 10 days. No known action has been taken. Will have Constable
Dahlstrom proceed with the issue.
Library Committee Meeting - Treasurer Nilsson
Didn't do anything. The issue was given to Ed Noonan to let the committee know
what he had already done for looking at sites. He was convinced that the Fire
Board was moving to a new location and that their old building would be ideal.
The fire hall issue is strictly a rumor at this point.
Park Sign - Treasurer Nilsson
Treasurer Nilsson moved and Clerk Graham seconded to approve the ordering of a
sign for the Township Park entrance, as described by the Advisory Council, to
be constructed by Joe Manz, of Signs and Lines and installed by same with
placement on the site plan as necessary to meet Zoning Ordinance Requirements.
Clerk Graham wants to know if there is an approved site plan and is the sign on
the site plan? Sign is not on the site plan. Treasurer Nilsson stated that this
is a temporary, nice sign. Two sides - 4 foot by 8 foot and will simply say
Williamstown Township Community Park and have the DNR plaque incorporated into
it. Building Inspector Aven stated that the Township will need a building
permit and footing inspection. Clerk Graham suggested keeping the line of site
from a car in mind for placement of the sign. Motion approved unanimously.
Park Development - Mickey Martin
Update on grant application. - First phase will give us the entrance treatment;
a landscape buffer between the residence and the park; 40 parking places;
gravel based road of 3200 lineal feet that goes back to the canoe drop off;
nature trail 8 foot wide to be of limestone so that it is handicapped
accessible; canoe launch; and fishing area. Katherine Lo suggested that nice
port-a-potties be put in until permanent structures are completed. Treasurer
Nilsson stated that Mr. Carl MacIntosh is going to give a cash donation and do
the engineering work of about $7,000. Estimated total development project cost
is $281,055. The grant request is for $195,000 with the Township matching the
difference of approximately $86,055, which can include in kind work. The
Township has also been approached by a soccer group interested in developing
the soccer facility. At this time there would be no Township funds available to
build or maintain the facility. The group has a three point plan; 1)
development, 2) maintenance of the fields, and 3) funding.
Supervisor Obst received communication from Mr. Craig Hitchcock who is still
interested in farming the park land. This is no longer possible due to the DNR
grant restrictions. Supervisor will reiterate this fact to Mr. Craig Hitchcock.
Building Inspector Aven
Mr. Aven stated that Mr. Helfmann was issued a permit for the rental building.
He has not been issued a permit for the storage facility because the
application was 100 ft larger than the site plan. He needs to apply to modify
the site plan before the Planning Commission. Mr. Helfmann does not want to go
through this process. Also a question on type of brick to be used. What the
Township means by brick and what the applicant means by brick are not
necessarily the same thing. Construction has not started on the rental building
yet. Building Inspector Aven will let Mr. Helfmann know he has to go back to
the Planning Commission, or resubmit a site plan for the Building Permit
Application.
Attorney /Client - proposed changes
NEW BUSINESS
Red Cedar Rec. - Letter of April 3, 1998
Had one person there from the city of Williamston. No action came out of the
meeting.
Charles Hendershot Letter - Horizon Cable
Meeting on the 20th of the Cable Commission. Shirley - under current franchise
they do furnish certain services to municipalities. Shirley wrote a letter to
Mr. Baird. Have not heard from them yet.
City of Williamston - USA Plastics Building. Brief discussion. No action taken.
Fire Board Resolution - Trustee Wiegandt
Trustee Wiegandt moved and Trustee Zaban seconded that the Township adopt the
non-binding resolution of intent to become an incorporating municipality of the
Northeast Ingham Emergency Service Authority. Supervisor Obst called for a roll
call vote:
Ayes: Trustee Zaban, Treasurer Nilsson, Supervisor Obst, Clerk Graham, Trustee
Wiegandt
Nays: None - motion passed unanimously.
Construction On Mitchell Road - Access To Athletic Fields - Mickey Martin.
The school plans to leave temporary access there. It will be paved, gated and
locked and used only for school service vehicles. Transportation Committee
Acting Chair Jennings stated that as long as the construction was done to the
permanent access specs of the Ingham County Road Commission, and a no parking
sign was put on the gate, there shouldn’t be a problem with this plan.
Proposal That The County Take Over Mitchell And Vanneter Roads.
The Board approved sending the letter to the Ingham County Road Commission
(ICRC) proposing that the ICRC take over jurisdiction of Mitchell and Vanneter
roads bordering the schools. Transportation Committee Acting Chair Jennings
stated that traffic volumes are similar to other County roads and to the Leslie
Township example where a road by a new school was taken over by the County.
Jan Raad - Public act 116 agreement.
Supervisor Obst Moved and Clerk Graham seconded to approve the enrollment of
Jan Raad into the P.A. #116 Agreement & City of Williamston Area also, as long
as no other government agencies disapprove. Motion passed unanimously.
Raymond Powell - Development Rights
Moved by Treasurer Nilsson, seconded by Trustee Wiegandt to approve the Raymond
and Paul Powell Development Rights Agreement with State Application. Motion
passed unanimously. Clerk Graham was authorized to fill out the appropriate
papers and return them to the Powells in time for them to meet their filing
deadlines.
Boundary Dispute Appeal - Decided not to proceed with an appeal.
Attorney Baukham
Supervisor Obst stated that the attorney did not do what was asked of him;
performed services beyond what was asked of him; and charged the Township for
these services. Agreed not to use Attorney Baukham for any future services.
Treasurer Nilsson moved and Clerk Graham seconded to approve the statement of
April 27, 1998 from Attorney Bauckham, for services rendered in the amount of
$760.00. Motion passed unanimously.
Hideaway Woods - Petition Submitted To The Board.
A petition signed by the vast majority of the Hideaway Woods Subdivision
residents voicing their concerns over the length of time it is taking to
resolve the sewer issues with the City and expressing their desire to remain in
the Township and not to be annexed to the City was accepted and noted by the
Board.
Road Closures Requests
Moved by Trustee Wiegandt and seconded by Clerk Graham to approve the
Applications to Ingham County Road Commission for Detour/Road Closing on June
20, 1998 for the City of Williamston’s Red Cedar Jubilee Parade and for June
13, 1998 for the Pebblebrook Homeowners Association Kid’s Day Parade and
Picnic. Motion approved unanimously.
Purchase Of New Filing Cabinets
Moved by Treasurer Nilsson and seconded by Trustee Wiegandt to approve the
purchase of three Fire King fire proof four drawer files for the Township
Office at a cost of $1,089 each, for a total of $3,267 delivered. Brief
discussion. Cost would be $3,567 if legal files were to be purchased. Motion
approved unanimously.
CONSENT AGENDA
Moved by Clerk Graham, seconded by Trustee Zaban to approve the Consent Agenda:
approving the minutes of the April 1, 1998 Public Meeting concerning 900 Gulick
Road; approving the minutes of the April 7, 1998 Regular Board meeting;
acknowledging the Treasurer’s report of financial activities of April 1998;
Approving the Clerk’s list of accounts to be paid May 12, 1998 - checks #8728-
8809 for a total of $49,282.86; and to accept and place on file the following
reports - Williamston Community Fire Board minutes of April 9, 1998, Building
Department activities for April 1998, Assessor’s Report and updates of April
28, 1998, and the City of Williamston Council Minutes of March 23 and April
13th Draft with agenda. Supervisor Obst called for a roll call vote:
Ayes: Trustee Wiegandt, Clerk Graham, Supervisor Obst, Treasurer Nilsson,
Trustee Zaban
Nays: None - Motion approved unanimously
Meeting closed at 11:20 PM.
_____________________________________      ____________________________________
Shirley Graham, Clerk               Susan Jennings, Board Recording Secretary
SPECIAL MEETING - MAY 12, 1998
A special meeting of the WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP BOARD OF TRUSTEES was called to
order by Supervisor Obst on Tuesday, May 12, 1998 at 6:45 PM. The Clerk was
asked to record who was present and if a quorum was present. Clerk Graham
stated a quorum was present and recorded the following: Supervisor Obst, Clerk
Graham, Treasurer Nilsson, Trustee Wiegandt, Trustee Zaban and Attorney Stephen
O. Schultz.
Treasurer Nilsson moved and Clerk Graham seconded to go into closed session to
consult with legal counsel on pending litigation and possible settlement
discussions where public discussion could have a detrimental financial impact
on the litigation and the Township. Motion approved unanimously.
Clerk Graham moved and Trustee Wiegandt seconded to go out of closed session at
7:30 PM. Motion approved unanimously.
Supervisor Obst adjourned to the regular meeting of the Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees barring any objections. There were none.
___________________________________________
Shirley Graham, Clerk
JUNE 2, 1998
The regular meeting of the WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP BOARD OF TRUSTEES was called
to order by Supervisor Obst on Tuesday, June 2, 1998 at 7:39 PM. The Clerk was
asked to record who was present and if a quorum was present. Clerk Graham
stated a quorum was present and recorded the following: Supervisor Obst, Clerk
Graham, Treasurer Nilsson, Trustee Wiegandt, Trustee Zaban, Building Inspector
Aven and Attorney Stephen Schultz.
The agenda was read over with the following additions:
Site Plan extension request from Marvin Fouty; Road Commission letter relating
to Mitchell and Vanneter roads; Cable Commission Meeting report; and Water
Management Specialists entered a bid for drainage work on the ball field.
ATTORNEY REPORT - Stephen Schultz
Little action on the law suit with the city due to City Attorney Cox failing to
return phone calls from Township Attorney Schultz. Pre Trial set for June 15th
will have to be postponed due to Attorney Schultz being out of the country on
the 15th. Hopes to set the Pre Trial for the 19th.
Fire Board Authority letter of incorporation. Legally looks fine. Attorney
Schultz wanted to clarify Article 7 dealing with levy of property taxes. The
Fire Authority will have the power to levy taxes. If the millage requested
exceeds 2 mils there would be a ballot proposal in all municipalities that make
up the Fire Authority.. If 50% + 1 of the population of all municipalities
combined pass the millage, then the millage would go into effect for all
municipalities in the Fire Authority even if the voters in any given
municipality voted it down. The Township would not have a veto, neither would
any other community participating in the authority. According to Public Act 57
of 1988, two mils is the maximum that the Fire Authority could levy without a
vote of the citizens. Trustee Wiegandt stated that depending on how many of the
surrounding communities decided to participate, the initial levy would probably
be lower than the two mils.
Treasurer Nilsson raised the question of the letter from Sherry Stein of
Foster, Swift... concerning deferred compensation plan. This is on the agenda
under new business, but it was decided to discuss it while Attorney Schultz was
present. Ms. Stein is contacting Carol Johnston at Aetna to resolve how the
deferred compensation plan was initially set up and to discuss the changes that
have occurred in the Tax Code that require the Township to update its plan. The
deferred compensation plan is currently managed by Aetna. [The Township must
conform by December 31, 1998 with the IRS Small Business Job Protection Act of
1996.]
Trustee Zaban asked if the City has not responded to the current proposal yet,
is the likelihood that we go to trial increasing? Attorney Schultz stated that
he was not encouraged by current situation. Supervisor Obst stated that the
City indicated they had formed a committee to work on the agreement but the
committee has had difficulty meeting. Attorney Schultz stated that the trial
date has been set in September and that the slight delay in the pre trial
should not cause the trial to be delayed further.
While Attorney Schultz is out of the Country the following attorneys from
Foster, Swift can be consulted: Attorney John Seurynck for ordinance
violations; Attorney Bill Fahey for items concerning the litigation with the
City; and Attorney Brian Goodenough for rezoning issues.
FIRE BOARD - Darrell Brown
Would like to see the Township approve joining the Fire Authority this evening.
In order to go forward they need a new fire barn. The Fire Authority needs the
OK to work on this. They are looking at specs for a new fire engine. Everything
else is status quo. Supervisor Obst asked if the public aware of what is going
on with the creation of the new Fire Authority? Darrell Brown stated that
Attorney Mark Adams is working on this.
PLANNING COMMISSION - Mickey Martin
Dexter Rezoning - There is a request from Mr. Joe Dexter to rezone his 40 acre
Ag Commercial lot to Ag Small Farm so that the property could be split into 10+
acre parcels. Recommendation was to approve the rezoning. The Planning
Commission needs final action on this item this evening. One possible option is
to rezone just the one 10+ acre lot and leave the remaining 30 acres in Ag
Commercial by joining it to the attached parcel. Supervisor Obst asked Mr.
Dexter's opinion on the proposed option. This was not acceptable to Mr. Dexter.
He would have to pay to have it rezoned later. The additional 80 acres that Mr.
Dexter owns is split by a Consumers Energy right of way. Mr. Dexter believes he
would be frozen by having property he couldn't do anything with. The State
purchasing his Land Development Rights is not a very realistic option in the
near future for him because this Township does not participate with matching
funds. Planning Chair Martin does not think that this Township has any worse
chance than any other Township since it is not a requirement that the Township
has matching funds for purchase. Only one Township in the State has this option
through a separate millage. Mr. Dexter believes the State is looking for larger
tracts of land and believes it is becoming more and more difficult to operate a
farm in this Township economically. Planning Vice Chair Jennings wanted to make
it clear that the Planning Commission did not wish to set a precedent with this
case. Several of the Planning Commissioners voted in favor of the rezoning
because they felt there weren't other viable options in this case. The Planning
Commission believes it must review the agriculture guidance for the Master
Plan. Trustee Zaban stated that part of the reason the Master Plan needs to be
reviewed is because the population encroachment is making it very difficult to
farm in this area. Supervisor Obst suggested rezoning just the 10 acres and
waive the fee for any future applications on the remaining 30 acres. Mr. Dexter
stated that he would like to split the property into three 14 acre parcels.
Intent is to sell one now. Hopes to farm another 8 years and then retire again.
Does not want to go through this process again at that time. Trustee Wiegandt
moved to approve the rezoning request of Joseph Dexter, 43.9 acres, parcel #
3303-03-22-300-007 from Ag Commercial to Ag Small Farm, as recommended by the
Planning Commission minutes of May 19, 1998. Seconded by Clerk Graham. Motion
passed unanimously.
Trustee Zaban brought up the fairness issue. Supervisor Obst stated a need to
address the fairness issue and to review the Master Plan. Trustee Zaban moved
that the Planning Commission review the Master Plan. Supported by Trustee
Wiegandt. Brief discussion followed. Motion passed unanimously.
Parks And Rec. Update - Mickey Martin
We are moving forward. Intend to call for a Public Hearing at the July Planning
Commission meeting regarding the grant proposal. Still working on in kind gifts
and getting plans drawn up. Park sign is on order.
OLD BUSINESS
900 Gulick Road Neighbors - Request for Time to be Heard.
Ms. Gerre Lou Imhoff stated that there are people in the area that are just now
hearing about the problems with 900 Gulick Road. She read a letter with 18
signatures and submitted it to the board. A copy is attached. Mr. Jim Sikarskie
read and submitted to the Board a similar letter with 21 signatures, a copy of
which is also attached.
Mr. Sikarskie called the engineer that came out to test the siltation problem
in his garden. The engineer has not yet sent the results. He did tell Mr.
Sikarskie that he was disgusted with having to run the tests because it was so
obvious that the run off has occurred. One-half inch of solid clay and two
inches of siltation were confirmed. Mr. Sikarskie borrowed a heavy duty tiller
and tilled his garden. After the 9/10 inch of rain on Sunday it was once again
filled with clay, negating the work he had just done. Mr. Sikarskie is tired of
reading "alleged siltation" in the Board minutes when it is obvious that there
is actual siltation. He also stated that violations of the ordinances should
not have been allowed to happen. If the Township Board is going to have any
respect from the community then these issues must be addressed immediately.
The neighbors were upset that by Mr. Foote removing himself from the Planning
Commission Agenda at the last minute, that they were also not allowed to be
heard at that meeting. Letting Mr. Foote retrofit the project to fit the
Ordinance is no longer an acceptable option to them. The neighbors want to know
how this issue is going to be resolved and they want the Board to tell them
this tonight.
The question was raised on who is legally responsible if the neighboring wells
go dry if Mr. Foote is allowed to use wells to fill his pond, the Township, Mr.
Foote, or whom? Supervisor Obst stated that there is no pond there now. Nothing
has gone down into the aquifer. There is to be no pond until a hydrogeologic
study is completed. Unless Mr. Foote goes against the stop work order then this
should not be a concern at this point. There is currently no danger to the
aquifer.
The question was asked of how long do we have to drive by this huge mess?
Supervisor Obst stated that the Planning Commission and Township Board are
working on the site plan approval process. His goal is that within 30 days from
the Planning Commission meeting of May 26, 1998 Mr. Foote would complete the
drainage and berm improvements along Mr. Sikarskie’s property line; and that
within 60 days the remaining drainage and berm improvements along the west line
of Mr. Foote’s property will be completed and will attempt to meet the
remaining requirements of the Planing Commission. Any work he is now doing is
all at his own risk. Supervisor Obst believes it is a misunderstanding to think
that Mr. Foote has gone ahead and achieved something that he would not have
achieved if he had proceeded as required. There is no guarantee that he might
not have to change what he is currently doing again. End result could be that
there will be no pond allowed there at all. Fact that Mr. Foote has planted
trees is at his own risk. It is a lengthy process to correct the current
situation. The Township has established that Mr. Foote has violated the Zoning
Ordinance. Supervisor Obst believes the issue would currently be in court if
the Township had initially required Mr. Foote to return the land to its
original condition, which would further be tying up Township resources and
funds. What the Board and Planning Commission have been trying to do is have
the outcome be exactly as it would have been had Mr. Foote followed the process
properly.
Question was raised, if the ordinances are in place why aren't they being
enforced pending the site plan approval? Supervisor Obst stated that a privacy
fence is limited to six feet in height, but a berm is not considered a privacy
fence. If the only intent of the berm is for privacy, then the 6 feet
limitation may be appropriate. Though Mr. Foote has himself stated at previous
Board meetings that the intent of the berms was for privacy, he is now saying
that the purpose is landscaping. The Township is attempting to resolve the berm
height issue with Mr. Foote. He is currently stating an average height of 8
feet - not a maximum - will be implemented. He has agreed that over the next
short time period he would put in the 10 foot toe and make the berms undulating
as the Planning Commission required. He is hoping this will meet the
requirements of making the berm harmonious with the area. A three on one slope
is required for the berm. Mr. Foote will be doing this.
Question on the pond - Since it is above the natural lay of the land there will
have to be algaecides used to maintain it along with excessive amounts of water
pumped into it. These chemicals will drain into the creek subsequently into the
wetlands. The concern is anything proposed so far does not measure up to
harmonious usage.
Mr. Sikarskie stated the height of the pond surface is 95.5 feet. His property
is at 94.3 feet. Lay of the land goes down to the south to about 86 feet of
elevation. Pond is at the highest elevation of the area. Mr. Foote could have
put it at the bottom of the land. The Township is now trying to retrofit the
pond at the top of the hill. This would never have been approved in the first
place. Supervisor Obst stated that Mr. Foote will not be able to tap into the
aquifer until the hydrogeologic study has been done, if at all, depending on
the results of the study. Mr. Foote has assured Supervisor Obst that when the
soil samples came back and that it indicated what Mr. Sikarskie claims he will
undo the damage.
Mr. Sikarskie stated that the current hearsay is that Mr. Foote plans to
develop the area with a subdivision and a golf course. He has attempted to
purchase several neighbors’ property. The response of those neighbors so far
has been that they put more value in the land than in Mr. Foote’s money. Mr.
Sikarskie’s research has lead him to believe that it is not the size of the
pond, but the size of the entire project that determines whether or not the DNR
needs to be involved. The minimum size for DNR involvement is 5 acres. Mr.
Foote’s pond is 4.9 acres, but the entire project extends over 10 acres. The
Township is still waiting to hear from Mr. Pingle of the DEQ. Four to five
neighbors have contacted Mr. Pingle independently about this situation.
The question was raised as to who is responsible for hiring the engineering
firm to test the potential impact on the aquifer. The opinion of the residents
was that this firm should not be hired and managed by Mr. Foote. Supervisor
Obst stated the Township would have the option of having its own engineer
present during the tests. The engineer would have to sign and seal the test
results and his and his firm’s reputation would be on the line.
Mr. Sikarskie does not think that Mr. Foote was given clear enough direction
from the Township as to what needs to be done for him to come in compliance.
Supervisor Obst stated that the Township had to be careful so that whatever the
Board tells Mr. Foote needs to be done will not be reversed in court at a later
date. The Planning Commission and Township Board cannot be arbitrary in their
decisions.
Ms. Imhoff stated that two and one half hours of the Board’s time was spent on
this issue at the last meeting and then Mr. Foote and his attorney walked out
without coming to any agreements. Supervisor Obst thinks the Township has made
progress. Ms. Imhoff stated that so has Mr. Foote.
Mr. Sikarskie stated that Mr. Foote has broken every law and done it without
the permits. The codes need to be enforced. The Township shouldn't be so wimpy
and intimidated by Mr. Foote’s big money. The law is on the Township's side.
The Township needs to enforce what it has on the books.
Gerry Smith stated that it seemed ridiculous to prevent the neighbors from
being heard at the last Planning Commission meeting because Mr. Foote asked to
be withdrawn from the agenda at the last minute. Ms. Smith was impressed with
how Mr. Dexter was treated concerning his rezoning earlier in this meeting. She
wonders why this issue wasn’t addressed immediately as far as taking required
legal action. How many days after the monstrosity arose was it before the
Township did anything? Supervisor Obst stated that the Board may have let it go
longer than they should have. They waited because they didn't know about it at
first and later they were trying to get more information by contacting other
agencies to see if any permits had been applied for. Supervisor Obst agreed
that, in retrospect, it did take the Board longer than what was best to get
this going. They are now trying to get the Township engineers and Mr. Foote's
engineers to agree on what needs to be done for the hydrogeologic study. The
process is drawn out. Mr. Foote is attempting to address the berm situation in
the 30 and 60 day time limits he has from the May 26th Planning Commission
meeting. After that the Planning Commission will hold another hearing and the
neighbors will be invited to voice their opinion on the results and those
opinions will be weighed in the Planning Commission’s recommendation to the
Board.
Trustee Zaban stated that being a General Law Township, we do not have a code
enforcement officer driving the streets. We have to wait for reports to come in
before we know a situation has occurred.
Jim McKibben stated that he doesn't care how much it costs Mr. Foote to put
this back in order. He does not believe that this project is attractive or
harmonious. Mr. McKibben believes the Township is now pursuing it in the proper
manner. He agrees the Township cannot be arbitrary in their rulings.
There was also the concern raised about the waste of water as a community
resource. The Township’s defensive position is allowing Mr. Foote to frame the
entire argument. He has everyone focused on the berm when the base line is that
the maintenance of that lake will require pumping the equivalent of 33 houses
daily usage of water on a daily basis. The word in the neighborhood is that Mr.
Frederick Foote has plans to do the same type of thing. Everyone must live with
water. To throw it away in this manner is criminal. A self filling pond at the
bottom of a hill would not be a problem. Supervisor Obst stated that the
Township needs to do research to determine what is reasonable water usage for
filling a pond. The comment was made that water conservation regulations as far
as watering lawns and washing cars are set in other areas, why can't they be
set here? Supervisor Obst stated that a current suggestion is that at the
Township's request, in a drought emergency, Mr. Foote would have to stop the
pumping. Neighbors are concerned that Mr. Foote is planning on using this pond
as a future reservoir for a golf course. They can see no other reason for
putting it at the top of a hill other than to use it as a reservoir. The
suggestion was made that the Township select the engineering firm to perform
the test, but still have Mr. Foote pay for it. Supervisor Obst agreed that this
should be examined.
Supervisor Obst clarified that the stop work order issued by the Township was
an order to not go forward with the project. The order did not prevent Mr.
Foote from attempting to rectify any problems that he had already created.
The neighbors requested that they be sent a copy of the criteria for zoning and
site plan approval. The Board collected names and addresses and agreed to do
this.
A neighbor across the road from the Foote’s stated that he tells the Township
one thing and then goes around Haslett saying that he has no intention of
changing anything.
Another neighbor stated that In the past 30 years there has never been water in
the Sikarskie garden or the ditch. Now with a rain there is. The tiling is
higher than the ditch. The Ingham County Road Commission put a new culvert in
front of the Dunkel’s property so that the water would flow past their
property. The water does not flow past, it floods the Dunkel property.
The neighbors understand that due process takes time, but the damage that has
occurred has to be addressed immediately. They do not believe that it has been
addressed. Supervisor Obst that damages should be addressed immediately. Mr.
Foote has led Supervisor Obst to believe that the problems are being addressed.
Mr. Stepanovich who lives on Shoeman Rd owns 10 acres on Gulick Rd. He stated
that this was the first time he has heard this in public. He hears people with
specific wrongs looking for redress and then hears the tone shift to waiting
for more test results before doing anything else. He stated that he has many
pine trees on his property. How long would it take for action if an apartment
building went up on his property without permits? The lake and berms are
structures just as much as an apartment building. Supervisor Obst stated that
in regards to immediate nuisances, these are being addressed. The difference is
that he could have a legal pond, but you can never have a legal apartment
building in that zoning district. The Township has to proceed legally. Mr.
Stepanovich stated that Mr. Foote has not done anything legally. Supervisor
Obst stated that Mr. Foote is taking the risk that what he ends up with may or
may not be approved by the Township. He's coming to the Township saying he's
going to meet the requirements. Treasurer Nilsson asked if the Zoning Ordinance
states harmonious, then who decides what is harmonious? Is it anywhere in the
ordinance that the neighbors have any say in what is harmonious?
The Board members and Planning Commission members have been by the site many
times. The real estate value of Mr. Sikarskie’s property has gone down as a
result of the impact of the Foote project. Treasurer Nilsson agreed the biggest
impact has been to Mr. Sikarskie’s property.
In general this is an environmentally conscious neighborhood. This is not an
environmentally friendly project. A low pond with fir trees for privacy could
have served the same purpose without this recourse from the neighbors. The
neighbors believe there is other motivation for the pond being where it is that
needs to be addressed. Treasurer Nilsson suggested hiring an environmental
lawyer to study the case. Supervisor Obst stated that the Township has
contacted the DEQ and DNR.
There was a request from the floor that the Board make a motion that the
Township Board hire the engineer at Mr. Foote's expense, rather than letting
him choose the firm. Supervisor Obst stated that the current agreement is that
Mr. Foote could choose the firm but the Township would be allowed to have our
engineer present at the time of testing. The Board needs more guidance from the
Planning Commission on this issue. There is a geologist on the planning
commission. The Board will check with him to see what is the best way to
approach this issue.
There is a third Mr. Foote who subcontracts out of Clinton County. The
neighbors would like to make sure that neither of our Township's Mr. Foote's be
allowed to use this Mr. Foote’s services for their projects.
The stop work order to prevent filling the pond is still in effect. There are
no fines currently being assessed against Mr. Foote.
The neighbors requested that anyone who signed either of the letters presented
at the beginning of this session be sent a copy of the requirements and
notification of any future meetings. The Board and Planning Chair have agreed
to do this.
The neighbors are not happy with the Board relying on Planning Commissioner
Hayes, a geological engineer, being the only watch dog. They would like to see
a truly independent firm hired for the study. Trustee Zaban stated that Bob
Hayes is the last person that is going to be compromised in this situation.
Planning Chair Martin stated that reports from STS have not been directly from
Mr. Hayes. He has had other engineers from his company working on them to make
sure there were no conflicts of interest or appearance of conflicts of
interest. Planning Chair Martin asked Commissioner Hayes if the Township needs
to have someone present at the test. He believes that Strata, the firm hired by
Mr. Foote, is reputable, but would not hesitate in a moment having some one
else monitor the test, if it would make the neighbors feel more confident in
the results.
Mr. Sikarskie is under the impression that Mr. Foote has threatened the
Enterprise that they had better not run an article on this issue. Still need to
define the maximum berm height allowed and what is harmonious or we will
continue to go no where. Mr. Sikarskie submitted his latest photographs of the
garden after this most recent storm.
NEW BUSINESS
Mr. Sterling Sluyter Receiving Harassing Letters With Regards To The Grand
River Annexation. The Township Attorney did not think the letter writer was
doing anything illegal. Mr. Sluyter started receiving letters when he was
circulating a petition to keep out the annexation. Clerk Graham has copies of
the letters. Mr. O’Dell, owner of the property to be annexed, verbally harassed
Mr. Sluyter when he was circulating the petition. Can not prove who is writing
the letters because they have not been signed. Mr. Sluyter has received four
letters since the annexation was approved on April 6th. Mr. Sluyter tried to
help the Township defeat the annexation attempt by circulating the petitions.
Would like some help from the Township now. Mickey Martin suggested that the
Township Board write a letter to Mr. O'Dell apprising him of the situation and
asking for his help if he had any knowledge of who the letter writer might be.
PLANNING COMMISSION - Mickey Martin
Marvin Fouty Site Plan Extension Request. Planning Chair Martin does not
believe the Township Board has the authority to give an extension for another
12 months. The Zoning Ordinance states that the Board can grant an extension
for up to 12 months. Planning Chair Martin believes they need to look at the
Zoning Ordinance to make sure nothing has changed that would affect this
property. Attorney Schultz believes that Mr. Fouty would not be allowed another
extension. Clerk Graham moved that this issue be sent back to the Planning
Commission for their consideration and review. Supported by Trustee Zaban.
Approved 4-1 with Treasurer Nilsson dissenting.
OLD BUSINESS
Ingham County Road Commission 1998 Road Improvements - Brian Jennings
Approval of contract with the county for local road improvement. Mickey Martin
raised the concern that the Transportation Committee has come up with a plan
with a very detailed report every year. The last two years they have suggested
that the Township devise a plan to fund road maintenance. Ms. Martin requested
that no roads be funded until a plan is made for maintaining our road system in
a manner that is fair for every Township resident. The recommendation for a
plan has been in the Transportation Committee’s report for two years and there
is still no plan in effect.
Transportation Acting Chair Jennings agreed that Ms. Martin’s observations are
correct. The Committee has projected out the costs of improving the roads for
the past two years. They have recommended that some alternative funding source
be found for the roads. Supervisor Obst asked if Mr. Jennings agreed that the
Township should hold up on paying for the roads now until a plan is in place?
Mr. Jennings stated that every year we cannot pay to fix all the roads that
need it.
Supervisor Obst stated that it is difficult to obtain a consensus from the
community on how this should be addressed. Mr. Jennings stated that because the
Transportation Committee is not a ruling body, he believes it should be handled
by the Board since levying taxes would have to be done by them. Mr. Jennings
also stated that a consensus will not be reached unless a specific plan is sold
to the community in the form that the roads won't get fixed unless the
taxpayers are willing to pay for it. Supervisor Obst asked Mr. Jennings if he
had a feeling about what a consensus might be. Mr. Jennings stated that he does
not. He has received different responses from everyone he has asked. Mr.
Jennings said that he would be willing to come up with a recommendation and do
a survey, but then the Township Board would have to follow up with it from
there. The Board gave the Transportation Committee the action item to come up
with the survey and pass it by the Board for approval, then to take the survey
and leave the resulting action up to the Township Board.
Mr. Jennings raised a concern about funding the Milton Road gravel
reconstruction this year. The original estimated cost was $7,000, the Ingham
County Road Commission came back with a cost of $42/$43,000 in their proposal.
The Transportation Committee unanimously recommends that Milton Road be dropped
for this year because of the increase in cost. Treasurer Nilsson moved and
Trustee Wiegandt seconded to approve the 1998 local road agreement for
improvements on Zimmer Road during the 1998 construction season with the Ingham
County Road Commission for an estimated cost of $48,400. Motion approved
unanimously.
Grand River and Zimmer Intersection - Brian Jennings
Due to late notice from the Post Office of the change on their move date, the
Michigan Department of Transportation (MDOT) and the Michigan State Police had
filled their schedules for the summer and were not available to reschedule this
study until August. The counters that were recently at the intersection were
placed by a different Division of MDOT that does periodic samplings throughout
the County. It was just a coincidence that this intersection happened to be on
the schedule for periodic counts at this time.
Letter From The Ingham County Road Commission On Vanneter And Mitchell Roads -
Brian Jennings
The Ingham County Road Commission voted to not take over jurisdiction of
Mitchell and Vanneter Roads around the Williamston Middle and Senior High
Schools. Reasons given were 1) They have information suggesting that the City
of Williamston will be attempting to annex these roads in the near future. The
Commission did not want to put any money into these roads only to have to turn
them over to the City; and 2) the current state of disrepair on these roads is
such that it would be several years before the County would have the money to
fix them properly. If the Township can get the roads up to specs and eliminate
the annexation threat the County will take another look at the situation.
NEW BUSINESS
Land Survey From The Advisory Council - Mickey Martin
The survey with a cover letter will be mailed out around the first of July.
Residents can return the survey by either dropping it off at the Township Hall,
mailing it, or dropping it off at their precinct when voting for the
Gubernatorial Primary on August 4th.
McNeer Corporation - Design Services, Mitchell and Vanneter Roads - Brian
Jennings.
The Transportation Committee asked for an updated estimate of the cost of the
project. Generally agreed that a letter will be sent thanking Mr. McIntosh of
McNeer Corporation for his proposal.
OLD BUSINESS
525 Gulick Road Complaint
The Board has received information from the property owner, Mr. Chris Kennicott
regarding the situation. He asked for, and was granted, an extension to take
care of the problem.
Williamston & Haslett Rd Complaint
Mr. Shaye Ramont, property owner, has been issued a violation notice to stop
work from the Township. He was also issued a Cease and Desist order from the
County Drain Commission. Wet Lands on the property were being altered. The
Drain Commission has since approved a permit for the property to be restored to
its original state. The property is also up for sale. Mr. Pingle from DEQ is
researching this as well.
Williamston Community Schools Mitchell Rd Access Update
The Williamston School Board has agreed to the Township’s conditions for
constructing a permanent site access drive to the athletic fields and
facilities off of Mitchell Rd. These conditions are:
1.   The drive is allowed and permitted by the Ingham County Road Commission.
2.   The drive is gated and locked to prevent entry of athletic field users.
3.   The drive is used solely by the district for access to the fields for
maintenance and grounds keeping.
4.   Any future change in use will be reviewed and approved by the Williamstown
Township.
Mr. Helfmann’s Building Permit - Walt Aven, Building Inspector
Mr. Helfmann was issued a building permit for the office building only, which
he has not yet started work on. He wants to start the pole barn which requires
a separate building permit. Building Inspector Aven advised Mr. Helfmann that
he needs to cut the size back down to what it was on the original plan approved
by the Planning Commission. The current brick proposal is a brick facing, but
it is put on brick by brick, not the paneling that was proposed before. If the
Planning Commission agrees, Mr. Aven has no problem with this brick type.
Resolution Adopting The Articles Of Incorporation Of The Northeast Ingham
Emergency Service Authority
Trustee Wiegandt moved and Treasurer Nilsson seconded that the resolution
adopting the articles of the Northeast Ingham Emergency Service Authority be
signed and adopted naming Mrs. Shirley Graham as the Township’s regular member
of the governing Board of the Authority for an initial term of three years and
Mr. Darrell Brown as the Township’s alternate. Supervisor Obst asked for a roll
call vote:
Ayes:   Trustee Zaban, Treasurer Nilsson, Supervisor Obst, Clerk Graham,
Trustee Wiegandt
Nays:   None
Powell Letter Of May 13, 1998
Clerk Graham has sent the required signed forms back to the Powells.
NEW BUSINESS
Cable Commission Report - Steve Zaban
Trustee Zaban believed there were too many errors in the minutes of the Cable
Commission Meeting to accept them at this point. He will make sure they are
corrected appropriately. The Township has not received any response from
Horizon Cablevision regarding the complaints of Township residents that were
forwarded to them. Biggest concern is the increase cost for Basic Plus service
when one of the added channels is no longer available and a replacement has not
been provided.
Clerk Graham is still waiting to hear from Horizon regarding hooking up the
Township. Someone from Horizon is supposed to show up at the Township Hall
between 1 and 4 tomorrow, Wednesday, June 3, 1998. [On June 3rd a Business
Access Needs Assessment was performed by Horizon Cable at the Township Hall.
The cost to the Township would be $49.90 per month for a fastnet Email
connection for one computer, which is a $30 discount from the normal business
rate. There would be an additional incremental discount for additional
computers. Free Business Basic Cable TV Service would also be provided to the
Township Hall.]
Sanitary Sewer Debt Service And Sewer Replacement Fund
Treasurer Nilsson moved and Trustee Wiegandt seconded to approve the 1998-1999
proposed budgets for the 1982 Sanitary Sewer Debt Service and Sewer Replacement
Fund. Motion approved unanimously.
Bid For Drainage On The Ball Field
A bid for drainage on the ball field of $16,800 has been received from Water
Management Specialists. This proposal will take care of the water problem only,
it does not include leveling of the field. The proposal is to install a water
management system on the ball field at the Township property by installing 4”
tile on 15 ft. spacings backfilled with course-screen sand with 2” of top soil
on top. All spoil to be deposited on Township property. They will mound it for
children to play or level it. This also includes a one time seeding after the
job is completed. Trustee Wiegandt thought this was a reasonable estimate for
this work. Treasurer Nilsson moved and Trustee Wiegandt seconded to accept the
bid of Water Management Specialists to install a water management system on the
ball field of the Township property. Motion approved unanimously.
CONSENT AGENDA
Moved by Treasurer Nilsson, seconded by Trustee Wiegandt to approve the minutes
of the May 12, 1998, 6:45 PM Special Board Meeting (Closed Session) and the
minutes of the May 12, 1998 Regular Board Meeting; to acknowledge the
Treasurer’s report of financial activities for May 1998; to approve the Clerk’s
list of accounts to be paid June 2, 1998 - Checks #8810-8861 for a total of
$28,450.31; and to accept and place on file the following reports: Williamston
Community Fire Board Minutes of May 14, 1998, Building Department Activities of
May 1998, Assessor’s report with updates as of May 20, 1998, Board of Appeals
minutes of May 6, 1998, and the City of Williamston Council Minutes Draft with
Agenda of May 11, 1998. Supervisor Obst asked for a roll call vote.
Ayes:   Trustee Wiegandt, Clerk Graham, Supervisor Obst, Treasurer Nilsson,
Trustee Zaban
Nays:   None.
Motion approved.
Audit
Clerk Graham informed the Board that the audit went well and that the auditor
charged less than originally estimated and will have a final report to the
Board by the June 30th meeting.
Trustee Zaban moved and Treasurer Nilsson seconded to adjourn.
Meeting Adjourned at 11:15 PM.
___________________________________      ____________________________________
Clerk, Shirley Graham               Board Recording Secretary, Susan Jennings
JUNE 30, 1998
The regular meeting of the WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP BOARD OF TRUSTEES was called
to order by Supervisor Norman Obst at 7:40 p.m. Clerk Shirley Graham stated
that a quorum was present. Present were Supervisor Norman Obst, Clerk Shirley
Graham, Treasurer Christine Nilsson, Trustee Ronald Wiegandt, Trustee Steven
Zaban, and Building Inspector Walter Aven.
The agenda was reviewed, with the following additions: John Kane request for
performance bond refund, and Williamston swimming pool report.
FIRE BOARD REPORT - Darrell Brown
The incorporation meeting of the Northeast Ingham Emergency Services Authority
had been held, with all area municipalities present except Leroy Township. Mr.
Brown felt the new board would be a positive addition for the area, and
complimented all parties involved in the project. [Leroy Township signed at a
later date.]
PLANNING COMMISSION REPORT - Brian Jennings
Omnipoint Communications - The Planning Commission had approved the application
for a special land use permit for colocation of a telecommunications antenna on
an existing tower, with conditions which needed to be met. All necessary
materials had not been received, and no action was requested at this meeting.
Hideaway Woods No. 4 - A request for final plat approval had been received, and
it was essentially the same as the approved final preliminary plat. Approval of
the plat was recommended by the Planning Commission. It was moved by Clerk
Graham, seconded by Trustee Wiegandt, PASSED, that the final plat for Hideaway
Woods No. 4 be approved as submitted on the mylar copy. Clerk Graham signed the
mylar and returned it to Hideaway Woods representative Carl McIntosh.
The Pines Office Park - A site plan for this project had been approved two
years ago, with an extension granted in 1997. The Planning Commission and the
Township Attorney agreed that the Zoning Ordinance allowed only one extension,
and site plan approval had now expired. The applicant had been advised to
submit a new application for the project, and told the cost of the review would
be minimal if there were no major changes in the site plan. Clerk Graham said
there had been discussion about a reduced fee for the application. Supervisor
Obst suggested the usual fee of $1500 be requested, which would be placed in an
escrow account, and the unused portion would be refunded to the applicant. The
Board agreed.
Susan Neller Stable and Riding Arena - A hearing was held on June 16, 1998 with
a special meeting on June 23 for deliberation, on the special land use permit
for a commercial stable and riding arena. The application was recommended for
approval by the Planning Commission, with six conditions. The Commission had
reviewed the cutting of trees which might be necessary to allow proper site
distance from a commercial driveway. Moving of the driveway to the west of the
property had been recommended, to lessen its impact on the neighbor to the
east, along with the planting of a double row of trees along the driveway.
Commission Chair Mickey Martin had investigated soil conditions at the west
property line, and had indicated to the applicant where the Commission thought
the driveway should be located. A new site plan had been received, which
indicated where the manure management was to be located. The proposed septic
system was to have been reviewed by Commissioner Robert Hayes, but no report
was available. The Township Attorney had submitted a proposed change in the
written agreement which was required by the Zoning Ordinance.
It had been recommended by the Planning Commission that the driveway be paved
750 feet from the road, with a double row of trees to be planted 15 feet on
center along its east side for 750 feet. These trees were not shown on the new
site plan. The recommended setback from the road for the curve in the driveway
was also not indicated.
Supervisor Obst read a letter from neighboring property owner Larry Salstrom,
which asked for inclusion of additional wording in the written agreement which
would address his concerns. Mr. Obst also suggested the inclusion of an item
stating that violations of the agreement would be considered as violations of
the Zoning Ordinance, and the special land use permit could be revoked for
continual violations of the agreement. Clerk Graham observed that the new site
plan did not address several of the conditions recommended by the Planning
Commission, including paving of the driveway, and said dimensions should be
more completely shown on the plan. It was moved by Clerk Graham, seconded by
Treasurer Nilsson, that the matter be tabled because all information was not
available.
Susan Neller stated she did not feel the location of the trees and the driveway
curve had been specified by the Planning Commission. As shown on the plan, the
curve was located 500 feet from the road, and she disagreed with some of the
Commission’s recommendations. Maynard Beery, the applicant’s wastewater
management system designer, said he had not had the recommendations when he
drew the site plan. The driveway had been moved about 150 feet to the west on
the new plan. Mrs. Neller felt driveway paving would be a constant problem with
the wet land at the western part of the property. She did not think paving and
trees were both needed. Placing trees along the driveway would limit the use of
her land and she did not want to place them there; she would be willing to
plant them along Mr. Salstrom’s property line. Clerk Graham agreed that trees
should not be planted on wet land.
Trustee Zaban said concerns could be addressed at this meeting, and thought the
biggest issue was the amount of driveway paving that had been recommended, and
which he felt was excessive. Mr. Salstrom said the Planning Commission’s
decision to require 750 feet of paving had been based on the effects of
prevailing winds and dust which would blow onto his property.
Supervisor Obst asked if delay of a decision would be harmful to Mrs. Neller.
She said she wanted to build as soon as possible, and asked for a decision at
this meeting. She felt the decision should not be delayed because one person
had not read the information submitted by Mr. Berry. Mr. Beery said the
information had been given to Commissioner Hayes late this afternoon. The
proposed septic system had been approved by the Ingham County Health
Department. He would prepare a new site plan with changes after a Board
decision had been made.
The Board discussed specific issues raised by the Planning Commission.
Driveway - Mr. Salstrom felt this commercial venture would negatively impact
his property values and aesthetics. Conditions recommended by the Planning
Commission had met his concerns, but the new site plan did not reflect all of
these changes.
Paving - Mr. Salstrom stated the Zoning Ordinance required paving of commercial
driveways, except where that provision was waived by the Township. He had
requested that 1000 feet be paved but was agreeable with the 750 decided upon
by the Commission. He requested that the Planning Commission’s recommendations
be adopted by the Township Board. Mrs. Neller said she understood commercial
drives were required to be paved, but asked for a waiver from that requirement
as a farm driveway. She planned on paving the length of a truck and trailer (40
to 50 feet). She said this was an agricultural business. Horses did not walk
well on paved surfaces, and paving 750 feet would limit that use to half the
driveway length. A paved drive would be difficult to maintain over wet soils.
In the written agreement she was charged with controlling dust, which she felt
was sufficient. Trees would also limit dust problems. She planned to do
training of horses in the mornings and lessons in the afternoon, with as many
as five people possibly present at one time in the evening. Lessons would
usually involve one car each hour. They would be closed on Mondays but would
receive deliveries and other equipment could use the driveway on those days.
She said a ten stall barn was not equivalent to a factory or other commercial
operation, and suggested the ordinance be revised to separate types of
commercial operations. Not all commercial driveways should be paved. Trees
along the west side of the property would also inhibit effects of the wind.
Treasurer Nilsson said this was an example of a case where paving should not be
required. Commissioner Harold Powell stated that he favored the operation, but
felt the 750 feet of paving requested would best protect the neighbors from
dust carried by the prevailing winds. Mr. Salstrom said the applicant had
stated previously that as many as three lessons might be given in an hour. He
expected the operation to be a success, and wanted to be protected against its
impact.
Trees - Treasurer Nilsson thought the trees would be more desirable than paving
for controlling dust. Mrs. Neller preferred planting around the adjoining
property rather than along her driveway, to leave her property open. Mr.
Salstrom said the purpose of paving and trees was to minimize the impact of
vehicle activity, and he did not believe trees along his property line would
accomplish that.
Supervisor Obst suggested requiring the paving of 40 feet, with the written
agreement to state that 750 feet of paving would be required if dust became a
problem in the future. Mrs. Neller agreed. Commissioner Powell stated that the
driveway curve should be located 750 from the road so it didn’t follow Mr.
Salstrom’s property line, but felt the trees could be planted wherever Mrs.
Neller wanted. Mrs. Neller said she would move the driveway curve back to the
750 foot location.
Donna Anton, 240 Turner Road, also spoke as a neighbor, saying the driveway was
now proposed to be located closer to her property, but she had no objection.
Trees would be better placed along Mr. Salstrom’s property line, which would
not preclude Mrs. Neller’s use of her land. She felt the stable and arena would
add to the area and be in harmony with current surroundings.
Mr. Salstrom said he was asking for the conditions recommended by the Planning
Commission. Trees along a commercial driveway would do the best job of
minimizing the potential negative impact.
The Board voted on the above motion, which failed. Member Graham voted in favor
of the motion, and members Obst, Nilsson, Wiegandt and Zaban were opposed.
The Board reviewed the proposed change in the written agreement as suggested by
Township Attorney Stephen Schultz, and agreed that it should be included. Mrs.
Neller asked that a provision be added regarding the ability to rebuild in the
case of a catastrophic loss. Mr. Obst said the Zoning Ordinance contained such
a provision. If additional paving were to be added in the event of dust
problems, that provision should also be added to the agreement. Treasurer
Nilsson supported paving 40 to 50 feet, with a review if dust resulting from
the unpaved drive was detrimental to Mr. Salstrom in the future, and she agreed
with trees along his property line. Trustee Wiegandt said unmaintained trees
along a driveway could pose a problem for emergency vehicles, and favored
plantings along Mr. Salstrom’s property. The site plan did not indicate the
composition of the driveway, and dirt roads required maintenance. This drive
was essentially a private road, which the Board did not allow. He felt paving
should extend beyond 50 feet, because dust problems could be expected to result
from a dirt drive. He was concerned about making a decision when all
information was not in place. Trustee Zaban said the recommended 750 feet of
paving was excessive.
It was moved by Supervisor Obst, seconded by Trustee Zaban, that the Township
Board approve the Neller special land use permit, subject to the following
conditions: (1) driveway to be located as shown on current site plan, (2)
proposed septic system must be found to be acceptable to the Township once
additional information is received from Mr. Hayes and possibly Mrs. Neller if
desired, (3) approval of written agreement with revisions, (4) paving of drive
required 375 feet back from road, (5) screening by evergreen trees to be
located along Salstrom property line, a staggered double row 15 feet on center,
375 feet from the road, (6) curve in driveway to be located 750 feet from road,
(7) a new site plan to be submitted with required changes and meeting approval
of the Township. Changes in the written agreement would include: (1)
modification as suggested by the Township Attorney, (2) insertion of paragraph
regarding violations of the agreement, (3) addition of a paragraph stating that
upon future determination of the Township Board that dust is a nuisance to
neighboring property, the Board may require paving to a length of 750 feet, as
agreed to by Mrs. Neller, and (4) addition of paragraph regarding the right to
rebuild in the event of catastrophic loss, as set forth in the Zoning
Ordinance, and (5) no building permit will be approved until these conditions
are met.
Clerk Graham asked if movement of the driveway ten feet to the east would place
it on drier ground; Mrs. Neller said it would. Commissioner Powell said
locating it 60 feet from the west property line, as presently shown, avoided
the worst of the wetness. Commissioner. Hayes’ concern had been for the
operation and maintenance of the septic system. He had provided information,
but it did not cover performance of the systems. Vegetation would be an
integral part of the system. The system was approved by the Health Department,
and Mr. Beery said the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality found this
type of system desirable. A problem that could result would be that not enough
wastewater would be generated and the system would dry up. Plants would need to
be checked to see that it was working properly. If the system failed, there
would be a potential for odor, but any surface flow would not be in the
direction of neighbors, and there would be no immediate impact. This system had
low maintenance requirements and no mechanical components. If it didn’t perform
as expected, an alternative system would be installed.
Supervisor Obst questioned approving the plan when many items needed to be
completed. It was decided that he and Planning Coordinator Mickey Martin would
review new materials when they were received, and a building permit would not
be issued until the site plan was approved. Mr. Obst told the applicant all
details requested must be included in a new site plan. The Clerk asked that
trees be noted as being the required minimum of five feet in height, ten feet
off the neighbor’s property, and that other neighboring property tree locations
be shown. Measurements of neighboring properties should be shown. The Board
voted on the above motion, which was approved unanimously. Mrs. Neller was told
two sets of plans would be needed for review by the building inspector.
Grant Application for Township Park - Mr. Jennings reported that a public
hearing would be held by the Planning Commission on July 21, 1998 on the grant
application for funding from the Michigan Natural Resources Trust Fund. A
decision was expected to be made at that meeting. Treasurer Nilsson suggested
requesting a 75-25 split of the grant money, rather than the 30-70 suggested by
McKenna Associates. To receive 70 percent of the total, the Township would need
to use cash as their 30 percent. A 25 percent contribution from the Township
could consist of in-kind donations. A donation of legal services had been
received from Dan Kraft; this could not be used for the grant, but the Board
agreed to accept the offer for possible future needs.
OLD BUSINESS - Complaints
Christopher Kennicott, 525 Gulick - A complaint had been received about
unlicensed vehicles, in violation of the Township’s blight/nuisance ordinance.
Mr. Kennicott had said he would clean up the problem, but had not completed the
work. The matter would be reviewed at the August Board meeting.
Jeff Foote, 900 Gulick Road - No report had been received on soil tests.
Supervisor Obst said Mr. Foote had agreed to take certain actions to ease the
water problem on Mr. Sikarskie’s land, and work was now being done. No recent
word had been heard from Mr. Sikarskie. When the work was done the Planning
Commission would hold a hearing to determine whether all requirements of the
Zoning Ordinance had been met. The project was still without site plan
approval.
NEW BUSINESS - Complaints
1197 Wild Cherry, Richard Baldermann - Clerk Graham reported that neighbors had
complained of junk vehicles at that address. The homeowner had agreed to
license and remove vehicles. Cars were being parked along the road, and Mr.
Obst said it was not clear whether the Township could address that problem. The
sheriff had been notified of the situation.
Capital City Rifle Club - Supervisor Obst reported that he had met with Jack
Huntoon and Robert Thompson. They had submitted a plan showing a 20 foot berm
to be located behind the existing firing line, which they expect would reduce
sound from the area. He said the Building Inspector would need to determine if
such an addition would be considered minor change, or whether a new site plan
would be required. Mr. Aven said a building permit would be needed, and he
would check with the County regarding a soil erosion permit, and would talk
with the Rifle Club. He was asked to report at the next meeting. Mr. Obst also
reported that a letter had been received stating concerns about lead
contamination of groundwater at the Rifle Club. A neighbor said he had taken
samples of water from the site, and an analysis had shown lead contamination.
The Rifle Club stated that the neighbor had not had permission to be on their
property, and the Rifle Club contended that was no public health problem at the
site. Mr. Obst said a neighboring resident would have her wellwater tested for
possible lead contamination.
716 North Putnam - A complaint had been received from the next door neighbor
about uncut grass and debris. Cleanup of the site was discussed, and attaching
costs to the tax bill for the property. The Clerk said the owner had died, and
the parcel now had no owner. The Treasurer suggested the Township purchase the
property. Supervisor Obst agreed with Board members that if the site
constituted a nuisance according to the Township ordinance, then cleaning the
site and placing the cost on the tax bill would be the best course of action.
Construction Drainage, Brookshire Estates - A homeowner had alleged that damage
had been done to her property by construction work, and was concerned that
water from the new site would drain onto her property. The Building Inspector
was asked to evaluate the situation at the time a final inspection of the new
house was made.
Cathy and Steve Hopkins, Meadowdale Subdivision - A complaint had been lodged
regarding smoke from a bonfire on the property behind the Hopkins’ home. An
altercation had broken out when the Hopkins said smoke was entering their house
and neighbors would not put the fire out. The neighbors did not have a burning
permit for that fire, and had been denied a permit when one was requested since
that time. Clerk Graham said the permit had been denied because the burning
ordinance had not been followed, a nuisance had been created, and when notified
of the nuisance no action had been taken to eliminate it. Neighbors Mr. and
Mrs. Harrison and Mr. and Mrs. Fate had now submitted a letter requesting a
burning permit, saying they would obtain a permit before burning, would obey
the requirements of the ordinance, and would put the fire out if a neighbor
complained. Treasurer Nilsson said if a problem occurred in the future, someone
should check the situation immediately. Trustee Wiegandt said the burning
ordinance was meant to deal with open burning, which required fires to be out
by 9:00 p.m. Burning in a contained unit would not be a problem, and there was
no reason for the Township to deny a permit for such a use. There was general
agreement that a permit should be issued upon request.
Horizon Cable Company - A complaint against the company had been received from
a resident. The Township had also been notified by the company of an increase
in the cost of service.
Investment Policy - An investment policy needed to be adopted to meet
requirements of P.A. 20 as amended in December 1997. Treasurer Nilsson asked
that one addition be made to the submitted document: “Investments purchased
through an interlocal government agreement under the Urban Cooperation Act.” It
was moved by Treasurer Nilsson, seconded by Trustee Wiegandt, that the
investment policy, as amended, be adopted for the Township. The motion passed
unanimously.
Modem and Internet Service - Horizon Cable had agreed to install free cable
television for the Township and would provide cable modem access for a fee of
$50 per month. That fee was thought to be a high cost, and it was decided to
use the existing fax line to connect to the modem as well as the fax.
Community Swimming Pool - Supervisor Obst reported attending a meeting to
discuss rates for pool usage. An increase in rates in the fall was proposed,
but a group of tickets could be purchased at the summer rate. He would attend
the next meeting, which would be held in July.
John Kane - Mr. Kane had completed landscaping at his motel and had asked for
return of his bond money with interest. The Clerk said interest was not usually
paid for such cases. Mr. Aven thought it might be due to the applicant, and Mr.
Obst said he could check with the Township Attorney. Mr. Aven said all
requirements had been met by Mr. Kane. Treasurer Nilsson suggested such funds
could be placed in a non-interest bearing account.
Roads - Brian Jennings reported that the Michigan Department of Transportation
(MDOT) was planning a traffic study at the corner of Grand River and Zimmer
Roads in August. Mr. Obst recommended that the City Manager of Williamston be
kept abreast of any developments regarding the situation. Treasurer Nilsson
asked that the Williamston City Council and Planning Commission be informed as
well. Mr. Jennings said he would contact the City Manager about discussions
they had held with MDOT.
Building Board of Appeals - Building Inspector Aven said a Building Board of
Appeals should be instituted, with three members, which could review any of his
decisions which might be appealed. If the Township were rated by an insurance
company, a poor rating could result if there were no such board. The Supervisor
said such a board would be established at the next Board meeting.
CONSENT AGENDA
It was moved by Treasurer Nilsson, seconded by Trustee Zaban, that the consent
agenda be approved. A question was raised about the Board of Appeals report of
June 9, 1998; it was determined the report was incomplete, and the item was
removed from the consent agenda. The consent agenda consisted of: Minutes of
June 2, 1998 regular Board meeting; Treasurer’s Report of Financial Activities
June 1998; Clerk’s List of Accounts to be Paid June 30, 1998 (checks 8862
through 8918); Fire Board minutes of May 14 and June 11, 1998; Building
Department Activities June 1998; Assessor’s Report June 18, 1998. A roll call
vote was taken on the above motion, which passed unanimously.
Trustee Wiegandt asked that the Planning Commission again be advised to
consider a Township tree ordinance. Plantings would be taking place in the new
park, and the Township should set a good example by planting the proper trees.
It was moved by Trustee Zaban, seconded by Trustee Wiegandt, PASSED, that the
meeting be adjourned.
The meeting adjourned at 11:05 p.m.
______________________________         _______________________________
Shirley Graham, Clerk               Rosemary Philip, Recording Secretary
MINUTES
AUGUST 6, 1998
The regular meeting of the WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP BOARD OF TRUSTEES was called
to order by Supervisor Norman Obst at 7:40 p.m. Clerk Shirley Graham stated
that a quorum was present. Present were Supervisor Obst, Clerk Graham,
Treasurer Christine Nilsson, Trustee Ronald Wiegandt, Trustee Steven Zaban and
Building Inspector Walter Aven.
The agenda was reviewed, with the following additions: request for outdoor
concert, alleged lead problem at Capitol City Rifle Club, letter from Fred
Foote requesting appointment, meeting with Marvin Fouty on condominium
ownership, and a Board of Review resignation and vacancy.
TOWNSHIP ATTORNEY’S REPORT - Stephen Schultz
Attorney Schultz reported that meetings had been scheduled with the City of
Williamston to discuss ongoing litigation. No trial date had been set.
Supervisor Obst raised the question about allowing an outdoor music concert,
which had been requested on Township property. Mr. Schultz said such a use was
not specified in the Zoning Ordinance. Section 2.07 deals with temporary uses,
but the types of events referred to as outdoor events were usually carnivals,
etc., held by nonprofit organizations. Possibilities were that (1) the use was
intended to be totally unregulated, or (2) the use had not been contemplated
when the ordinance was written but was not intended to be left as an
unregulated use. Section 2.08 deals with uses not otherwise included. The
ordinance provides uses by right or by special use, and if not listed a use
cannot take place in a district. A use could be allowed by the Township Board
under certain circumstances, or the Board could refer the matter to the
Planning Commission for a recommendation on amending the ordinance to include a
specific use.
Based on the concerns about traffic, parking, temporary structures, noise,
nuisance, police, etc., Mr. Schultz did not believe the Township had intended a
use such as an outdoor concert to proceed without regulation. The Planning
Commission could be asked to suggest an appropriate district and determine
conditions of the use. The planned concert could not go forward because such a
use was not now allowed. Mr. Schultz recommended referral to the Planning
Commission, with the concert promoter informed that such a use was not
permitted, and told that a revision of the Zoning Ordinance would be addressed.
Under the Rural Zoning Act a use could not be banned; a district and conditions
of use must be designated.
Supervisor Obst said a letter had been received from Jeff Foote’s attorney, to
which he had responded that he would bring the matter to the Board for
authorization to take action to bring the site into compliance with the Zoning
Ordinance. Mr. Schultz said the ordinance provided for injunctive relief to
prohibit use or to impose penalties, or the use of an appearance ticket, which
would impose a penalty. Also, Mr. Foote could be cited for violation of the
Nuisance Ordinance. Since there was no question that this was a violation of
the Zoning Ordinance, it could be turned over to the Zoning Official
(Supervisor Obst) for action. Jim Sikarskie, 866 Gulick Road, asked about
enforcement of the Soil Sedimentation Act. Mr. Schultz said the Township did
not have authority to enforce the Act. The Township was dealing with a grading
permit and approval of a site plan, and soil erosion was part of that process.
Remediation was also part of that issue.
A letter had been received which alleged a public health problem from lead in
surface water at the Capitol City Rifle Club, and Mr. Obst asked what measures
were available. Mr. Schultz said the Township had no ordinance to deal with
public health issues or environmental issues. Such authority resided with the
Ingham County Health Department and the Michigan Department of Environmental
Quality. The Township could adopt an ordinance to address public health, safety
and welfare regarding environmental issues. Supervisor Obst stated that the
Township would notify appropriate agencies of the issue. [Mr. Schultz left the
meeting.]
PLANNING COMMISSION REPORT - Mickey Martin
Planning Commission Chair Mickey Martin reported that the Commission had held a
public hearing on the proposed grant application for development of the
Township park. The recommendation was that the application be remanded back to
the Township Board until appropriate matching funds had been raised through
fundraising or a cash match. Results of the open land survey, as it pertained
to the park, had indicated 84 respondents would help raise funds for the park,
while 206 said they would not. Supporting a millage for the park were 137
residents, while 160 did not favor a millage. Ms. Martin said she found the
results to be encouraging. She had been told the grant application process was
very competitive and the Township needed all the points it could get toward
approval of a grant, and cash carried points while in-kind donations did not.
In-kind donations were good, but were also hard to track. Such donations were
easier when a municipality had a public works department to do some of the
work. A total of $3500 had been donated at the present time. A new grant
process for smaller park development projects would become available in April
1999, which might be a better choice for the Township. The Planning Commission
had felt it would be better to delay the application for a grant until the
Township’s share of the money was available.
Treasurer Nilsson agreed it would be better to wait on the application. She
said two prospective Eagle Scouts had asked about projects in the park. A trail
had been mowed and trees had been donated. A sledding hill was being built,
which would form one side of the amphitheater. Parks and Recreation Chair Mike
Nestell wanted to plan a fund-raising event this fall. Trustee Wiegandt said an
item needed to be established in the budget for park maintenance, with work on
development to be addressed more aggressively in the spring.
Advisory Council Chair Rutgar Hoag suggested formation of a Parks Commission,
as this would be a long-term project. The Advisory Council was asked to submit
such a proposal.
It was moved by Trustee Wiegandt, seconded by Treasurer Nilsson, PASSED, that
the Township forego applying for a grant to meet the September 1 deadline,
proceed with fundraising, and review the matter in the spring of 1999.
Kathryn Lo, 290 Sherwood Road, asked how much money the Township had to put
toward the park, and how long it had taken the Township to accumulate the
$95,000 that had been allocated for purchase of the park land. She did not feel
it was feasible to raise a large sum of money within a year. Supervisor Obst
said many people had stated they would support a millage for park development,
and the Township hoped to raise the funds privately.
The Pines Office Park – Ms. Martin reported that a site plan had been approved
two years ago, with an extension granted in 1997. The approval had now expired.
Marvin Fouty had applied for approval of the same plan, and the Planning
Commission had recommended approval. Mr. Fouty was considering making the
project a condominium development, which was not possible under the Zoning
Ordinance as the plan was presently configured. Private roads were a
consideration, but were not allowed by the Township. She said she would meet
with him about condominium possibilities on August 11 at 10:00 a.m. It was
moved by Trustee Wiegandt, seconded by Clerk Graham, PASSED, that the 1996 site
plan for The Pines Office Park be approved, with conditions listed in
Christopher Doozan’s letters in 1996 and 1998.
Treasurer Nilsson asked about the tree ordinance, which the Commission had been
asked to consider. Ms. Martin said she had called Mr. Groh but had not talked
with him. She and Commissioner Nancy Fink had reviewed the proposed ordinance,
and she would again attempt to speak with Mr. Groh.
A Building Board of Appeals, which had been requested by Building Inspector
Walter Aven, was discussed. The Board decided to advertise for prospective
members of that board and the Board of Review in the next Township newsletter.
OLD BUSINESS
Complaints
Christopher Kennicott, 525 Gulick Road – Supervisor Obst said he had spoken
with Mr. Kennicott, but had not received a promised letter. Clerk Graham
reported that junk had been removed and the area had been cleaned up
considerably. One car was being restored with parts from another car. Trustee
Wiegandt suggested no action be taken, since progress was being made, but that
the situation should be monitored.
Jeff Foote, 900 Gulick Road – Supervisor Obst recommended that the Township
Board proceed with action to bring the situation into compliance with the
Zoning Ordinance. Mr. Foote had not submitted a new site plan, as had been
requested. Neighbor Jim Sikarskie said the drainage issue had been addressed.
He felt it would be difficult to stabilize erosion on the berms because
plantings had died in the dry weather. He asked if the Board would establish a
time frame, or would wait for Mr. Foote to act. He thought Mr. Foote felt he
was in compliance with the ordinance, and did not plan to change the 12 foot
berm on the front of the property. Planning Commission Chair Martin said Mr.
Foote’s lawyer, Jeffrey Ray, had stated in a July 15, 1998 letter that problems
with Mr. Sikarskie’s garden had been solved. She had told him that was not
true, as shown by photographs taken after a recent rain. Drains had since been
installed, with discharge to the wetland area to the south of the site.
Treasurer Nilsson said the case was an obvious Zoning Ordinance violation, and
the Township Attorney had stated that the Zoning Administrator could be
directed to take action. Trustee Wiegandt said the Township had tried to work
with Mr. Foote for a year, and strongly urged the Supervisor to issue an
appearance ticket, and take the matter to court if necessary. Mr. Obst said he
needed authority from the Board to take such action. It was moved by Clerk
Graham, seconded by Trustee Zaban, PASSED, that the Supervisor be given the
authority to take the matter to the Township Attorney and ask that necessary
steps be taken to enforce the Zoning Ordinance. A concern about aquifer studies
and pumping was expressed. Supervisor Obst said Mr. Foote did not plan to begin
pumping this summer.
Richard Baldermann, 1197 Wild Cherry – Clerk Graham reported that the Sheriff
had spoken with the Baldermanns, and no action was needed by the Board.
716 North Putnam – Clerk Graham said two bids had been received for clearing
and mowing of the yard at this site, which had no legal ownership. Responding
to Ms. Martin’s question about its use by Habitat for Humanity, Trustee
Wiegandt said it would take seven years to clear the title to the property,
since there was no owner of record. Kathryn Lo suggested the Township should
acquire the parcel and auction it as a fundraiser for the park. One of the bids
had been received from the neighboring homeowner, who had complained about the
site. It was moved by Clerk Graham, seconded by Trustee Zaban, PASSED, that
Raymond Wood be awarded the contract to maintain the site through this season,
at a charge of $75 per month, plus an additional $200 for initial cleanup. It
would be explained to him that maintenance for 1999 would await approval in
next year’s budget.
Horizon Cable Company – Trustee Zaban reported two new complaint letters had
been received. Supervisor Obst asked that they be forwarded to the Cable
Commission. He also asked when Commission appointments expired, and said
members should be asked if they wished to continue to serve.
Township 457 Deferred Compensation Plan – Supervisor Obst said a resolution of
the Board was needed to bring the Township into compliance with the Small
Business Job Protection Act of 1996. This would prevent the Township from
having the ability to use employee funds to settle Township accounts, if it
developed financial difficulty. It was moved by Trustee Zaban, seconded by
Clerk Graham, that the following resolution be adopted. A roll call vote was
taken: Yes – Members Zaban, Nilsson, Obst, Wiegandt and Graham. No – None. The
motion passed unanimously.
RESOLUTION
RESOLVED: That in accordance with the requirements of the Small Business Job
Protection Act of 1996, and notwithstanding Sections 1(b) and 12(b) of the
Township of Williamstown Section 457 Retirement Trust Agreement, said Trust
Agreement established effective September 1, 1992 is hereby terminated
effective as of the date of this meeting of the Township Board; and
FURTHER RESOLVED: That in conjunction with Section 13(a) of the Township of
Williamstown 457 Retirement Trust Agreement, the Trust’s ownership interest in
any asset, including annuity contracts, held by the Trust shall be transferred
to the Township of Williamstown effective as of the date of this meeting of the
Township Board; and
FURTHER RESOLVED: That the First Amendment to the Township of Williamstown 457
Retirement Plan is hereby adopted effective January 1, 1998, or such earlier
date as is required by the Small Business Job Protection Act of 1996 and the
Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997; and
FURTHER RESOLVED: That the Supervisor and Township Clerk are authorized to
execute the First Amendment to the 457 Retirement Plan and any related
documents on behalf of the Township.
NEW BUSINESS
Recycling – Clerk Graham reported that due to changes in hours at Granger
Recycling Center, Martin Wright would be unable to continue with the Township’s
recycling program as presently established. Mr. Wright explained that
participation in the program had steadily increased for the first years, and in
the last two years had reduced slightly. At its peak, 100 to 125 cars
participated, and now on a typical Saturday 65 to 80 people would be served. He
did not feel it was necessary for the Township to provide the service, since
many companies offered curbside recycling, and the Waste Management site in
Williamston was open at no charge. The Township could stop the service and see
what the feedback would be. Having bins available on site all the time did not
work well due to contamination of the recycled materials. Ms. Martin stated the
service should not be discontinued, and someone else should be sought to
provide it. She suggested advertising in the newsletter. Treasurer Nilsson
calculated that the service was costing about $4 per person per month, for
those using the service. The Supervisor asked Clerk Graham to seek a
replacement to provide the service. She would provide a notice for Mr. Wright
to hand out on August 8, his last Saturday in operation, stating that the
service was being discontinued temporarily, noting alternate locations, and
asking if the service was desired and if anyone wanted to provide it.
Request for Outdoor Concert – The Township had received a verbal request from
Nick Gavrilides of Spin Cycle Records to hold an outdoor music event on
property owned by Larry Hughes. Township Attorney Schultz had recommended that
the Township formulate a provision of the Zoning Ordinance that would indicate
where such events could be held, and under what conditions. Such a concert
could not presently be allowed. Clerk Graham said misinformation had been given
to Mr. Gavrilides about the request. Supervisor Obst said the Board should send
a certified letter to him explaining the situation and stating that the matter
would be referred to the Planning Commission for a recommendation. Many issues
were involved in the issuance of such a permit, including health, police,
drinking, etc.
USA Plastics Building – Supervisor Obst noted that the building, located in the
Township, had been purchased by the City of Williamston. He said the City
wanted the Township to give them that land, and the issue could become part of
an agreement worked out regarding the lawsuit with the City. No Board action
was required.
Capitol City Rifle Club, Lead Contamination Issue – Supervisor Obst explained
that a letter had been received from Ger Schultink, expressing concern about
possible lead contamination of surface water at the Rifle Club site. Attorney
Schultz had said the Township had no authority regarding environmental issues,
and should refer such matters to the County or State. Mr. Schultink said his
letter had addressed the widespread lead contamination at gun clubs.
Neighboring resident Larry Hughes had provided results of lead sample tests.
Mr. Hughes was asked how the samples were obtained; he said he had collected
them himself. In answer to a question about trespassing, he stated that he did
not trespass as he was a member of the Rifle Club. Mr. Schultink felt 50 to 100
samples at $25 each would show if there were reason to be concerned, and
environmental agencies should be asked to coordinate a site assessment.
Supervisor Obst said he would ask the Advisory Council to formulate a
recommendation. It was moved by Treasurer Nilsson, seconded by Clerk Graham,
PASSED, that the issue of alleged lead contamination at the Capitol City Rifle
Club, as described by Mr. Schultink, be referred to the Advisory Council for
review. Ray Lemmen, 1800 Germany Road, asked about work being done at the Rifle
Club, and whether they were in violation of the Zoning Ordinance since they
were changing their site. Mr. Obst said a new backstop berm was being
constructed, which was expected to reduce noise. A building permit had been
applied for and the Building Inspector was checking the grade of the berm.
Operation at the club had been voluntarily stopped pending results of a lawsuit
against them. He said new legislation permitted expansion of gun clubs and
reduced townships’ authority over them. However, he would check with the
attorney about whether they were in violation of the ordinance. Larry Hughes,
owner of adjoining land, said the addition of lighting had allowed increased
activity, in violation of their site plan, and he thought a permit had not been
issued for that addition. Mr. Schultink did not think expansion was allowed,
and asked for an opinion from the attorney. Mr. Hughes explained that his
lawsuit was the reason the club was closed; the suit covered use of a driveway
and safety violation of lead flying onto his property. He said changes were
being made due to safety violations. He had asked for a permanent injunction to
close the club due to safety violations. Mr. Schultink asked that the Township
request a copy of a safety audit required by the National Rifle Association to
see if they are in compliance; Mr. Obst agreed to request the audit.
Office Furniture – Clerk Graham said a proposal had been submitted for office
equipment, totaling a $1700 increase over the $2082 that had been approved
previously. It was moved by Clerk Graham, seconded by Trustee Wiegandt, PASSED,
that the budget be modified to approve an increase of $1700 from $2082 that had
been approved for office furniture.
Fred Foote Letter – Mr. Foote had asked to be appointed to a Township board or
commission. Supervisor Obst asked the Advisory Council to suggest where his
service would be most beneficial.
Building Inspector Report – Walter Aven
Mr. Aven mentioned the Building Board of Appeals, which Supervisor Obst said
would be noted in the Township newsletter. Mr. Aven said some changes were
being made in the building code, and he would report when problems were
resolved.
Fire Board Report - Harold Powell
Fire Board representative Harold Powell said they had adopted a resolution to
request a one mill levy for operation only, for a five year period, to be
placed on the November ballot. They were currently looking for a new location
for the fire hall. Operating funds could be used to purchase such land.
Susan Neller Stable Agreement – Supervisor Obst reported that the agreement was
ready to be signed by the Township. He had prepared a memo to her, stating that
trees could be placed near the driveway if she preferred. He did not feel the
Board had required her to plant trees specifically along the neighbor’s
property line. Trustee Wiegandt said the Board had indicated where the trees
should be planted, which was away from the driveway. Clerk Graham stated they
should be planted where soils were best. Supervisor Obst said Mrs. Neller would
be meeting with Planning Coordinator Martin in the fall regarding tree
plantings; a change in tree location would require a modified site plan.
Howard Dahlstrom, Mowing of Park Trails – The Board authorized payment of $20
per hour, for a total of $140, for Mr. Dahlstrom’s mowing. If a bill were
submitted for additional money, it would be reviewed by the Board.
Election Results – Clerk Graham reported on results of the August 4 primary
election; the Township had seen a 25 percent turnout.
Landscaping at Township Hall – Clerk Graham stated that complaints had been
received about the grounds at the Hall. One company had submitted a proposal
for reworking the grounds. Consideration should be given to eavetrough
dispersal locations. Trustee Wiegandt suggested having the mowing company trim
the shrubs, etc.
Charter Township – Treasurer Nilsson noted a workshop on charter townships was
being held, and suggested Board members attend. It was suggested that Jim
Ballard and Rex LaMore of the Intergovernmental Affairs Committee of the
Advisory Council also be asked to attend.
CONSENT AGENDA
It was moved by Clerk Graham, seconded by Trustee Wiegandt, that the consent
agenda be approved. A roll call vote was taken. Yes: Members Obst, Zaban,
Wiegandt, Graham and Nilsson. No: None. The motion passed unanimously. The
consent agenda consisted of minutes of July 30, 1998; July Treasurer’s Report;
Clerk’s List of Accounts to be Paid (checks 8919 through 9010); Williamston
Community Fire Board minutes of July 9, 1998; NIESA Minutes of July 9, 1998;
July Building Department Activities; July 15 Assessor’s Report; Board of
Appeals minutes of June 9 and July 1, 1998.
It was moved by Trustee Zaban, seconded by Treasurer Nilsson, PASSED, that the
meeting be adjourned. The meeting adjourned at 10:35 p.m.
****
___________________________________      ___________________________________
Shirley A. Graham, Clerk            Rosemary B. Philip, Recording Secretary
SEPTEMBER 1, 1998
The regular meeting of the WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP BOARD OF TRUSTEES was called
to order at 7:35 PM by Supervisor Obst. Clerk Graham was asked to record who
was present and if there was a quorum present. Clerk Graham stated a quorum was
present and recorded the following: Supervisor Obst, Clerk Graham, Treasurer
Nilsson, Trustee Zaban, Trustee Wiegandt, Building Inspector Aven. Attorney
Schultz scheduled to arrive later.
The agenda was read over with the following additions: Oversized political
signs; and an amendment to the investment policy.
PUBLIC COMMENTS & QUESTIONS
Ingham County Sheriff Department - Break-In Update - Detective Pete Ackerly
Detective Ackerly stated that there has been a rash of break-ins in
Williamstown Township since July. A suspect, Mr. Valsquas, is currently
incarcerated in the Clinton County Jail. He is a 5 ft 7 inch, 260 lb. Hispanic
male who was working as a cement contractor. It is through this work that he
chose the homes for break-ins. He had just come off of a 10 year prison term
and 2 year probation. There were 7 break-ins in Williamstown Township that he
is suspected of committing since July. He is also suspected of two break-ins in
Wheatfield Township, and several in Livingston and Clinton Counties. There is
an article in the September 2, 1998 Enterprise on this investigation that
pictures the car suspected of being used in these robberies. Anyone having seen
this car in the area, or having any further information on this case is asked
to call Detective Pete Ackerly at 676-8256.
Abraham & Gaffney, P.C. - Audit Report Review for Fiscal Year Ending 3/31/98
Received a clean report from the auditors. There were no areas to be addressed.
Sound and efficient accounting methods are currently being used by the
Township, with no recommendations for improvement.
Northeast Ingham Emergency Service Authority (NIESA) - Harold Powell
NIESA will be asking for an operating millage of one mill for the next five
years on the November Ballot. NIESA is made up of the communities of
Williamstown Township, the City of Williamston, Locke Township, Leroy Township,
Wheatfield Township and the Village of Webberville. There will be a need for a
full time secretary, and when Chief Hunt retires a full time Fire Chief will
need to be hired. There are currently EMTs available on a full time basis with
the exception of weekends when the coverage is strictly by volunteer EMTs. Both
fire barns are in need of expansion. A public awareness program of the
authority is currently in the works. They are looking for municipal support of
the ballot question.
PLANNING COMMISSION REPORT - Mickey Martin
Williamstown Estates - Final Plat Approval
All conditions of the Planning Commission have been met. The Planning
Commission recommends approval of the final plat for Williamstown Estates.
Trustee Wiegandt moved and Treasurer Nilsson seconded to approve the Final Plat
of Williamstown Estates per the Planning Commissions recommendation of August
18, 1998. Motion approved unanimously. Clerk Graham signed the Plat.
Mr. Robert Sturgis - 1300 Epley Road - Special Land Use Permit
Clerk Graham moved and Trustee Zaban seconded to approve the Planning
Commission recommendation to allow total square footage of all accessory
buildings to exceed 2400 square feet on the Sturgis property at 1300 Epley
Road. Motion approved unanimously.
Mr. Greg Shannon - 6150 Shoeman Rd, Haslett - Pond Site Plan Approval
Clerk Graham moved and Treasurer Nilsson seconded to approve the pond Site
Plan, as recommended by the Planning Commission with all of their conditions
having been met. Motion approved unanimously.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Complaints Status Report:
525 Gulick Road - Have seen progress on the site. Many of the cars have been
removed. An old fence row has been bulldozed and cleaned up, and the lawn has
been mowed. Agreed to give him more time to finish the clean up.
1819 Germany Road - Capitol City Rifle Club - Report from the Ingham County
Drain Commission on lead contamination is included and will be forwarded to the
Advisory Council for consideration. Operations have resumed at the club.
900 Gulick Road - Mrs. Gerre Lou Imhoff submitted an article from the August
14, 1998 Lansing State Journal on Meridian Township’s plan for a new well being
dropped due to uncertainties about its use and potential impact on the water
system. She included the following comments with the article: “Here is a good
example of Meridian taking past experiences, weighing uncertainties, and acting
in a very responsible manner.” Further discussion of the situation at 900
Gulick Road was deferred until the arrival of Township Attorney, Stephen O.
Schultz.
Horizon Cablevision / Cable Commission Meeting of Aug. 28, 1998 - Steve Zaban
Horizon has agreed that they need to improve communication and service with
their customers. No specific plans for improvement were made available at the
meeting. Horizon has agreed to offer the Fox Sports Network beginning in
September. There will be no charge for the first month. Horizon is still
deciding on the charge for this station and whether or not it will be
automatically included in Basic Plus service or if it will be available as an
option. Trustee Zaban believes Horizon has finally gotten the message that
their customer service and communication needs to improve.
Township Recycling Program - Shirley Graham
Mr. Martin Wright has agreed to continue the recycling program at the Township
Hall on a trial basis. The new times for collection will be the second Saturday
of the month from 12:00 noon until 3:00 PM.
NEW BUSINESS
Street Lighting Request for Woodview Subdivision, Phase III - Shirley Graham
Trustee Wiegandt moved and Clerk Graham supported to approve the Township
expenditure for this project, two poles to be installed per plat diagram, with
the cost to be prorated on the 11 lots over a three year period at the going
interest rate, per the Township general fund checking account statement,
commencing with December 1, 1998 tax statements. Discussion followed. Motion
approved unanimously.
Planning Commission Appointments - Three People; Each for a Three Year Term
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees approved the appointment of the
following people to the Williamstown Township Planning Commission, each for a
three year term, as nominated by Supervisor Obst: Dan Kraft (re-appointment),
Steve Zaban (Board Representative - re-appointment), and Rex LaMore (new
appointment).
Per Treasurer Nilsson’s suggestion; the Township Board will send a letter of
thanks, acknowledging Brian Jennings’ service on the Planning Commission for
the past four years.
Political Signs
All yard signs, including political campaign signs, are limited in size to 16
square feet. Mr. Deweese has been informed of this limitation.
Sanitary Sewer Service Request - 3800 Vanneter Road, Harns Care, Inc.
The Harns’ are interested in buying the property at 3800 Vanneter Road to
provide Adult Foster Care for six people. The increase in the number of
residents at the property would likely cause the drain field to fail. For this
reason they are requesting to be connected to sewer. Treasurer Nilsson moved
and Trustee Wiegandt seconded to approve and forward the request to the City of
Williamston for Sanitary Sewer Service at 3800 Vanneter Rd. As requested by
Nancy Harns, President of Harns Adult Foster Care, Inc. Motion passed
unanimously.
Addition to the Investment Policy - Christine Nilsson
Treasurer Nilsson has been made aware of an amendment that needs to be made to
the Township’s Investment Policy regarding investment pools. Treasurer Nilsson
moved and Clerk Graham seconded that the following be added to the Township’s
Investment Policy:
I. Investment pools organized under the surplus funds investment pool act, 1982
PA 367, 129.111 to 129.118, and under the local government investment pool act,
1985 PA 121, MCL 129.141 to 129.150.
Motion approved unanimously.
CMU Letter of Recognition for Treasurer Christine Nilsson - Norm Obst
Central Michigan University’s Center for Public Service has acknowledged
Christine Nilsson’s graduation from the Michigan Municipal Treasurers Institute
on May 8, 1998 and commended her for her performance and leadership in the
institute over the past three years.
CONSENT AGENDA
Treasurer Nilsson moved and Clerk Graham seconded to approve the Consent
Agenda: approving the minutes of the August 6, 1998 Regular Board Meeting;
acknowledging the Treasurer’s report of financial activities for August 1998;
approving the Clerk’s list of accounts to be paid September 1, 1998 - check
numbers 9011 through 9056 totaling $25,669.21; and accepting and placing on
file the following reports - Williamston Community Fire Board Minutes of August
13, 1998, NIESA Minutes of August 6, 1998, Building Department Activities for
August 1998, and the Assessor’s Report/Updates of August 20, 1998. Supervisor
Obst asked for a roll call vote:
Ayes:   Trustee Zaban, Treasurer Nilsson, Supervisor Obst, Clerk Graham,
Trustee Wiegandt
Nays:   None.
Motion passed unanimously.
QUESTIONS OF THE ATTORNEY - Stephen O. Schultz of Foster, Swift, Collins &
Smith, P.C.
9:20 PM - Attorney Steve Schultz Arrived
900 Gulick Rd - Jeffrey Foote residence. Attorney Schultz will be filing a
complaint against the Foote’s in District Court on Wednesday, September 2,
1998. In the complaint the Township is seeking the collection of fines and
injunctive relief. The Foote’s have 21 days after the Township files the
complaint to file an answer. If the Court grants injunctive relief then the
Foote’s would be required to fill in the pond or get Site Plan Approval. Two
neighbors have alleged that the Foote’s are already pumping from their well to
fill the pond.
Trustee Wiegandt moved and Clerk Graham seconded to go into closed session to
consult with legal counsel on pending litigation and possible settlement
discussions where public discussion could have a detrimental financial impact
on the litigation and the Township. Motion approved unanimously.
9:38 PM - Regular Meeting Closed and Closed Session Opened to Discuss Pending
Litigation with the Township’s Attorney.
11:07 PM - Closed Session was Closed and Regular Meeting Reopened.
Trustee Zaban moved and Clerk Graham seconded to adjourn the Regular Meeting of
the Williamstown Township Board of Trustees. Motion passed unanimously.
11:08 PM - Meeting Adjourned.
_________________________________      __________________________________
Shirley Graham, Clerk               Susan Jennings, Recording Secretary
OCTOBER 6, 1998
The regular meeting of the WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP BOARD OF TRUSTEES was called
to order at 7:41 PM by Supervisor Obst. Clerk Graham was asked to record who
was present and if there was a quorum present. Clerk Graham stated a quorum was
present and recorded the following: Supervisor Obst, Clerk Graham, Treasurer
Nilsson, Trustee Zaban, Trustee Wiegandt and Building Inspector Aven.
The agenda was read over with the following additions: Proposed Zoning Ordnance
revisions, proposed Barry Road paving and North Williamston Saddlemates 4-
H club requesting use of the Township Hall.
PLANNING COMMISSION - Mickey Martin
Royce Lockwood Rezoning - Trustee Weigandt moved and Clerk Graham supported to
approve the rezoning of a 10 acre portion of Royce Lockwood’s parcel # 3303-03-
23-200-012, from Ag-Commercial to Ag-Small Farm per the Planning Commission’s
recommendation. Motion approved unanimously.
Williamston Inn - Requesting a modification to their Special Land Use Permit to
add an owner occupied residence upstairs and to the rear of the Inn. They have
complied with all requests of the Planning Commission, who recommend approval.
Clerk Graham asked if they could get a one year extension if needed. Planning
Chair Martin indicated that they could. Clerk Graham moved and Treasurer
Nilsson supported to approve the site plan modification of the Williamston Inn,
1133 E. Grand River Rd. Motion approved unanimously. Clerk Graham moved and
Treasurer Nilsson supported modifying the Special Land Use Permit for 1133 E.
Grand River Rd to allow the construction of a second story addition to the
owners residence attached to the Williamston Inn based on criteria noted in
McKenna Associates notes and sections 27.02B and 27.03 of the Zoning Ordinance.
Motion approved unanimously.
ADVISORY COUNCIL - Rud Hoag
Recommendations for the Township Board:
1. Recommend the Board initiate sponsorship and co-hosting of a joint MTA
informational seminar with the three other Townships (Locke, Leroy and
Wheatfield) regarding becoming a Charter Township. The four supervisors would
initiate this meeting. Rex LaMore will contact Supervisor Obst with additional
information on this proposed meeting. No objections from board. Supervisor Obst
will follow up with Mr. LaMore.
2. Recommended that the Board draft a charge for the Advisory Council regarding
specific criteria for committee actions. The Council is seeking to improve
communications with the Board. The Council would like charges to be clearly
outlined from the Board in writing so that the committees know exactly what the
Board expects of them and what time line they are expected to follow.
3. Recommends that the Board hold informational meetings regarding possible 425
agreements between the Township and the City of Williamston to gather public
input. Supervisor Obst agreed that a Township meeting is a good idea to discuss
what a 425 is and how it would impact the Township. A joint meeting with the
City would have to wait until negotiations are further along with the City. The
Council will schedule this meeting for a Monday night, before October 28th if
possible.
4. Recommended that a Parks and Rec. committee be established as a committee on
its own and the Board establish the objectives and goals. Treasurer Nilsson
suggested some goals and objectives for a Township Parks and Rec. Committee:
   to oversee development of new Township park property on Grand River Road
   a. Immediate fund raising for grant match.
   b. Volunteer project approval and coordination.
   c. Be responsible for a maintenance schedule of any existing facilities.
Treasurer Nilsson moved and Trustee Zaban seconded to create a parks and rec.
committee with the committee’s chair to become a member of the Advisory
Council. Motion passed unanimously. There was general agreement to go in the
direction outlined by Treasurer Nilsson. Fred Foote to be appointed to the Park
and Rec. committee should he so desire.
5. Recommended that the Supervisor write the DNR and Ingham County Health
Department informing them that some of the residents are concerned of possible
lead contamination of the ground water at a Gun Club site in their
neighborhood. Supervisor Obst agreed to do this and he will also contact the
EPA.
6. Recommends the Township rent a portable toilet for the park. A sled hill is
being built and hiking trails are being used. Clerk Graham will handle
arranging this.
7. Recommends the park be secured by a gate. Also suggest some farm fence.
Trustee Wiegandt suggested that we were getting a little ahead because an
Ingham County Sheriff’s officer would have to be able to get back on the
property to make sure no one is there before they lock it up.
8. Recommends hours the same as the cemeteries be posted at the entrance. The
Council will look into posting the hours now. They will also check to see if a
public phone is required.
Township Park - Mr. Decker offered the services of the Kiwanis Club of 50
members to the Park Committee to see if they can be of help. They have much
experience in this area.
Contract for the soil going into the park to ensure that it is clean fill. The
agreement concerning who's bringing the dirt in and where it's from does not
clearly state that it is clean fill. Attorney Schultz (per Supervisor Obst)
recommends that a contract be set up that states it is clean fill and what
clean fill is. Was stated in a conversation with Treasurer Nilsson that it is
clean fill. The fill is coming from a construction site of a road project. Bull
dozing is also being done gratis. The Board agreed that they just need to
document where the fill came from. C & D Hughes will be contacted. Will follow
up with Building Inspector Aven.
Transportation Study Commissioned By The City. Will have Transportation
Committee Chair Jennings look at the City’s study and work in conjunction with
the Ingham County Road Commission as to its merits and demerits. The
Transportation and Communications Committee is charged to evaluate the City's
road study and report back at the next Township Board Meeting.
UNIFINISHED BUSINESS
Horizon Cablevision - Fox Sports has been added, but no letters were sent to
subscribers. Will start charging in January for this channel. Expressed to
Horizon that we are not happy with the information being given to the public.
The Township currently has a 15 year contract with Horizon.
UPDATES
900 Gulick Road - Jim Sikarskie inquired about the injunction filed to return
the land to its original state or submit a site plan and not to make
modifications. He has noticed that the mounds have been graded and
hydromulched. Supervisor Obst stated that the Township has filed a motion to
have the land returned to its original state. Mr. Foote’s attorney filed a
response claiming that the Township has been treating the Foote’s unfairly. The
Township Attorney is responding to their response. There is a Township stop
work order that is being ignored, but there is no order from the court yet.
Since Williamstown is a General Law Township it does not have any law
enforcement agencies of its own and therefore its only recourse for enforcing
its Ordinances is through the court system.
Meadowdale Drive Traffic Concerns. - Mitchell Road. Supervisor Obst received a
phone call relating concerns of families on Mitchell and Meadowdale about the
high speed limit on Mitchell Rd. No written correspondence has been received to
date.
City/Township Negotiations And The Beeman Road Proposed City By-Pass Route.
Supervisor Obst read a letter from Miss Virginie Codran, age 12, into the
record. The Board agreed to charge the Transportation Committee with looking at
the City’s study and in particular their finding that there would be 80 trucks
a day using a Beeman Road by-pass. A City worker has told a Township resident
that no trucks would be allowed on such a by-pass.
The residents on Beeman Road are all against such a by-pass going in. They do
not want to see any further increase in traffic on this road. The road is
heavily used by pedestrians, bicyclists and various sports teams of the schools
for running. The residents want to maintain the type of atmosphere and traffic
on the road that prompted them to buy their homes on this road to begin with.
They feel that a dramatic increase in traffic, especially truck traffic would
make this road no longer safe for pedestrians, children and cyclists.
The residents submitted a letter to the board stating that they are adamantly
opposed to any Township Roads being turned over to the City of Williamston as
part of any potential 425 agreement. The residents wish to be kept informed of
any developments in the negotiations with the City, especially as they apply to
Beeman Road. Supervisor Obst stated that the Township’s Master Plan states the
Township’s intent to maintain the rural atmosphere of the area.
Trustee Wiegandt stated that for safety reasons (specifically fire) we may need
another route over the river that is closer to town than Dietz or Zimmer,
though he is not convinced that Beeman is the appropriate location for such a
route. Treasurer Nilsson was concerned that the City appeared to only looked at
this one location for another bridge over the river. Clerk Graham is not in
favor of a crossing at this location citing the areas wet lands, cemetery, golf
course, etc. that would be involved. She does not want to see increased traffic
on Beeman or Rowley road there. She agrees there is a need for another bridge,
but not here. She is also not convinced of the City’s contention that the
Putnam Street bridge would have to be completely closed down to rebuild it. The
M-52 bridge was rebuilt by only closing one half of it at a time.
There cannot be a 425 agreement without a public hearing. Those in the 425 area
can put it on the ballot to overturn a 425 agreement. A 425 agreement of some
sort is one possible settlement of the sewer litigation with the City of
Williamston.
Trustee Zaban stated his concerns about what the City wants to do.
Realistically the City would probably win an annexation if the property owner
wanted it. Supervisor Obst stated that there are currently property owners who
are interested in going into the City because they want to develop with sewer.
That is how the Beeman Road issue is tied to the law suit. He also stated that
the Township is not going to sacrifice any residents to settle the sewer
lawsuit. Supervisor Obst stated that he hoped the Board has made it clear that
they have the same objectives as the residents present and that the Board will
contact them as soon as they have more information.
Submission Of Petition To Pave Barry From Loundsbury To Williamston Road - Ron
Decker. There were only two property owners along this stretch of road that are
not in favor of paving Barry Rd. 81% of the residents want the road to be
paved. Road is often washed out. Treasurer Nilsson talked to Bob D'Alcorn of
the Ingham County Road Commission on this subject. He agreed that it is less
expensive to maintain a paved road, but it takes a substantial amount of money
to pave the road initially. He will work on figuring out when the paving would
pay for itself vs. maintaining the dirt road. Drain has already been put in
down at Bentley Road. Will forward the request for paving to the Transportation
Committee.
Larkin Country Acres - proposal appears to violate the lot split ordinance.
Waiting to hear from their attorney. Trying to split into lots that don't have
access to public roads.
NEW BUSINESS
News Letter Deadlines - Chris Nilsson
Schedule in the packet on Newsletter dates. Oct. 19 by 5:00pm is deadline for
submitting articles. Need to have changes back by Noon on Friday, October 23rd
and will be to printers by Noon on Monday, October 26th.
Central Michigan Consulting Upgrades - The Board agreed to go with option A at
this time. Will investigate other upgrade options for the next meeting,
especially concerning the Secretary’s machine. The option agreed to will rewire
the Novell, DOS/Win 3.11 network for a cost of $562.73 plus wiring. The hard
drives in two of the computers will be upgraded at an approximate cost of
$200.00 each.
Zoning Issues - Houses in a subdivision facing a major public road must be
screened from the road 50 to 100 feet. This and the other updates of the Zoning
Ordinance proposed by the Planning Commission were approved by the Board.
Saddle Club - Use of the Township Hall by the Saddlemates 4-H club was approved
by the Board for all dates requested except December 6th and 20th. Any and all
regular hall rental requests will supersede 4-H usage.
NIESA Resolution - offer to lease existing fire hall for $1.00 per year for 5
years. Needs action on this by mid November. Equipment and funds of the
Williamston Fire Board would go directly to NIESA. Leroy Township will probably
lease their equipment on a yearly basis. The Fire Board owns the Williamston
equipment whereas the Township and City own the building. No action taken at
this time.
CONSENT AGENDA
Clerk Graham moved and Trustee Zaban supported to approve the Consent Agenda:
approving the minutes of the September 1, 1998 Regular Board Meeting;
acknowledging the Treasurer’s report of financial activities for September
1998; approving the Clerk’s list of accounts to be paid October 6, 1998, checks
# 9057-9129 for a total of $94,570.00; and accepting and placing on file the
following reports: Williamston Community Fire Board Minutes of September 10,
1998; NIESA Minutes of September 3, 1998; Building Department Activities
September 1998; Assessor’s Report and updates of September 30, 1998; and Board
of Appeals Minutes of August 27th, September 17 & 24, 1998.
Motion to adjourn by Trustee Zaban, supported by Clerk Graham.
Meeting Adjourned at 10:50 PM.
______________________________________      ___________________________________
Shirley Graham, Clerk               Susan Jennings, Recording Secretary
NOVEMBER 10, 1998
The regular meeting of the Williamstown Township Board of Trustees was called
to order at 7:40 PM by Supervisor Obst. Clerk Graham was asked to record who
was present and if there was a quorum present. Clerk Graham stated a quorum was
present and recorded the following: Supervisor Obst, Clerk Graham, Treasurer
Nilsson, Trustee Wiegandt, Trustee Zaban, Township Attorney Schultz, and
Building Inspector Aven.
The agenda was read over with the following addition: complaint against the
Assessor.
ATTORNEY’S REPORT – Stephen O. Schultz
900 Gulick Road - A hearing is set for Dec 10th at 3:00 PM to ask for a
preliminary injunction to prohibit the Footes from maintaining their property
in violation. If the injunction is granted the property owners would have to
return the property to as near its original state as possible. The Township has
received a discovery request of production of documents from the property
owner’s attorney. They are requesting 10 years worth of documents relating to
ponds and grading permits. Anything relevant or likely to lead to relevant
evidence is eligible to be requested for discovery. They have also requested
well and ground water studies. A Response is due in 28 days. A meeting is set
with the property owner’s attorney, Jeff Ray, for this Friday, November 13th.
An issue for the judge is whether or not she wants to order the property owner
to bulldoze the pond.
Noted Mr. Cox's opinion on the by pass route. Attorney Schultz stated that
Attorney Cox’s opinion regarding prohibiting truck traffic on any future
extension of Beeman Rd. is correct but it only extends for the length of any
resolution that restricts the use. It is not necessarily a permanent
restriction.
PLANNING COMMISSION - Mickey Martin
No action items.
Supervisor Obst stated his concern with the direction the Planning Commission
may be moving in to establish private roads (driveways for multiple
residences). He wants to be sure all objectives that are desired are met.
ADVISORY COUNCIL - Rud Hoag
Mr. Hoag stated that he was pleased with the turn out and response of people at
the 425 Agreement informational meeting.
Intergovernmental Committee - Recommended a meeting with the surrounding
Townships and the Michigan Township Association (MTA) regarding what is
required of charter townships vs. common law townships. Discussion followed on
the timing of such a meeting. It was decided that Supervisor Obst will contact
the Supervisors of Locke, Leroy and Wheatfield Townships to see if they are
interested in cosponsoring such a meeting with MTA.
Park Committee – The new Park Committee has held its first meeting. Minutes of
the meeting are attached.
Possible Lead Issue at the Gun Club - Received a response from DEQ indicating
that if there is ground water lead contamination at the site the Gun Club would
be legally liable to clean it up. Prior to that the club’s attorney wrote a
letter that gave the impression that the Township had a hidden agenda in
looking into this. Supervisor Obst wrote a letter back to the attorney of the
gun club who then responded that his originally letter was poorly constructed
and that he did not intend to imply any hidden agenda on the part of the
Township. Questions arose as to who is responsible for testing to determine
whether or not a groundwater lead contamination problem does exist. Supervisor
Obst is still waiting to hear back from the Ingham County Health Department
regarding this question. The DEQ does not have any mechanism to initiate
testing.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Central Michigan Consulting – Supervisor Obst ordered $64 worth of RAM for the
secretary’s and the Planning Assistant’s computers. Supervisor Obst would like
to wait and see what the requirements of the BS&A Tax and Assessment programs
for Windows are before upgrading the computers further.
NIESA – Treasurer Nilsson moved and Trustee Wiegandt supported to approve the
resolution to lease the Williamston Community Fire Hall at 627 E. Grand River
Ave. to NIESA for the amount of $1.00 per year for a period of five (5) years.
Supervisor Obst called for a roll call vote.
Ayes:   Treasurer Nilsson, Trustee Zaban, Trustee Wiegandt, Clerk Graham,
Supervisor Obst
Nays:   None.
NEW BUSINESS
Complaints
12 E Sherwood has been resolved.
Shoeman Road - Lockert property – construction material still on the property.
All autos now have current licenses.
Red Cedar Rec. - Charles Withey - Board President for Red Cedar Rec. The
Williamston City Council passed a resolution to look at the feasibility of a
regional recreation authority at their October meeting. Red Cedar Rec. desires
to be the lead in studying the feasibility of creating such an authority. Red
Cedar Recs. only asset is equipment. They currently have to use the city,
township, school facilities and properties. They would like a regional
recreation authority to actually own the property it uses. They would like to
form a committee consisting of Mr. Withey of Red Cedar Rec., Jeri Mifflin,
Director of Williamston Community Education, and representatives from the City
of Williamston and each of the Townships to investigate the feasibility,
benefits and financing of a regional recreation authority. Mr. Withey and Gerry
Mifflin will take on the brunt of the work of looking into this, including if
the passage of proposal C would make funds available for this type of
organization. They would like to hold their first meeting in December of 1998
and have the study completed by August of 1999. The Township Board turned the
issue over to the Advisory Council and Park Committee to come back with a
proposal for the board at their next meeting on December 1, 1998.
Complaint Against The Township Assessor. – Assessor Obst visited a house where
there was a sale and asked some questions to determine if the sale price was a
market value sale. He indicated that any improvements made by Dec 31 would have
to go on the 1999 tax roll. He stated that he has not completed the assessment
s for this yea, nor is he obligated to do so before December 31st. The home
owner answered the assessor’s initial questions and then called back later
stating that the sale price should not be any of his business. Assessor Obst
had initially asked if the sale was between related persons; and if it was
rented, if the rent was market value. A building permit has been pulled for the
garage. The assistant assessor will be going out before the end of the year to
check on the status of the new construction. Assessor has the board support
that he has not acted inappropriately, and that the questions asked are
necessary for him to do his job properly to determine a fair and accurate
assessment for the property. There is no obligation on the part of the home
owner to answer these questions if they do not wish to.
December 7 - 7:00 PM Meeting At Mcgoff Auditorium - A public meeting is jointly
scheduled with presentations from the City of Williamston and the Township of
Williamstown in order for each to present their vision for the future of the
area and obtain feedback and direction from the citizens of both the City and
the Township.
McKenna Associates will deliver a cost proposal for doing a presentation at the
meeting on what would be appropriate development in the Beeman Road extension,
and how it fits in with the Township’s master plan.
Have to be careful in any 425 agreement that a hodgepodge checkerboard affect
doesn't occur with one property being in the City, the next in the Township,
and the next in the City, etc. This is a potential problem with a 425 agreement
area where property is not transferred until it requests to be transferred.
Cable Commission - Yvonne Key has expressed an interest to join the commission.
The Township is waiting to hear if there are any openings. Appointments need to
be made in December 1998.
CONSENT AGENDA
Treasurer Nilsson moved and Trustee Zaban seconded to approve the Consent
Agenda: approving the minutes of the October 6, 1998 Regular Board Meeting;
approving the minutes of the September 1, 1998 closed session; acknowledging
the Treasurer’s report of financial activities for October 1998; approving the
Clerk’s list of accounts to be paid November 10, 1998, checks #9130—218 for a
total of $49,186.40; and accepting and placing on file the following reports:
Williamston Community Fire Board Minutes of October 8, 1998; NIESA Minutes of
October 1, 1998; Building Department Activities of October 1998; and Assessor’s
report / updates of October 29, 1998. Supervisor Obst called for a roll call
vote:
Ayes:   Trustee Wiegandt, Trustee Zaban, Treasurer Nilsson, Supervisor Obst and
Clerk Graham
Nays:   None.
Motion to adjourn by Treasurer Nilsson, supported by Trustee Zaban.
meeting adjourned at 9:34 PM.
_________________________________      ___________________________________
Shirley Graham, Clerk               Susan Jennings, Recording Secretary
DECEMBER 1, 1998
The regular meeting of the Township Board of Trustees was called to order at 7:
40 PM by Supervisor Obst. Clerk Graham was asked to record who was present and
if there was a quorum present. Clerk Graham stated a quorum was present and
recorded the following: Supervisor Obst, Clerk Graham, Treasurer Nilsson,
Trustee Wiegandt, Trustee Zaban, Township Attorney Schultz, and Building
Inspector Aven.
The agenda was read over with the following additions: Board of Review
appointment, proposed Zoning Ordinance changes, and Christmas bonuses for the
office staff.
ATTORNEY REPORT: Stephen O. Schultz
Getting ready for Dec. 7 joint town meeting with the City. On Friday,
Supervisor Obst, Attorney Schultz and the Township Planning Consultant, Chris
Doozen will review materials and put together remarks.
900 Gulick Rd. - Supervisor Obst and Attorney Schultz have met with Mr. Foote
and his attorney, Mr. Ray to try to reach an agreement before the scheduled
Dec. 10th hearing. The Township is looking for compliance with the Zoning
Ordinance. If compliance can not be agreed upon then the Township will keep the
Dec. 10th court date.
Researched The Following Issues:
·Liability of the Township if private drives that service more than one parcel
are allowed.
·The Edwards’ variance request to have two residences on one lot, which has
been addressed and was not granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
·The proposed agreement to dissolve the Fire Board and transfer its assets to
NIESA. An issue has come up regarding the Township’s liability after the Fire
Board is dissolved. Paragraph 4 of the resolution provides that while the
Authority is assuming certain liabilities of the Fire Board it is not assuming
civil liability for damage claims. Appears the D of O policy is a claims made
policy which could make the Township or City liable. The rest of the resolution
is fine. Attorney Schultz suggests approving the resolution contingent on
having sufficient coverage for liability. if claims made policies exist, then
the Authority will have to get tail policies to cover this situation.

Trustee Zaban moved and Trustee Wiegandt supported to approve the presented
resolution to dissolve the Williamston Community Fire Board and transfer the
fire equipment and other assets to the Northeast Ingham Emergency Service
Authority (NIESA) contingent on satisfactory resolution of the insurance
issues. Motion approved unanimously.
Zoning Ordinance Issues
Proposal for lot splits in Ag-Commercial Zone. Attorney Schultz believes the
Township may be getting ahead of itself by adopting an ordinance that requires
land be put into an open space or agricultural preservation trust before a
Development Rights Ordinance has been adopted. There is also an Ag space bill
in the state senate and a couple of other development rights bills in the
process at the state level. If they don't get voted on during this lame duck
session then they will have to start the bill process over again. Attorney
Schultz believes it would be in the best interest of the Township to wait a
month before voting on this particular change in the ordinance. Treasurer
Nilsson sought clarification of what land would be affected. Land division in
the Ag-Commercial district would allow for up to 4 lots of one to five acres
each with a shared driveway, or up to 4 lots of two to five acres each that
have public road access to be split from an original lot of at least 40 acres.
The remaining 20+ acres would be put into a trust.
Per Planning Coordinator Martin the only changes from the original proposals to
amend the Zoning Ordinance were for the kennels and the Ag-Commercial land
division. The outdoor event removed the minimum of 100 people requirement.
There have been no other changes since the September 22 correspondence.
Treasurer Nilsson moved and Trustee Wiegandt supported to approve the proposed
Zoning, Land Division and Subdivision Ordinances text revisions as recommended
by the Planning Commission, except for the parts dealing with the Ag-Commercial
Land Division. Motion passed unanimously.
PLANNING COMMISSION - Mickey Martin
Rezoning of the Schraft property from RR to Ag-C. Planning Commission has only
received comments in support of the change. Treasurer Nilsson moved and Clerk
Graham supported to approve the rezoning or 40 acres from RR to AG-C, as
applied for by George and Patricia Schraft. See Planning Commission minutes of
11/17/98. Motion passed unanimously.
Edwards proposed Zoning Ordinance changes. Mr. Edwards would like to see some
vehicle in the zoning ordinance that would allow two structures to be on a
single parcel for some time beyond the time of construction. Request was turned
over to the Planning Commission for review and consideration.
Attorney Schultz left at 8:20 PM.
ADVISORY COUNCIL - Rud Hoag
Introduction of Roger Pearce - the new Parks and Rec. Committee Chair.
Requests For Action - The Advisory Council will write up a proposal for what
the requests for action by the Township Board to the Advisory Council should
look like.
Park Hours - The Advisory Council would like the Park Committee to discuss
posting the hours on the Township Park. This item was put on the back burner
because of difficulty in enforcement at this time, but the Council thinks it
would still be a good idea to have the hours posted now.
Transportation Committee - Road Funding - Brian Jennings. Reviewed the
Transportation Committee's recommendations for road funding. The second
recommendation was for funding of subdivision roads. A sliding scale was
developed for percentage of Township funding when fixing subdivision roads.
Questions on the PASER Surface Rating - the Township normally improves roads
that are rated between a three and a four. The lower the number on the scale
the worse the condition of the road. The Township would pay 100% of the cost
when the road gets to level two or one. The residents of the subdivision can
petition to have their roads repaired at any time, but they would have to
contribute a percentage of the cost based on the condition of the road at the
time of the request. The better the condition, the higher the percentage the
residents have to pay directly and the lower the percentage that the Township
will contribute. Supervisor Obst suggested a public hearing be held to discuss
the policy proposal.
The first recommendation was for a sum of $100,000 be set aside for road
improvement each year, to be adjusted for inflation, with 25% set aside in an
escrow account for future major road projects. Recommendation to be considered
at the 1999/2000 budget meeting. Discussion followed.
Appointment of Richard Kill to the Transportation Committee. Trustee Zaban
moved and Trustee Wiegandt supported, to appoint Mr. Richard Kill to the
Transportation and Communications Committee. Motion approved unanimously.
Recommends that the Board allocate $500 for the Commercial Development
Committee to work with MSU students for further research.
Dwight Kampe proposed the students look at Grand River Rd. and take inventory
of what kind of developments currently exist. The students will also talk to
the property owners to see if they have any immediate plans for any kind of
development or improvements. They will also help to determine what kind of
development along Grand River the Township would be receptive to. Supervisor
Obst suggested that the Township should have a budget for how the $500 would be
spent. Mr. Kampe agreed that this would be an important part of the project for
the students to come up with such a budget. Supervisor Obst also stated that
one of the primary concerns of the city of Williamston is what is going to
happen along Grand River outside city limits. He recommended that the students
talk to City officials to get their opinions on development along the
Township’s stretch of Grand River Rd. There was general agreement by the
Township Board that this is a project they would like to do. Mr. Kampe is to
return to the Township Board with a proposed budget for approval in the amount
of $500.00.
Regional Parks and Recreation Authority - Feasibility Study
The Advisory Council recommended that the Board pass the resolution to work
with Red Cedar Rec. and representatives from area communities on a feasibility
study and that the Township also send Tom Trepke as their representative as
recommended by the Parks Committee. Trustee Zaban moved and Treasurer Nilsson
supported to adopt the resolution as presented to the Board at their November
meeting to work with Red Cedar Rec. on a feasibility study for developing a
regional Parks and Recreation Authority. Motion passed unanimously. Katherine
Lo raised a concern that the Township Park would not be funded and developed
properly if we waited for this regional authority to go through. Treasurer
Nilsson stated that the regional authority's plans would mirror the existing
plans of the participants - so park development would continue as scheduled.
The authority would be a separate entity similar to NIESA, the new emergency
services authority. Treasurer Nilsson moved and Trustee Zaban supported to
appoint Tom Trepke as the Township’s representative to the feasibility study
committee as recommended by the Parks Committee. Motion approved unanimously.
Park Committee Appointments
Recommend that John Slagh and Betty Challis be appointed to the Park Committee.
So moved by Treasurer Nilsson supported by Trustee Zaban. Motion approved
unanimously.
Advisory Council Calendar
The Council will not meet in December. The next scheduled meeting is set for
January 18, 1999.
Fate Letter
The speed limit on Mitchell Rd issue will again be turned over to the
Transportation Committee to see if the new construction at the schools changes
the situation enough in the eyes of MDOT and the Michigan State Police to get
the speed limit lowered from the current 45 MPH.
UNIFINISHED BUSINESS
Construction Appeals Board
Clerk Graham moved and Treasurer Nilsson supported to approve the creation of a
three to seven person Building Appeals Board and appointment of members per
application and as nominated by Supervisor Obst: Mr. Rick Williams, Mr. Aage C.
Jensen, Mr. Frans Wilbrink and Mr. Mark Stevens. Motion approved unanimously. 
Cable Commission Appointments - Chuck Wilson stated that no one is looking to
get off the board, and he is recommending the current members be re-appointed.
Due to an oversight the necessary appointments were not made in June of 1997
and June of 1998, but the Commissioners have continued to serve during this
time. There is a limit of five members on the Commission. Mrs. Ivonne Key asked
to be appointed to the Cable Commission. Mrs. Key will be notified that there
are not any openings at this time, but that she will be contacted when one
becomes available and is encouraged to attend and participate in the
Commission’s meetings. Moved by Trustee Zaban and supported by Clerk Graham to
update the appointments of Rick Williams and Charles Wilson, whose terms
expired in June of 1997, so that they now expire in June of 2000; to update and
re-appoint Donald Bouffard and Martin Wright whose terms expired in June of
1998, so that they now will expire in June of 2001; and that Jack Kzecki will
continue to serve his term which expires in June of 1999.
Board of Review Appointment - Mrs. Lois Kill notified the Township Board that
she would like to serve on the Board of Review. Supervisor Obst recommended
approval of her appointment. Moved by Treasurer Nilsson and supported by Clerk
Graham to appoint Mrs. Kill to the Board of Review to fill the unexpired
vacancy. Motion approved unanimously.
NEW BUSINESS
Complaints -
Junk Car Sites - Zimmer Rd & Barry Rd
House on Foster Road - Mr. David Bath has now moved to Petoskey. Verified that
there has been construction going on without a permit.
Granite Road in Pebble Brook - no violation found.
1514 Barry Rd - Junk Car and blight conditions. Ten day notice posted on the
car.
5990 Zimmer Road - junk car
4950 Meridian Road - No violation found there. Told complainant to take
pictures.
559 E Sherwood Rd - notice on car left there. blight ordinance in violation.
Humidifier Bid - Trustee Wiegandt moved and Treasurer Nilsson supported to
approve the purchase and installation of humidifiers onto both furnaces in the
Williamstown Township Hall for a total of $610.00. Motion approved unanimously.
Christmas Bonuses - same as last year - $75.00.
PUBLIC COMMENTS
Brian Jennings - 425 meeting, Monday the 7th. What is the format? Supervisor
Obst’s opinion is that there will be presentations by the City and Township,
followed by public comment. Katherine Lo asked who was going to present for the
township? This will be determined on Friday.
CONSENT AGENDA
Treasurer Nilsson moved and Trustee Wiegandt supported to approve the consent
agenda:
Approve the minutes of the November 10, 1998 Regular Board Meeting; Acknowledge
the Treasurer’s report of financial activities for November 1998; Approve the
Clerk’s list of accounts to be paid December 1, 1998 #9219-9262 for a total
of$22,441.96; and accept and place on file the following reports: Williamston
Community Fire Board Minutes of November 12, 1998, NIESA minutes of October 8,
1998 and November 5, 1998, Building Department activities for November 1998,
Assessor’s report / updates of November 18, 1998, and the Board of Appeals
minutes of November 12 and November 23, 1998. Supervisor Obst called for a roll
call vote:
Ayes:   Trustee Zaban, Treasurer Nilsson, Supervisor Obst, Clerk Graham and
Trustee Wiegandt
Nays:   None.
Treasurer Nilsson moved and Clerk Graham supported to adjourn the meeting.
Meeting adjourned at 9:55 PM.
__________________________________      ____________________________________
Shirley Graham - Clerk               Susan Jennings - Recording Secretary
1999 Meeting Minutes
JANUARY 5, 1999
The regular meeting of the Township Board of Trustees was called to order at 7:
35 PM by Supervisor Obst. Clerk Graham was asked to record who was present and
it there was a quorum present. Clerk Graham stated a quorum was present and
recorded the following: Supervisor Obst, Clerk Graham, Treasurer Nilsson,
Trustee Wiegandt, Trustee Zaban, Township Attorney Schultz and Building
Inspector Aven.
The agenda was read over with the following additions: Increasing the umbrella
on the liability insurance due to the sledding hill in the park being an
attractive nuisance; Williamston School District Summer tax collection
resolution.
ATTORNEY'S REPORT - Stephen O. Schultz
Insurance Policies Associated With The Former Fire Board - A letter was sent
indicating the need to get tail coverage. Concern is that there will be tail
coverage for about 22 months, but claims related to the old Fire Board could
still be filed after that time, though the likelihood is diminishing. All the
municipalities and NIESA have to be concerned about how long this coverage is
needed. Can renew it annually. If NIESA does not renew it then the
municipalities need to decide if they need the coverage. Clerk Graham stated
that NIESA is still in the process of obtaining bids for coverage.
Larkin Lot Split Request - Wrote an opinion letter in connection with the
Larkin lot split request. Proposed lot split does not comply with the Land
Division Act. It violated the letter and spirit of the Act. The property
owner’s proposal was a request to have it both ways. They wanted to ignore the
divisions for one statute of the Act and include them for others.
Public Hearing On December 7th With The City Of Williamston - There has been
some communication with the City subsequent to the public hearing related to
the next steps that need to be taken.
City Lawsuit - There is a March 22nd trial date set for our dispute with the
City of Williamston over sewer capacity.
Request For Annexation Of 1500 E. Grand River By The City - Attorney Schultz
reported on our attempt to work with the City of Williamston on the property at
1500 E. Grand River Rd.
900 Gulick Road - The request for preliminary injunction hearing is set for
January 29th at 2:30. Mr. Foote dropped off some drawings with an indication of
the landscaping, but not a landscape plan. There is no proposal to settle this
case for the Board’s consideration. As of now the hearing is on. Still missing
some things from the Board’s check list of items to be presented from the
Footes. Cannot approve a site plan without a landscape plan. Bob Hayes needs to
look at the letter from Ed Everett.
Increased Coverage For The Sledding Hill - Clerk Graham stated that the
Township currently carries one million dollars in liability coverage with an
additional two million dollar umbrella. To increase coverage to five million
dollars would cost an additional $400 per year.
PLANNING COMMISSION - Mickey Martin
Site Plan Approval For The Kelcris Corporation - Accessory building to be used
for storage. All conditions of the Planning Commission have been met. Building
permit has been paid for. all set to go. Clerk Graham moved and Trustee
Wiegandt supported to approve the Kelcris Corporation Site Plan as recommended
by the Planning Commission. Motion passed unanimously.
Joint Boundary Commission - Treasurer Nilsson had a question on the Planning
Commission minutes regarding the possible establishment of a joint boundary
commission with the Planning Commissions of the City of Williamston and
surrounding Townships. Planning Commission Chair Martin stated that the purpose
of such a commission would be to establish boundaries of growth, sewer, etc.
What we do affects them and what they do affects us. City passed a motion to
adopt the idea - resolution PC71998. Need to hear more about the specifics
before such a committee needs to be brought to this Board.
425 Agreement Discussion - Supervisor Obst thanked Kathryn Lo for her comments
at the Planning Commission meeting to prompt the Planning Commission to attend
the Board meetings. Mrs. Lo stated her concern that plans are made between the
Board and City between the meetings and nothing is made public about the
discussions. Supervisor Obst stated that the City and the Township attempted to
make their views known at the December 7th joint meeting. Mrs. Lo stated that
she believes they are trying to quietly negotiate this thing behind the scenes
and people are not informed about it. The March News Letter of 1998 indicated
that we are going to make a proposal to the City and nothing has been discussed
since then. Plan was a win-win situation that no one could turn down but
specifics were not given as to what the plan is. Trustee Wiegandt stated he
believed Mrs. Lo was asking why are we even looking at a 425. For more than 15
years the City has been eating away at Township property by annexing. A 425
Agreement could keep this from continuing. A 425 agreement could keep the taxes
of the property in the Township for 50 years. Supervisor Obst stated the
Board’s intent to keep the public fully informed.
ADVISORY COUNCIL - no meeting.
Park & Rec. Committee Meeting - Chris Nilsson
Agreed to put up a sign that said hours are dawn to dusk. Sign on the sledding
hill that says the Hill is not ready for sledding this year. Not seeded yet,
will have erosion until it is. No off road vehicles is also on the sign at the
front. Jeri Mifflin will speak to the committee about fund raising. Gerry Lou
Imhoff suggested that a simple snow fence does wonders to keep people off of a
dangerous hill. Supervisor Obst suggested that we check if posting a sign or
putting up a fence would reduce liability.
MSU Students Doing Study On Grand River Corridor - Dwight Kampe
Will meet with MSU on January 14th to see if and who is interested in doing
this project.
UNIFINISHED BUSINESS
Building Appeals Board Appointment - Received a letter of interest from Jeff
Bartrem. The Board currently has four members. Building Inspector Aven thought
that Mr. Bartrem’s appointment could be seen as a conflict because Mr. Bartrem
is a building inspector. Supervisor Obst thinks we ought to wait on this and
talk to attorney Schultz about it. Treasurer Nilsson suggested since we do not
now need another member on this Board, to thank him for his interest and
decline his appointment at this time. The Board will retain his letter in the
file.
NEW BUSINESS
Summer Tax Requests From Williamston School District And Ingham Intermediate.
Ingham wants to collect 100% in the summer if there is a summer collection.
Treasurer Nilsson still needs to talk to Williamston Schools.
Board Of Review Appointments - Need to be renewed for 1999/2000. Three member
Board of Review. Three existing members willing to serve again. Clerk Graham
moved and Trustee Wiegandt supported to approve the Board of Review
appointments of Harold C. Powell, Gerald A. Eidt and Lois L. Kill for the two
year terms, starting January 1, 1999. Motion approved unanimously.
Horizon Cablevision - Sale of Assets and complaint. Both issues will be turned
over to the Cable Commission. Senior rate is not available in the Williamston
area. Clerk Graham believes Horizon has opened themselves up to a class action
law suit by advertising the rate and then declining to offer it. It is in the
current contract that if and when they sell the contract will need to be re-
negotiated. There is a meeting set up the 21st with the Cable Commission and
representatives from Horizon.
Budget Review - Shirley Graham
Insurance is over budget in one account and nothing is posted in another -
indicates a posting error. The auditor's corrections for the end of the year
are on the way. Treasurer Nilsson stated that the trailer taxes are now
current.
Insurance Coverage - Trustee Wiegandt suggested taking out the extended
coverage and review it in the future to determine if we have enough as the park
begins to build. Clerk Graham moved to increase the umbrella coverage up to
five million for a total coverage of six million dollars. Supported by Trustee
Wiegandt. Motion passed unanimously.
Pine Ridge Farm Letter - Treasurer Nilsson believes the letter requires a
response. Very thought provoking.
Tri County Regional Planning Commission - requests an appointee to a committee
that will be studying growth. The Board is looking for a volunteer to serve on
this committee. Will also check with the Planning Commission to see if anyone
from there is interested.
CONSENT AGENDA
Treasurer Nilsson moved and Clerk Graham supported to approve the Consent
Agenda as follows: Approve the minutes of the December 1, 1998 Regular Board
Meeting with one addition to page 2, paragraph 7 - “Mr. Kampe is to return to
the Township Board with a proposed budget for approval in the amount of
$500.00.”; Acknowledge the Treasurer’s Report of Financial Activities for
December 1998; Approve the Clerk’s List of Accounts to be paid January 5, 1999
- Check #s 9263-9332 for a total of $41,124.21; Accept and place on file the
following reports - Williamston Community Fire Board Minutes of November 12,
1998, NIESA Minutes of November 5, 1998, Building Department Activities of
December 1998, Assessor’s Report/Updates of December 21, 1998, and the Board of
Appeals Minutes of November 23, 1998. Supervisor Obst called for a roll call
vote:
   Ayes:   Treasurer Nilsson, Trustee Zaban, Trustee Wiegandt, Clerk Graham,
Supervisor Obst
   Nays:   None.
ADJOURNMENT
Clerk Graham moved to adjourn, supported by Treasurer Nilsson.
Meeting adjourned at 9:04 PM.
_________________________________         ____________________________________
Shirley Graham, Clerk               Susan Jennings, Recording Secretary
FEBRUARY 2, 1999
The regular meeting of the Township Board of Trustees was called to order at 7:
35 PM by Supervisor Obst. Clerk Graham was asked to record who was present and
recorded the following: Supervisor Obst, Clerk Graham, Treasurer Nilsson,
Trustee Wiegandt, Trustee Zaban, and Building Inspector Aven. Township Attorney
Schultz had a scheduling conflict and was unable to attend.
The agenda was read over with no additions.
PLANNING COMMISSION - Mickey Martin
No action items.
Proposed Tree Ordinance - met in subcommittee with the resident who recommended
the ordinance. The Planning Commission was undecided as to what kind of tree
ordinance was best for the Township. A survey was devised to determine the
scope and desire for a tree ordinance. The Planning Commission took the survey
and answered negatively for implementing an ordinance. The only possible need
they saw for a tree ordinance might be in the public right of ways. Even here
the Township would need to work with the Ingham County Road Commission (ICRC)
and the Township could be held liable if someone runs into a tree that the ICRC
had determined should be removed, but the tree ordinance prevented the removal.
The Planning Commission concluded that it saw no reason to enact a tree
ordinance at this time and a problem that such an ordinance would address had
not been identified. Recommendation is to not proceed at this time. Supervisor
Obst suggested that the Township should go back to the individual who
recommended the ordinance and allow him to address the Board on it. Treasurer
Nilsson suggested accepting the report and passing it along to anybody who
wants it, and they can then comment. Trustee Wiegandt stated that when the
Township looked at this almost a year ago we were in the process of developing
plans for the park. He questioned if we need something to set a precedence for
conservation. He had no concern other than what should be used as guidelines.
ADVISORY COUNCIL - Rud Hoag
Charge Form - The Board had asked the Advisory Council to write up a form
indicating how things should be accomplished by any particular committee.
Treasurer Nilsson moved to approve the following Charge Form, as submitted by
the Advisory Council, to be used for official communication from the Township
Board to the Advisory Council on issues to be addressed. Supported by Trustee
Zaban. Motion approved unanimously.
Township Board Directives for Advisory Council
State the request -                               
1.   What committee -                   
2.   Options
a. Ordinance revision
Indicate which Ordinance         
To what section         
b.   Information only         
c.   Policy change         
d.   Response to a complaint or concern from a resident         
e.   Master Plan revision         
3.   Goals
a.   Actual facts you want committee to retrieve
                                         
                                         
b.   Areas of particular interest or concern to the Board
                                         
                                         
c.   Possible options the Board wants explored
                                         
                                         
d.   Deadline date Board would like report submitted
                             
Cost
1.   Boards projection of cost if any
                       
2.   Cost feedback from committee
                       
Direction
1.   Where is the information to be directed for use (circle all applicable)
a.   Planning Commission
b.   Township Board
c.   Other
Road Funding Policy - Treasurer Nilsson moved and Clerk Graham supported to
adopt the following Road Funding Policy:
The Williamstown Township Board will maintain its current and future road
system if it allocates $77,000 per year, subject to inflation, to be used in
conjunction with the Ingham County Road Commission’s matching funds. The roads
scheduled for maintenance will be selected through a PASER Surface Rating
system previously adopted and with input from the Ingham County Road
Commission. If at any time property owners within the Township wish to have
their roads improved prior to being selected, they may petition the Township
for the improvements and share the cost through a special assessment. The
percent of the project that the Township will pay for will depend on the
condition of the roads to be improved. The Township Board will use the
following cost sharing guidelines:
   PASER Surface Rating         Percent of Improvements Paid by the Township
      10                      0%
       9                      0%
       8                      0%
       7                      25%
       6                      25%
       5                      50%
       4                      75%
       3                      75%
       2                     100%
       1                     100%
A majority of the resident property owners, along the road to be improved,
would be required to sign a petition requesting the improvements be made. The
petition must state the estimated total cost of the improvements, how the cost
will be divided among the property owners, the number of years the special
assessment will be spread, and the percent of cost sharing with the Township.
This policy will apply to all Township Roads equally, subdivision and non-
subdivision, but not County Primaries.
Motion passed unanimously.
Zimmer and Grand River - MDOT has denied a light at the intersection based on
their surveys and criteria. Corner met only 2 of the 7 criteria. Still trying
to find out what is going to happen at the corner and what options are
available. [Information obtained after the meeting: Brian Jennings,
Transportation and Communications Committee Chair, received a letter Feb. 3rd
from the Michigan Department of Transportation that stated in part “...I do not
recommend the installation of a traffic signal at this time. However, MDOT
staff at the Lansing Transportation Service Center are willing to work with the
Township to make any necessary improvements to this intersection. A project to
resurface M-43 in this area will be designed during the near future. Mr. Terry
Anderson, manager of the TSC, will be the main contact for the Township during
development of these plans.” The letter was signed by Jeffrey A. Reid, Region
Traffic and Safety Engineer.]
Mitchell Road - Looked into obtaining bids to install a sidewalk on Mitchell
Road. Waiting to find out where a potential 425 agreement may put the road.
Richard Kill is working on getting the speed limit on Mitchell Road lowered.
Post Office Traffic - Supervisor Obst stated that lacking a traffic light at
Grand River and Zimmer, the turn onto Grand River to go into the Post Office is
unsafe. Received general agreement on this issue. Discussion followed as to who
is responsible for determining the traffic pattern at the Post Office and who
has the authority to change it. Traffic pattern was set by the Post Office
Planner out of Chicago. They are the people that have the authority to address
the situation. Suggested that letters regarding these concerns be addressed to
the Township Board, who will then forward them to the proper people at the
Postal Service and the Ingham County Road Commission. It was also suggested
that the Township Board write a letter to both the Postal Service and ICRC with
its concerns.
Commercial Residential Committee - Study On Grand River Corridor - Dwight Kampe
The MSU students are going ahead with the project. They propose to photograph
all properties along the corridor and they will mail a survey to all property
owners along the corridor to see what their plans are for future development.
They have internal funds from their department to fund their day to day
expenses and will submit a unified total expense from the department, not to
exceed the $500.00 maximum set by the Board.
Parks and Recreation - Chris Nilsson
Planning an open house at the park to coincide with Jubilee in June. Proposal
made from one of the members who researched a prairie for possible back 40
acres of fields. Easy to maintain, attracts butterflies, can probably get
grants to establish it. Soccer people interested in developing soccer fields at
the site. Identifying sources of funding. Applying for same grant that was used
to purchase the property for a first phase of development which would include
an entrance treatment with 40 parking spaces, hiking trails, etc. The committee
has only been organized for three months and they have not focused on fund
raising yet. Township general fund money is needed for maintenance at the
Township Hall site and the park. Would like to find alternate methods for
funding park development. Gerry Lou Imhoff had a suggestion for a door to door
campaign that worked well with the Lake Lansing Road Park. The committee will
follow up on this idea.
Open Land Survey Results - Nancy Fink
Report accepted and placed on file. Some of the results included 95% of
respondents agreeing that the overall quality of life in the Township is good.
77% believe it is becoming less tranquil. 83% participate in outdoor recreation
in the Township. 27% thought the Township should develop more outdoor
recreation areas outside of the park. Some of the conclusions reached as a
result of the survey were that housing development in agricultural areas is
undesirable. The Township should develop growth boundaries, buffer zones to the
agricultural areas. Need to update maps in Master Plan. Talked about bike
trails being in the Master Plan. Suggested developing a bike trail along Grand
River Rd from the City limits of Williamston out to the Township Park. This
idea was met with enthusiastic support from those present.
UNIFINISHED BUSINESS
Horizon Cable Commission - Commission Vacancy. Ivonne Key has asked to be
appointed. Jack Kzeski is retiring. Trustee Zaban moved and Treasurer Nilsson
supported to appoint Ivonne Key to the Cable Commission, effective immediately
to fill the vacancy left by Mr. Kzeski’s retirement for the remainder of his
term ending June 6, 1999 and for a subsequent three year term beginning June
6th. Motion passed unanimously.
Discussion of the sale of Horizon followed. Planning Coordinator Martin stated
that she has received calls from residents and developers complaining of the
difficulty and cost for new subdivisions and developments to obtain service.
Residents have complained about their inability to reach a person at Horizon
when they have a complaint, which is in violation of the franchise agreement.
Suggested that the Township not agree to a new contract until these issues are
resolved. Trustee Zaban raised the issue of the Senior discount being
published, but not honored in this area. This is a case of false advertising.
The Township needs to object to the sale by early March. The Cable Commission
will attempt to meet with the new owners again February 10th.
Trustee Zaban moved that he would like the Board to write a letter to the
Horizon Cablevision Company supporting the numerous complaints that have not
been addressed over the years, including not honoring the senior discount that
they published, no plans to expand services in the new subdivisions and/or
charging exorbitant prices to lay cable in the new developments. The letter is
required prior to the February 10th meeting. Clerk Graham supported the motion
and stated the need to stress having pre construction meetings with all
utilities when a new development is being proposed. Motion approved
unanimously.
Revised Fire Hall Lease Resolution
Clerk Graham moved and Trustee Wiegandt supported to adopt the following
resolution regarding the lease of the Fire Hall:
Resolution Approving Lease of the Township Property Located at 627 East Grand
River, Commonly Known as the Fire Hall, to the Northeast Ingham Emergency
Service Authority
   WHEREAS, the Northeast Ingham Emergency Service Authority, ‘NIESA’, was
established to provide emergency services including fire suppression and
ambulance services within the Township and adjacent areas; and
   WHEREAS, the Township Board previously agreed to lease the fire hall to
NIESA upon terms acceptable to the Township; and
   WHEREAS, the Township is the owner as a tenant in common of an undivided
one-half interest in the real estate.
   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED AS FOLLOWS:
1.   The Township Board consents to the lease of the property located at 627 E.
Grand River, the “Fire Hall” to the Northeast Ingham Emergency Service
Authority, on terms contained in the attached Lease, with the following
modifications all approved as to form by the Township Attorney:
1.1   Modification of paragraph 14 to read as follows:
   Destruction of the premises. If the premises are damaged or destroyed by
fire or other cause, the buildings shall be repaired or rebuilt and the
proceeds of insurance upon the premises shall be applied to cover the cost. If
the available insurance proceeds are insufficient to cover the cost of repair
or rebuilding and lessee chooses not to supplement the insurance proceeds with
its own funds, the lease shall terminate automatically as of the date of
destruction and the insurance proceeds shall be distributed as the parties
shall agree. Under no circumstances shall lessors be obliged to spend their
funds to repair or rebuild the premises under this paragraph.
2.   The Township Supervisor and Clerk are authorized to execute the agreement
on behalf of the Township upon approval as to form by the Township Attorney.
Roll Call Vote
   Ayes:   Supervisor Obst, Clerk Graham, Treasurer Nilsson, Trustee Zaban,
Trustee Wiegandt
   Nays:   None.
Resolution adopted.
NEW BUSINESS
Application for Building Appeals Board - Supervisor Obst nominated Stephen
Patoprsty to be appointed to the Building Appeals Board. Supported by Trustee
Wiegandt. Appointment passed unanimously.
United Services - Roofing Bid - Shirley Graham
When United Services repaired some storm damage per the Township’s Insurance
Company, they noticed the flat roof area was holding water and not in very good
shape. They placed an unsolicited bid to fix the situation. Clerk Graham would
like to get more bids if the Board desires that to be done or if someone else
wants to climb up there and determine the condition of the roof. Determined
that the Board will table the issue for a month or so until weather conditions
are more favorable. At that time Building Inspector Aven has agreed to inspect
the roof and report on whether or not repairs need to be made. Further bids
will be sought at that time if warranted.
MSU Intern
Mickey Martin Introduced Kristin from MSU who will be covering the meetings for
her class hoping to have her articles published in the Enterprise. She is
interested in doing a story on the road funding issue. She will have questions
for after the meeting. She will be here until the end of the semester in May.
MSU Traffic Safety Issue
Clerk Graham moved and Trustee Wiegandt supported to approve the closing of
Hart Road on March 31, 1999 from 6:00 PM to Midnight as applied for. Motion
passed unanimously.
ICRC Williamston Road Enhancement
Trustee Zaban moved and Trustee Wiegandt supported to approve the resolution of
support of the Board of the Ingham County Road Commissioners’ effort in
actively seeking Federal participation in the construction of four foot wide
paved shoulders along both sides of Williamston Road from the north city limit
of the City of Williamston to Haslett Road. Supervisor Obst called for a roll
call vote.
   Ayes:   Supervisor Obst, Clerk Graham, Treasurer Nilsson, Trustee Wiegandt,
Trustee Zaban
   Nays:   None.
Resolution adopted unanimously.
Appeal Of FOI Denial From Joe Cox
Attorney William F. Young stated that he had filed a similar FOI request with
the City of Williamston, where Mr. Joe Cox is the attorney, and was denied on
the grounds of attorney, client privileges. Township Attorney Schultz advised
Supervisor Obst that the appeal has no merit. Supervisor Obst moved and Clerk
Graham supported the Board issuing a written notice upholding the denial per
the Township Attorney’s recommendation. Motion passed unanimously.
Great Lakes Trucking
Agricultural Lime spill. Unpaid bill for Hazmat response. Clerk Graham
recommends forwarding to Foster, Swift for their follow through on collections.
Agreed to by the Board
Meeting of Ingham County Equalization for Board of Review members announced.
900 Gulick Road
Adjourned the preliminary injunction hearing before the judge. The Footes have
signed an agreement which encompasses having a site plan, landscape plan, 100
cubic feet of top soil for immediate neighbor, and a possible hydrological
study, if needed. Will have the Planning Commission determine if the plans meet
the requirements of the Township.
Possible 425 Agreement
The City of Williamston has returned a proposal that is disappointing. Hope to
set up a meeting. The City and Township Attorneys have set up a meeting with
each other.
Budget Meeting February 27th 9:00 A.M.
Annual Meeting March 27th 9:00 A. M.
The annual meeting will only be held if citizens convey their interest in
attending prior to the meeting. At this time, there has been no interest
expressed.
Consent Agenda
Clerk Graham moved and Trustee Wiegandt supported to approve the consent
agenda, accepting the minutes of the January 5, 1999 Regular Board Meeting;
acknowledging the Treasurer’s report of financial activities for January 1999;
approving the Clerk’s list of accounts to be paid February 2, 1999, checks #
9333-9394 for a total of $36,325.89; and accepting and placing on file the
following reports - NIESA minutes of December 3, 1998, Building Department
Activities for January 1999, Assessor’s Report/Updates of January 14, 1999,
Fire Board minutes of December 10, 1998 (Final Meeting), and the NIESA minutes
of January 7, 1999. Supervisor Obst called for a roll call vote.
   Ayes:   Trustee Wiegandt, Trustee Zaban, Treasurer Nilsson, Clerk Graham,
Supervisor Obst
   Nays:   None.
Motion approved unanimously.
Williamston Schools Summer Tax Collection - Chris Nilsson
Per Tom Tebeau of the Williamston School District, the Township will not be
collecting a summer tax for the school district in 1999.
Adjournment
Treasurer Nilsson moved to adjourn, supported by Trustee Wiegandt. Motion
passed unanimously.
Meeting adjourned at 9:45 PM.
__________________________________      ____________________________________
Shirley Graham, Township Clerk            Susan Jennings, Board Recording
Secretary
MARCH 2, 1999
The regular meeting of the Township Board of Trustees was called to order at 7:
40 PM by Supervisor Obst. Clerk Graham was asked to record who was present and
recorded the following: Supervisor Obst, Clerk Graham, Treasurer Nilsson,
Trustee Wiegandt, Trustee Zaban, Township Attorney Schultz, and Building
Inspector Aven.
The agenda was read over with the following additions: USA Plastics Building -
issue of occupancy; Township Office Personnel Policy; and Budget Amendments.
ATTORNEY REPORT - Stephen O. Schultz
No action required.
900 Gulick Road - Involved in attempting to resolve the Foote Pond matter.
Reviewed planning commission minutes and offered comments to Planning
Coordinator Martin, Clerk Graham and Treasurer Nilsson.
City Litigation - Pretrial is set for Monday March 8th. The trial date is March
22nd. If cannot settle before then we will be going to trial on that date. Met
to exchange ideas on a possible settlement of the sewer issue only. Believe
there is some possibility here that will not involve any property transfers,
only sewer issues.
Larkin Country Acres Lot Split Request - Looking at the request. Nothing more
until Board of Appeals.
Noted two issues from last meeting’s minutes
Advisory Council Charge Form - the charge form from the Board to the Advisory
Council has to follow the open meetings act.
Horizon Cable Vision - Has some suggestions that he can offer the Cable
Commission in addressing the complaints in view of the transfer. Shortcomings
in performance will be in the record when their franchise comes up for renewal.
By the time their renewal comes around there will be alternatives. It is not an
empty threat to say that we treat these things seriously and will make them a
matter of record. The new company will inherit the franchise and all the
obligations that go with it. This is the time to put the new provider on notice
and get their attention. Also may want to consider comparing notes with other
communities using Horizon. A joint letter may be even more persuasive.
Phone Michigan Franchise Request - Looking at the franchise request for several
other Townships that the law firm represents. Will do one review for all four
townships and will split the cost between the townships. This is the first of
several requests that we will probably see now that the local telephone company
has been opened up for competition. There is currently tension between two
aspects of the state’s statutes - the Townships rights to set up a franchise
and the ordinance saying there will only be a permit fee to use the right of
ways. Two conflicting requirements.
Development Rights Ordinance - need to get an opinion to the Planning
commission on this.
Occupancy of 1500 Grand River Road - does not appear that it is at a stage
where legal action is warranted yet. Building Inspector Aven sent a letter to
Williamston City Manager, Dale Soumis on Feb. 5th, reminding him that the City
needs an occupancy permit and cannot use the building until they got one. Mr.
Aven has written another letter restating the Feb. 5th letter and that a permit
has not been issued. He will issue a temporary permit for the office on the
condition that all vehicles and fuel be removed from the garage portion until
that portion of the building is in compliance and a final certificate of
occupancy is issued. The Building Inspector will hand deliver this letter.
Attorney Schultz stated the reason he doesn't want to authorize any action
tonight is because there isn't an imminent threat to health, safety and welfare
in the office part of the building. If the City doesn't agree to bring the
garage up to code before using it then that is another issue because they would
be flaunting the codes. At that time the attorney would recommend pad locking
the building. Inspector Aven stated that the building is in better shape than
it was when USA Plastics occupied it. He assumes the City will have the
vehicles out by tomorrow night.
PLANNING COMMISSION - Mickey Martin
900 Gulick Road - The Planning Commission was presented with a new site plan
and landscaping plan for the pond. The Commission rejected the plan that was
submitted due to inadequate information available on the plan for slope,
drainage and run off. The Commission has proposed a motion that any future site
plans must meet the 10 conditions proposed by the Planning Commission. If Mr.
Foote ever decided to fill the pond with pumped water he would have to go
through the strata testing that was specified last Spring.
Jim Sikarskie stated that if the ten points are followed it will be a major
step forward. He said that they had a ten point document before submitting the
last site plan that they didn't follow. Is there a date by which these
guidelines must be met by? Concerned it is just another delay tactic. This has
been going on for close to 2 years. He realizes they are legally acceptable
delay tactics, but when will it stop. Attorney Schultz stated that in his
discussions with Foote's attorney they went through the ten points that were
established at the May meeting to say this is where the Township is at. Got the
response that the indemnification is unnecessary if they don't draw the well.
Will no longer fill it with a well, so those requirements are now moot. With
respect to the 8 foot berm, that was never agreed to by Jeff Foote in May of
1998 or at any time since. Only standards we have to work with are 1 on 3 slope
and harmonious. cannot necessarily dictate 8 foot berms. Mr. Foote was prepared
to meet the other requirements laid out by the Board. Mr. Sikarskie was under
the impression that the community would have the ability to present their view
on what is harmonious. The berm facing the road has not changed. It is still 10
to 11 feet high. He has not reduced it where the public views it, only behind
the barn where he views it. Supervisor Obst had asked Chris Doozen, the
Township’s Planning Consultant, about the harmonious issue. Part of it does
relate to height. Height of berm does affect run off. Shorter berms do not have
as much of an erosion problem. The Township may be left open to a charge that
an 8 foot limit is arbitrary and capricious. The Ordinance requires under
landscaping that the grass planted be maintained and not allowed to die. If it
does die it must be replaced immediately or at the beginning of the next
planting season. A violation here would be handled the same as any other zoning
violation. Mr. Sikarskie recommends that looking at adjoining properties would
be the most important requirement for harmonious. Contours that are there need
to be used for comparison for harmonious. Wanted to express appreciation to the
Planning Commission for the product they ended up with and the ability to voice
his concerns and opinions. Incorporate Section 5.04, sub-section C.9 of the
Zoning Ordinance into any approval of the site plan. That would pick up all of
Mr. Doozen’s comments that no undesirable trees are used and can verify that
the proper number of trees have been planted. Would put it right in the motion
for site plan approval. Attorney Schultz doesn't think it will be an issue, but
it is a prudent thing to put in the motion.
Supervisor Obst moved and Clerk Graham seconded that the site plan for a pond
at 900 Gulick Road be approved subject to the applicant meeting the article 5
requirements of the Zoning Ordinance, and the following conditions:
1.   If the pond is intended to be filled with well water, then prior testing
shall be completed in accordance with the Strata Environmental Services
outline. The Township will be fully notified in advance of the exact times and
dates when the testing will be conducted so if the Township wishes it may have
a Township Engineer and/or representative present.
2.   The plans are to be reviewed and approved by the Township Building
Official with respect to the Uniform Building Code Requirements.
3.   A comprehensive storm drainage plan must be presented, illustrating storm
water drainage along the entire east and west property lines. This plan shall
be designed by a registered professional civil engineer. The toe of the slope
on the west side shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from the property line
with a one on three slope. A new site plan is required to indicate the above
stipulations.
4.   Berms on the property are to be reshaped in accordance with item 3, above,
so they are no steeper than a slope of one foot vertical to three feet
horizontal. The plan must also be modified to illustrate the berms on the east
side.
5.   A performance guarantee must be submitted to cover all indicated
improvements including assuring proper operation of the storm drainage system
as well as landscaping and maintenance requirements in the Zoning Ordinance.
6.   If the pond is intended to be filled with well water, then a monitoring
well must be left installed. During future drought conditions a report from the
monitoring well must be provided to the Township at its request. A low water
level must be established at the time the hydrogeological study is submitted so
that the Township knows what to look for in the future when they ask for
monitoring well data.
7.   The applicant agrees to refrain from using well water to fill or maintain
the pond level. If in the future the applicant chooses to fill the pond with
well water, prior approval from the Township shall be required. If the
applicant violates this agreement, resulting in a deleterious impact on nearby
properties, wells, or groundwater supply or quality, the applicant agrees to
indemnify nearby affected property owners for costs to repair or rectify such
impacts, including legal, engineering and consultant costs.
8.   The applicant understands that should the above testing indicate changes
are needed, then it is possible the plan may need further modifications to all
aspects including, possibly, the size of the pond.
9.   Elevations shall be referenced to a U.S.G.S. benchmark.
10.   Berm height shall not exceed that indicated on the topographic map
received by the Township on January 4th 1999.
Discussion of the motion followed, including questions on the amount of
performance guarantee required - to be determined based on the project; per
item 3, a new site plan is required; and concerns raised about the berm facing
the road not undulating and being higher than eight feet. If trees won't grow
there, then he would be in violation and would have to reshape the berms at
that time.
Per Attorney Schultz, acceptance of this motion on the part of the applicant
would settle the law suit. Motion approved unanimously.
Township Attorney Schultz left the meeting at 9:15 P. M..
Final Action for Spag's Bar and Grill - No one spoke against the Special Land
Use Permit at the Planning Commission meeting. The Township has not received
any complaints regarding the hours of operation. The Planning Commission
recommends giving the final approval for the Special Land Use Permit. Clerk
Graham moved and Trustee Zaban supported to approve the Planning Commission’s
recommendation for a Special Land Use Permit as long as the property use stays
the same. Motion approved unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENTS AND QUESTIONS
Mr. Carl MacIntosh had four items he wished to bring to the Board’s attention:
Sewer issue - do not delay. For Hideaway Woods the City has claimed they have
capacity in the line if they choose to handle their own sewage. If the property
is in the Township they will say they don't have capacity because they want the
lines fixed. This issue won't get resolved unless the sewer issue is separated
from the whole annexation issue. Per Supervisor Obst, as of a week and a half
ago, sewer issue was separated from the 425 Agreement issue.
Occupancy of 1500 Grand River Road - Mr. MacIntosh stated that he is assigned
to a work session at the new city facility at 1500 Grand River. He does not
believe that parking is adequate at the site and that it does not meet the
Township’s Zoning Ordinance. When he asked for a copy of the site plan at the
Township Office, two members of the Board didn't know there was a site plan.
One was faxed to him later this afternoon. He is wondering if they are getting
the same scrutiny as the rest of the world.
Vanneter and Mitchell Roads - In absence of any 425 agreement it is time the
Township spends a little of its money to start investigating the problems and
needs of Vanneter and Mitchell Roads. If these roads should become involved in
a future 425 agreement, then as part of the agreement it can be stipulated that
the Township and or County be reimbursed for those funds. Clerk Graham stated
that she agrees with him 100% that it is time to do something with those two
roads.
Aerial Pollution (Utility Lines) - Wires are going every which way, crossing
the roads, etc. Cable going down Zimmer Road went in front of trees and behind
trees. Supervisor Obst stated that the easement already exists, so they can
hang the lines wherever they want in their easements. He also stated that the
Township has contact with Detroit Edison who notifies us of major changes, but
it is the little changes that are eating us up. Mr. MacIntosh stated that it is
time for an ordinance that regulates this. He knows that buried lines are
costly and wondered at what point is a public utility a developer (developer's
are required to bury the lines in subdivisions). If the Township required that
any new construction of any new house have the utilities run underground, then
that would help the problem. Currently it is only required of platted sub
divisions. Dwight Kampe stated that he was approached by Detroit Edison to run
a line across his field. He doesn't want the lines outside of the easement even
if they bury it. Treasurer Nilsson agreed that we should add to the ordinance
that any new building should require buried lines. Supervisor Obst suggested
another possibility would be to require burying cables when a property is sold.
UNIFINISHED BUSINESS
Budget Hearing - Clerk Graham moved and Treasurer Nilsson supported holding a
Budget Hearing for the fiscal year 1999/2000 at the regularly scheduled April
1, 1999 Township Board meeting and advertise same. Motion passed unanimously.
NEW BUSINESS
Abraham And Gaffney - Moved by Treasurer Nilsson, supported by Clerk Graham to
approve the signing of the contract for the audit of 1998/1999 fiscal year with
Abraham and Gaffney by Clerk Graham and Treasurer Nilsson. Motion passed
unanimously.
Meeting Dates For 1999/2000 - Clerk Graham moved and Treasurer Nilsson
supported accepting the following tentative schedule for the 1999/2000 regular
meetings of the Williamstown Township Board of Trustees: April 1, 1999; May 3,
1999; June 1, 1999; June 29, 1999; August 3, 1999; September 7, 1999; October
5, 1999; November 2, 1999; December 7, 1999; January 4, 2000; February 1, 2000;
and March 7, 2000. Motion passed unanimously.
Gaming License Application - The Organization for Bat Conservation wants to
raffle a bike. Treasurer Nilsson moved and Clerk Graham supported approving the
Gaming License Application for The Organization for Bat Conservation as
required by the Michigan Lottery, Charitable Gaming Division. Motion passed
unanimously.
Discussion followed to pass a resolution giving the Clerk authority to approve
these types of applications without them possibly being unnecessarily delayed
by up to a month waiting for the next scheduled Board meeting. The Clerk will
put together a motion for the next meeting that will list the different State
and County applications that the Clerk may approve without going through the
Board.
Michigan Liquor Control Commission - transfer of the liquor license from Eagle
Express II to E. Jaboro incorporated. Will compose letter saying we have no
problem with it except that Eagle Express II is delinquent in their personal
property taxes.
Park And Rec. Committee - Christine Nilsson
Trustee Zaban pointed out the three references in the Park Committee minutes
asking Treasurer Nilsson to come back to the Board to ask for money. Noted the
suggestion on the last page of the minutes to ask for $10,000 to use as the
Committee determines necessary. Treasurer Nilsson stated that this request was
meant to be non-specific because the Committee will be coming up with ideas
throughout the year. Recommendations for funding will still come from the
Committee to the Advisory Council to the Board. All expenditures would still
have to be approved by the Board. This recommendation was made so that some
park funding could be included in the Board’s budget discussions for the 1999/
2000 fiscal year.
Budget Amendments - Shirley Graham
Elections is over budget as are Building and Grounds and Board of Appeals.
Clerk Graham moved and Trustee Wiegandt supported to move $3600 from the
Contingency account to the following: $2500 to Site Improvements, $100 to
Elections, $1,000 to Board of Appeals. Motion approved unanimously.
1999/2000 Salary Resolution - Clerk Graham moved and Treasurer Nilsson
supported to approve the following salary resolution as designated for elected
officials as named: Supervisor - $12,396; Clerk - $19,656; Treasurer - $19,656;
Trustees - $4,200 base plus a maximum of 12 meetings at $60 per meeting for a
total of $4,920 per Trustee. Motion approved unanimously.
Township Office Personnel - Norm Obst
Supervisor Obst expressed serious concern about the confidentiality of
assessment information. By State statute assessment information cannot be given
out until after the roll has been completed unless authorized by the
Supervisor. Treasurer Nilsson stated the need to have an office meeting. She
emphasized the need to have better communication among the office staff.
CONSENT AGENDA
Treasurer Nilsson moved and Clerk Graham supported to approve the consent
agenda, accepting the minutes of the February 2, 1999 Regular Board Meeting;
acknowledging the Treasurer’s report of financial activity for February 1999;
approving the Clerk’s list of accounts to be paid March 2, 1999, checks #9395-
9452 for a total of $33,607.75; and accepting and placing on file the following
reports - NIESA Minutes of February 4, 1999, Building Department Activities of
February 1999, Assessor’s Report/Updates of February 24, 1999, Land Division
Activities for April 1998 through March 1999. Supervisor Obst called for a roll
call vote.
   Ayes:   Supervisor Obst, Clerk Graham, Treasurer Nilsson, Trustee Zaban,
Trustee Wiegandt
   Nays:   None.
Motion approved unanimously.
ADJOURNMENT
Treasurer Nilsson moved and Clerk Graham supported to adjourn. Motion passed
unanimously. Meeting adjourned at 10:24 PM.
__________________________________      ____________________________________
Shirley Graham, Township Clerk            Susan Jennings, Board Recording
Secretary
APRIL 1, 1999
The regular meeting of the Township Board of Trustees was called to order at 7:
37 PM by Supervisor Obst. Clerk Graham was asked to record who was present and
recorded the following: Supervisor Obst, Clerk Graham, Treasurer Nilsson,
Trustee Wiegandt, Trustee Zaban, and Building Inspector Aven.
The agenda was read over with the following changes: Remove the budget review.
Add renewal of New Construction Air-conditioning Contract to consider; and
request to change August meeting date.
1999-2000 BUDGET HEARING:
Hearing opened at 7:40 PM
Supervisor Obst gave a brief review. Proposed 1999-2000 budget was put up for
discussion. There was none.
Trustee Weigandt moved to close the public hearing. Supported by Treasurer
Nilsson. Hearing closed at 7:46 PM.
Regular Board meeting reopened at 7:46 PM.
1999-2000 Budget Approval/Township General Appropriations Act:
A Resolution to establish a General Appropriations Act for Williamstown
Township; To define the powers and duties of the Williamstown Township Officers
in relation to the administration of the Budget; and to provide remedies for
refusal or neglect to comply with the requirements of this resolution.
The Board of Trustees of Williamstown Township resolves:
SECTION 1:   TITLE.
This resolution shall be known as the Williamstown Township General
Appropriations Act.
SECTION 2:   CHIEF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER.
The Supervisor shall be the Chief Administrative Officer and shall perform the
duties of the Chief Administrative Officer enumerated in this act.
SECTION 3:   FISCAL OFFICER.
The Clerk shall be the Fiscal Officer and shall perform the duties of the
Fiscal Officer enumerated in this act.
SECTION 4:   PUBLIC HEARINGS ON THE BUDGET.
(for general law townships) Pursuant to MCLA 141.412; MCLA 141.413, notice of a
public hearing on the proposed budget was published in a newspaper of general
circulation on (date--at least six days prior to the public hearing), and a
public hearing on the proposed budget was held on April 1, 1999. Budget Hearing
Notice published on March 21, 1999 and March 28, 1999.
SECTION 5:   ESTIMATED REVENUES.
Estimated township general fund revenues for fiscal year 1999-2000, (Year
ending March 31, 1999) including an allocated millage of one mill; voter-
authorized millage of zero mills; and various miscellaneous revenues shall
total $513,499.
SECTION 6:   MILLAGE LEVY.
The Williamstown Township Board shall cause to be levied and collected the
general property tax on all real and personal property within the township upon
the current tax roll and amount equal to one mill as set forth by the Tax
Allocation Board.
SECTION 7:   ESTIMATED EXPENDITURES.
Estimated township general fund expenditures for fiscal year 1999-2000, (Year
ending March 31, 2000) for the various township activities (cost centers) are
as follows: See attachment, $669,359.
SECTION 8:   ADOPTION OF BUDGET BY REFERENCE.
The general fund budget of Williamstown Township is hereby adopted by
reference, with revenues and activity expenditures as indicated in sections 5
and 7 of this act.
SECTION 9:   ADOPTION OF BUDGET BY COST CENTER.
The Board of Trustees of Williamstown Township adopts the 1999-2000 fiscal year
general fund budget by cost center. Township officials responsible for the
expenditures authorized in the budget may expend township funds up to, but not
to exceed, the total appropriation authorized for each cost center, and may
make transfers among the various line items contained in the cost center
appropriation. However, no transfers of appropriations for line items related
to personnel or capital outlays may be made without prior board approval by
budget amendment.
SECTION 10:   APPROPRIATION NOT A MANDATE TO SPEND.
Appropriations will be deemed maximum authorizations to incur expenditures. The
fiscal officer shall exercise supervision and control to ensure that
expenditures are within appropriations, and shall not issue any town order for
expenditures that exceed appropriations.
SECTION 11:   TRANSFER AUTHORITY.
                  Deleted. N/A
SECTION 12:   ALLOTMENT OF APPROPRIATIONS.
No later than the first day of the fiscal year, each department, board or
commission of Williamstown Township shall submit to the Chief Administrative
Officer a statement or proposed allotments of appropriations based on expected
periodic requirements. The Chief Administrative Officer shall review, modify or
approve the proposed allotment plan for any cost center.
SECTION 13:   PERIODIC FISCAL REPORTS.
The fiscal officer shall transmit to the board at the end of each of the three
quarters, and at the end of each month occurring during the fourth quarter, a
report of financial operations, including, but not limited to:
a)   a summary statement of the actual financial condition of the general fund
at the end of the previous quarter (month);
b)   a summary statement showing the receipts and expenditures and encumbrances
for the previous quarter (month) and for the current fiscal year to the end of
the previous quarter (month);
c)   a detailed list of:
1)   expected revenues by major source as estimated in the budget; actual
receipts to date for the current fiscal year compared with actual receipts for
the same period in the prior fiscal year; the balance of estimated revenues to
be collected in the then current fiscal year; and any revisions in revenue
estimates resulting from collection experience to date.
2)   for each cost center: the amount appropriated; the amount charged to each
appropriation in the previous quarter (month) and for the current fiscal year
and as compared with the same period in the prior fiscal year; the unencumbered
balance of appropriations; and any revisions in the estimate of expenditures.
SECTION 14:   LIMIT ON OBLIGATIONS AND PAYMENTS.
No obligation shall be incurred against, and payment shall be made from any
appropriation account unless there is a sufficient unencumbered balance in the
appropriation and sufficient funds are or will be available to meet the
obligation.
SECTION 15:   BUDGET MONITORING.
Whenever it appears to the Chief Administrative Officer or the Township Board
that the actual and probable revenues in any fund will be less than the
estimated revenues upon which appropriations from such fund were based, and
when it appears that expenditures shall exceed an appropriation, the Chief
Administrative Officer shall present to the Township Board recommendations to
prevent expenditures from exceeding available revenues or appropriations for
the current fiscal year. Such recommendations shall include proposals for
reducing appropriations, increasing revenues, or both.
SECTION 16:   VIOLATIONS OF THE ACT.
Any obligation incurred or payment authorized in violation of this resolution
shall be void and shall subject any responsible official(s) or employees to
disciplinary action as outlined in P.A. 621 (1978) and the Williamstown
Township personnel manual.
SECTION 17:   BOARD ADOPTION.
Trustee Wiegandt moved and Treasurer Nilsson seconded; PASSED to adopt for the
1999-2000 Fiscal Year the General Appropriations Act for WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP,
originally adopted by the Township of Williamstown on April 4, 1989, and the
foregoing resolution as read. Roll Call Vote:
   Ayes:   Trustee Wiegandt, Trustee Zaban, Treasurer Nilsson, Supervisor Obst,
Clerk Graham
   Nays:   None.
Ingham County Road Commission/Transportation Committee Recommendations For 1999
Road Improvements. Brian Jennings
Bob Peterson of the Ingham County Road Commission (ICRC) concurred with the
Township’s Transportation Committee’s 1999 road improvement recommendations and
had no comments. Treasurer Nilsson asked about crack filling. Mr. Peterson
stated that crack filling is done a lot by MDOT, but not ICRC. ICRC will only
do it as a precursor to repaving.
Township Attorney Stephen O. Schultz arrived at 7:52 PM.
Supervisor Obst read the summary of the Transportation Committee’s
recommendations into the record:
1.   Set at least $50,000 aside for Vanneter and Mitchell or begin engineering
work.
2.   Do not resurface Newman, but allocate funds this year to complete the
project next year ($31,439).
3.   Do not pave any gravel roads (North Branch and Wilgus).
4.   Gravel Road Reconstruct on Milton and Bentley only after contacting the
residents in the area and reviewing their input ($16,240).
5.   Do not do Gravel Road Reconstruct on Barry.
6.   Set remaining moneys aside for future years when higher than average
number of roads need to be maintained ($77,000 - $47,679 = $$29,321 set aside).
7.   Set an additional $23,000 aside for future large projects as outlined in
the Master Plan.
Brian Jennings clarified that with the additional $23,000 to be set aside per
year for future large projects (such as bridge construction, or situations
similar to Vanneter and Mitchell) the Transportation Committee is recommending
a total of $100,000 to be budgeted for road construction per year.
Pebblebrook Place/Quarton Road still has four lots that have not started
building. The Transportation Committee believes there will still be heavy
construction traffic on Newman Road this year until all the homes on Quarton
are built. They would like to schedule Newman Road construction as late in the
year as possible this year, or early in 2000 so that it can be done after the
heavy construction traffic is done. Mr. Peterson said the Board can wait until
May to make a decision on the Newman road upgrade and still be able to be
scheduled by the ICRC for later this year.
Milton and Bentley - need to contact residents first because they have been
vocal in the past about not having improvements done. Were on the list for last
year, but was dropped for fiscal considerations. Will send letter to the
residents.
Vanneter and Mitchell - Supervisor Obst asked if a special assessment is in
order for major reconstructions like this one. His question was of a general
nature, wanting to know when a special assessment might be an appropriate
mechanism for funding major road projects. Will pass along request to the
Advisory Council to look into special assessment funding.
Update On Haslett Road Project From Van Atta To Hart - Bob Peterson, ICRC
Bid went to C&D Hughes. Will start in mid June. Should be done by end of
August. Two sections require full depth reconstruction and will require
detours. The plan in the State Transportation Program is to improve the section
from Hart to Barton in 2000 and the section from Barton to east of Williamston
Road in 2001. Mr. Peterson will submit an article for the May Township
Newsletter detailing the project and detours. Each property owner affected by
the project has been contacted and agreements have been signed regarding
grading and tree removal.
Treasurer Nilsson asked again about crack filling. ICRC does not do it because
it is very costly and you do not get a new surface on the road. When you fill
the cracks you may keep some of the water out, but you don't do anything for
the road surface. Chip and Seal will fill the cracks and give the road a new
wear surface. Mr. Jennings will forward the Transportation Committee’s report
from last year on this topic to the Board. Treasurer Nilsson wanted to do a
test crack fill.
QUESTIONS OF ATTORNEY - STEPHEN O. SCHULTZ
Foote Property - communicated to Mr. Ray, the Footes’ Attorney, the Board's
resolution. Accepted the terms that the board adopted at the last meeting. Open
items are items that Planning Coordinator Martin has to give assurance that the
conditions have been met. Have to provide Mr. Sikarskie with the soil. The
Township may want to deal directly with Mr. Foote to arrange for delivery of
the soil to Mr. Sikarskie. Supervisor Obst will contact Mr. Foote. The Court
has been informed that an agreement has been reached, but the lawsuit cannot be
dropped until Mr. Foote has complied with the conditions. The Court will be
upset if he has not complied by the time the case comes up on the docket again.
Reviewed Development Rights Ordinance. Delivered opinion letter with suggested
changes to Planning Coordinator Martin. The ordinance as proposed complies with
the changes to the Township Zoning Act and legally should stand firm.
Phone Michigan - Will be delivering the middle of next week two items regarding
Phone Michigan. Have put together a proposed permit agreement and proposed
permit ordinance for all four Townships that they represent that have been
approached by Phone Michigan.
Possible Settlement Of Litigation With The City Of Williamston
Trying to finalize the language. The City has accepted; just some of the
language needs to be clarified. Need to hold a special meeting to look at the
final document to authorize the Clerk and Supervisor to execute the final
document. A special Board meeting will be held at 4:30 PM on Monday, April 12th
to authorize execution of the agreement.
Attorney Schultz left at 9:04 P.M.
PLANNING COMMISSION - Mickey Martin
No action items.
At the April 20th Planning Commission Meeting the MSU students will do their
presentations of the Grand River Corridor. Would like to encourage all the
Board members to come to this Planning Commission meeting.
Development Rights Ordinance - question raised by Treasurer Nilsson on why a
resident wishing to split off four parcels and keeping the remainder for
himself in an Ag Commercial Zone was being held up waiting for passage of the
Development Rights Ordinance. The Board had previously decided not to pass the
Ag Commercial by-rights-four-lot-splits part of the Zoning Ordinance until the
Development Rights Ordinance had been adopted, since going ahead with the lot
splits requires voluntary relinquishing of their development rights on the
remainder of the property.
ADVISORY COUNCIL - Rud Hoag
Roger Pearce was supposed to be here for the Park Committee, but was unable to
make it. Hope to have each chair attend a board meeting in turn and make a
short presentation. Looking at goals for the committees to accomplish.
Transportation Committee - recommendations will be voted on at the May meeting.
Phone Michigan Report - will wait until receive attorney's report.
Park - would like approval for some of their funding so that they can go ahead
with their projects. Clerk Graham stated that the Board needs something in
writing to specify what they are being asked to consider. Need to see a firm
bid proposal on seeding the hill, developing a prairie, and building up the
entry way. Treasurer Nilsson will bring all the required information to the
Special Board meeting on Monday, April 12th.
Grand River Corridor Study - Dwight Kampe
Encourage everybody to be there on the 20th.
UNIFINISHED BUSINESS
Clerk's Administrative Responsibilities
Trustee Wiegandt moved, and Trustee Zaban seconded to adopt the following
resolution of Clerk’s Administrative Responsibilities:
Williamstown Township Board Policy as of April 1, 1999
Clerk’s Administrative Responsibilities
The Clerk’s office, being the central receiver of daily mail, be allowed to
process time sensitive permits as needed; Parade Route Detours, Road or Street
Closures, MSU Safety Department Road Closures, and State Gaming permits, if for
brief periods of 1/2 day or less. The Clerk shall use common sense in this
discretion, and if any questions arise, the matter will come to the Township
Board for final approval.
Motion passed unanimously.
NEW BUSINESS
Capitol City Rifle Club - 1999 Calendar of Events.
NBD Bank - Notice Of Merger.
Complaints
Will make sure that Mr. Snelson of 423 E. Grand River is made aware that he is
not in a proper zone for working on cars.
Parking Problem at 3800 Vanneter will be forwarded to the Ingham County
Sheriff.
Renewal Of New Construction Air Conditioning, Inc. Contract
Clerk Graham recommends we approve renewing the maintenance contract with New
Construction Air-Conditioning, Inc. for $300. The Board generally agreed to
approve the contract.
August Meeting Date Changed To Monday August 2nd.
Deadline For May Newsletter Entries - 10:00 AM Monday, April 19th.
CONSENT AGENDA
Minutes - change wording on Budget Amendments motion to include the words debit
and credit. Treasurer Nilsson moved and Clerk Graham supported to approve the
Consent Agenda, approving the minutes of the March 2, 1999 Regular Board
Meeting with the above mentioned amendments; acknowledging the Treasurer’s
report of financial activity for March 1999; approving the Clerk’s list of
accounts to be paid April 1, 1999 - Check #s 9453-9510 for a total of
$43,620.95; and accepting and placing on file the following reports - NIESA
Minutes of March 4, 1999, Building Department Activities for March 1999,
Assessor’s Report/Updates of March 17, 1999, and the Board of Appeals minutes
from March 17, 1999. Supervisor Obst asked for a roll call vote.
   Ayes:   Trustee Wiegandt, Trustee Zaban, Treasurer Nilsson, Supervisor Obst,
Clerk Graham
   Nays:   None.
Motion Passed unanimously.
Treasurer Nilsson moved and Clerk Graham seconded to adjourn.
Meeting adjourned at 9:56 PM.
__________________________________      ____________________________________
Shirley Graham, Township Clerk         Susan Jennings, Recording Secretary
MAY 11, 1999
The regular meeting of the Township Board of Trustees was called to order at 7:
35 PM by Supervisor Obst. Clerk Graham was asked to record who was present and
recorded the following: Supervisor Obst, Clerk Graham, Treasurer Nilsson,
Trustee Wiegandt, Trustee Zaban, Attorney Stephen O. Schultz, and Building
Inspector Aven.
The agenda was read over with the following additions: Doug Price - Woodview
request. Russell Aker request for sewer; Landscape presentation; fee schedule
change.
QUESTIONS OF THE ATTORNEY - Stephen O. Schultz
Settlement Agreement with the City of Williamston - Received from the City of
Williamston a copy of the settlement agreement of the sewer law suit. There was
still some language that needed to be cleared up as of the last Board meeting.
Received some comments from Clerk Graham on the last draft which was forwarded
to the City. They have accepted all of those changes. Attorney Schultz has
received an initialed copy back from the City indicating their acceptance of
the agreement. The City only had two additional clarifications to make: 1)
under non discriminatory rates debt service was added; and 2) in paragraph 8.3,
added except under the provisions of 8.1. Attorney Schultz proposed that a
final execution copy be prepared and forwarded to the City for signature. Will
then file a stipulation to dismiss the law suit. Once the City has signed then
the respective clerks will cut the required checks.
900 Gulick Road - Mr. Sikarskie has received his dirt. Planning Coordinator
Martin and Building Inspector Aven will review the latest plan received from
Mr. Foote. Will file an order to dismiss if the plan received is satisfactory.
PLANNING COMMISSION - Mickey Martin
One action item - A-1 Rent-All. Storage facility with a rental business in the
front. One storage building has been constructed. They still need to construct
the second storage facility and the main business building. Requesting a 12
month extension of their Site Plan. Recommended by the Planning Commission that
the Site Plan extension be granted until April 2, 2000. Treasurer Nilsson moved
and Trustee Wiegandt supported that the Board approve the Planning Commission
recommendation for the A-1 Rent-All Site Plan extension for one year with an
expiration date of April 2, 2000. Motion passed unanimously.
PARK COMMITTEE - Chris Nilsson
Reminded everyone about the open house on June 20th. They are planning family
activities and refreshments. In the process of getting the hill seeded and
establishing a prairie in the northern part of the park. There is a hiking
trail that starts west of the hill and goes along the river and back to the
hill.
Ball Diamond Usage - Red Cedar Rec. - Jim Lounsbury
Red Cedar Rec. has been upgrading the field at the Township Hall. They would
like to set up a long term agreement and put up some fencing. They don't want
to put the money into the fencing if they can't get a 3-5 year agreement.
Mickey Martin had indicated they should put a sign on the back board and the
back door that RCRA has the field Monday - Thursday at stated times. The
fencing would cost about $2,000, so they don't want to put that kind of money
into it without a commitment. RCRA does not want to lose priority on the field
after they improve it. The Board clarified that officially they don’t have
priority now. The Township does not have a reservation system for park usage,
nor any way to police usage. It is available on a first come first serve basis.
It is up to the RCRA to post their usage and hope other people respect that.
The Township office has been informing people of RCRA’s plans for the field
when they receive a call about availability.
American Legion - Conrad Taschner
Request for funding under Act 63 of 1915. The Act requires all local governing
bodies to fund veterans’ flags and holders. Brought in a sample of a Bronze
holder that will last forever. Have tried other materials and these were the
best. Asked the city to go 50/50 with the Township. They approved that. The
legion has been using their own money, but they have run out. Would like $200
every year from both the City of Williamston and Williamstown Township. They
are in the process of taking a survey to determine exactly how many veterans
are in the cemetery. According to the law every veteran must have a flag. The
funds will be kept by the Cemetery Board. The Boy Scouts have agreed to put the
flags out every year. Flags go out the week before Memorial Day and come down
the week after the 4th of July. The Township would allocate the funds from
either the cemetery fund or the office surplus. This detail will be decided
when the auditors come at the end of May. Treasurer Nilsson stated that she was
impressed with the petition that was submitted. Treasurer Nilsson moved and
Trustee Wiegandt supported to approve, per Act 63 of 1915, funding of current
1999 expenses in the amount of $176.00 (one-half of $351.99). In addition,
approval of an annual appropriation of $200.00 for future purchase of flags and
holders, as needed to support the American Legion grave marker funding. Motion
passed unanimously.
Woodview Lot 50 - Doug Price
The declaration of restrictive covenants and the Plat for the Woodview
Subdivision state a 50 foot set back is required for building a home. The
Zoning Ordinance requires a 25 foot set back in this zone. Building with a 50
foot set back on lot 50 would impede the natural drainage of lot 37. They would
like to build with a 40 foot set back to prevent this from happening. If the 50
foot requirement were only in the restrictive covenants, then the developer
would be able to make this change. Since the 50 foot set backs are also on the
Plat, which is part of a binding density option agreement with the Township,
the Township’s Planning Consultant and Attorney are both of the opinion that
the issue must go before the Zoning Board of Appeals. Mr. Price disagrees with
this assessment of the situation. He was scheduled to close with a buyer for
this lot on Friday, May 14th. After much discussion Trustee Wiegandt moved and
Trustee Zaban supported to expedite this and waive the board of appeals fee for
a variance to the setback on lot 50. Passed unanimously. Will schedule a Board
of Appeals meeting for Wednesday or Thursday next week (May 19th or 20th) if
the applicant requests.
Proposal For Landscaping Around The Building - Landscape Bob
Made a presentation showing what plantings he proposed for around the Township
Hall. He proposed using drought, heat and cold hearty plants that would require
a minimum amount of maintenance and would not out grow their space. Stated he
can do the job for $19,700 if the Township went with everything in his
proposal. This price is all inclusive, including removal and dumping of the old
stuff. He would like to incorporate the Eagle Scout plantings into the
landscape. He indicated watering would be necessary the first year to help the
plants get established. After that, rain water should be sufficient. Left a
copy of his plan and sketch for Board consideration.
Proposed Sewer Hookup - Russell Aker
In light of the pending resolution of the law suit with the City of
Williamston, Mr. Aker is interested in getting on the list of potential future
sewer hook ups. Supervisor Obst stated that on a first come first serve basis
there is no capacity left because of all the people who have already requested.
The Township Board has to come up with a policy to determine who gets the
hookups. Supervisor Obst suggested that Mr. Aker put together a proposal for
how many hookups he is requesting and how they would enhance the Township. The
Township has 100 Residential Equivalency Unit (REU) hookups with the agreement.
The Board will keep Mr. Aker informed of what the process is going to be in
determining distribution of the hookups.
City Building at Corwin and Grand River
A Township resident stated a concern about whether or not the City was lawfully
occupying the building at Corwin and Grand River. Building Inspector Aven
stated that the City has been issued a temporary certificate of occupancy for
the front office and the garage. The City is seeking a waiver from the barrier
free status of the building from the state. Once this issue has been resolved a
permanent certificate of occupancy will be issued. The parts of the building
being used are safe and to code. The City has not been given any special
treatment in the issuance of the temporary certificate of occupancy. It is a
normal practice in this type of situation.
Direction Of The Community
Another Township resident expressed his feelings and concerns about the
direction of the community in general. His concerns will be taken to the
intergovernmental committee.
Proposed Bentley Road Improvements - Shirley Graham
Gravel Reconstruction requires surveying the Road creating traffic lanes 11
feet to each side from the center and ditching. The Road Commission has 33 feet
from the center in each direction to work. 11 surveys were sent to the
residents in this area. Eight were returned. No one wanted trees cut. Six
responded no to cutting trees and two made no comment on this item. Four
respondents stated the ditches need to be cleaned, and four said they did not.
Mr. Ronald Decker stated that it seems to him more important to improve Barry
Road before reconstructing other gravel roads. Would like to consider black
topping Barry Road before paving Bentley Road.
Mitchell Road
A Township resident expressed his deep concern for the traffic situation on
Mitchell Road, especially regarding pedestrian traffic and the lack of safety
for the school children in the area. He chided the Board for their inactivity
in this area. In response, it was indicated the Board was unable to obtain a
lower speed limit despite many efforts and the City of Williamston was
unwilling to help fund road improvements.
Fee Schedule Change - Mickey Martin
Currently, there is no fee for an extension of a Site Plan. There is a need to
put a fee on the schedule. The starting fee is an escrow account of $1,500 for
the original site plan. Planning Coordinator Martin is asking for a minimum
$300 charge for extensions. Would rather have an escrow amount instead of a
fee. Trustee Zaban moved and Clerk Graham supported to add a $300 escrow
account for Site Plan Extensions to the fee schedule. Motion passed
unanimously.
900 Gulick
Planning Coordinator Martin verified that only she and Building Inspector Aven
needed to review the new plan submitted by the Footes and that it does not have
to go before the entire Planning Commission.
Ingham County Drain Commission - Heath Drain - Board Of Determination Minutes
4/22/99
After considering the purpose of the petition and the comments presented at the
Board of Determination, and the report by the engineer, Chair Friedle
determined the drain necessary and conducive to public health, safety and
welfare, and for the protection of the public health of Williamstown Township.
The cost would be split between the road authorities, the Township, and the
affected property owners in the district.
Mowing Proposal - 716 N. Putnam Street
Mr. Raymond Wood put in a bid to mow the property at 716 N. Putnam for $75 per
month. Trustee Wiegandt moved and Clerk Graham supported to approve Mr. Wood’s
bid proposal of $75.00 per month for weekly mowing and general yard care at 716
N. Putnam from May 1 through October 31, 1999. Motion passed unanimously.
Proposal For Legal Representation At The Boundary Commission - Norm Obst
Daniel Kraft, a Township resident, has volunteered up to 30 hours of free legal
time. The City of Williamston Building at Corwin and Grand River and the Bond
property are the current annexation requests before the Boundary Commission.
The Board generally agreed to forward the materials on these two cases to Mr.
Kraft and to have him start the clock ticking.
Proposed Change Of Legal Representation - Norm Obst
Due to a break down in communication and divergent approaches between Attorney
Stephen Schultz and Township Supervisor Norman Obst, Attorney Schultz has
suggested it is time for a change. He has recommended John Seurynck, who is
another attorney from the same firm and represents Howell Township. He has some
court experience and local government experience. Mr. Seurynck has represented
Howell Township for a little over a year. Has been with the firm for three
years. Attorney Schultz stated that he would be available to support Mr.
Seurynck in any way needed. An introductory meeting will be set up by Attorney
Schultz between Supervisor Obst and Attorney Seurynck. Supervisor Obst will
provide a recommendation, or a recommended procedure, at the next Board
meeting.
CONSENT AGENDA
Treasurer Nilsson moved and Clerk Graham supported to approve the Consent
Agenda, approving the minutes of the April 1, 1999 Regular Board Meeting and
the April 12, 1999 Special Board Meeting; acknowledging the Treasurer’s report
of financial activity for April 1999; approving the Clerk’s list of accounts to
be paid May 11, 1999 - Check #s 9511-9592 for a total of $44,713.41; and
accepting and placing on file the following reports - NIESA Minutes of April 1,
1999, Building Department Activities for April 1999, and the Assessor’s Report/
Updates of April 29, 1999. Supervisor Obst asked for a roll call vote:
   Ayes:   Trustee Wiegandt, Trustee Zaban, Treasurer Nilsson, Clerk Graham,
Supervisor Obst
   Nays:   None.
Adjournment
Clerk Graham moved and Supervisor Obst supported to adjourn.
Meeting adjourned at 10:51 p.m.
___________________________________      ____________________________________
Shirley Graham, Township Clerk            Susan Jennings, Recording Secretary
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP BOARD OF TRUSTEES
JUNE 1, 1999
The regular meeting of the Township Board of Trustees was called to order at 7:
35 PM by Supervisor Obst. Clerk Graham was asked to record who was present and
recorded the following: Supervisor Obst, Clerk Graham, Treasurer Nilsson,
Trustee Wiegandt, Trustee Zaban, Attorney Stephen O. Schultz, and Building
Inspector Aven.
The agenda was read over with the following additions: Phone Michigan; Request
for park usage by the Boy Scouts, funding for the park, Xerox proposal for a
new FAX machine, landscaping proposals.
ATTORNEY REPORT - Stephen O. Schultz
900 Gulick Road - Received letter from Mr. Ray, Mr. Foote's attorney, regarding
dismissal of the law suit in light of the Site Plan Approval. There is still
one more outstanding item, the issuance of a grading permit. Once that has
occurred then the lawsuit may be dismissed.
Sewer Litigation - Final documents were forwarded to the City of Williamston
regarding that law suit. Mr. Toy, representing Mr. Perkins, called to say he
reviewed the settlement and his client authorized him signing to dismiss the
lawsuit.
Phone Michigan - received comments from the Meridian Township Engineer. He had
a half-dozen wording changes. This agreement would give Phone Michigan the
right to work in the right of ways. If they obtain easements outside of the
right of ways, then they, as well as the Township, would have access to those
easements as well. Attorney Schultz recommends approving the Telecommunications
Ordinance subject to the suggested technical changes suggested by Meridian
Township. No public hearing is required for the Telecommunications Ordinance.
Legal Representation - Due to Attorney Seurynck having resigned his position
locally to take a job in Chicago, Attorney Schultz has recommended Attorney
Steve Lasher from his firm as a possible replacement. Attorney Schultz has set
up a meeting for Supervisor Obst to meet Attorney Lasher.
PLANNING COMMISSION - Mickey Martin
Phone Michigan - The Advisory Council recommended approval of the
Telecommunications Ordinance. Trustee Wiegandt moved and Trustee Zaban
supported to adopt the Telecommunications Ordinance (Ordinance number 36) as
submitted with the technical adjustments suggested by Engineer Roger Beull of
Meridian Township. Supervisor Obst called for a roll call vote:
   Ayes:   Supervisor Obst, Clerk Graham, Treasurer Nilsson, Trustee Zaban,
Trustee Wiegandt
   Nays:   None.
PUBLIC COMMENTS
Landscape Plan - Tom Graham submitted a drawing showing his thoughts on
landscaping that needs to be done around the Township Hall. He suggested
putting in steel tread plates in the side walk to help drainage from the
building to the parking lot. Remove locust tree. Irrigate all around the
building except where the transformer is. Remove ground cover from under the
trees and sod everything. Remove maple tree that is dying. Raise septic tank
lids to grade. He also had some suggestions for maintenance that needed to be
done to the interior of the building. Mr. Graham stated that if the Township
cannot properly maintain the facility and grounds at the corner of Germany and
Zimmer, then how can the residents have any confidence in the maintenance and
upkeep of the new park.
The Township had received an unsolicited bid from Summerfield Landscape in July
1998 for $12,388; and a bid from Landscape Bob last month for $19,763. Neither
of these bids are for the plans submitted by Mr. Graham. Clerk Graham stated
that the basic work can be done this year, with further work done later.
Katherine Lo stated she likes the idea of sod around the building. Clerk Graham
will look into getting further bids.
PLANNING COMMISSION - Mickey Martin
Memorial Lutheran School - The Planning Commission’s conditions have been met.
Recommend approval of the Site Plan and Special Land Use Permit. Treasurer
Nilsson moved and Trustee Wiegandt supported approving the Planning
Commission’s recommendation for approval of Memorial Lutheran School’s Site
Plan contingent upon the Drain Commission’s approval of an easement. Motion
passed unanimously. Trustee Wiegandt moved and Clerk Graham supported approving
the Planning Commission’s recommendation for Memorial Lutheran School’s Special
Land Use Permit, subject to final site plan approval. Motion passed
unanimously.
John Kane - Building Permit To Replace The Temporary Model Home
The Minutes from 1994 show that the Site Plan that was approved allowed for a
model home that would be a temporary structure for no more than three years.
The model was removed in 1997. There was no provision in the Site Plan for
another model to be put on the site at a later time, nor was this discussed at
any of the meetings with Mr. Kane. The Board generally agreed that putting new
models on the site as old ones became obsolete was probably Mr. Kane’s intent
from the beginning, but provisions were not made to do this in the original
site plan. The Township’s Planning Consultant, Chris Doozen, believes another
site plan needs to be approved to accommodate future model homes on this site.
Too much time has passed for the original Site Plan to be modified. The Board
discussed various options and agreed that Mr. Kane needed to make a written
proposal to the Board in order for them to be able to accommodate his request.
Planning Coordinator Martin will contact Mr. Kane to ask him to bring back to
the Board a proposal that can be considered. Building Inspector Aven indicated
that there would need to be a separate building permit for each model home he
would put on the site.
PARK & RECREATION COMMITTEE AND RELATED ITEMS - Chris Nilsson
The sledding hill has been seeded and is greening up. Williamston Snow Removal
and Landscape did a good job. The prairie was planted last week. Work was done
at the entrance. Improvements were made to the drain culvert, and the entrance
was smoothed out and had some gravel added. The Open House plans are going
well. There is no rain date! The Open House is scheduled for June 20th from 1-
4. Have activities and refreshments planned. Felpausch will have a hot dog
wagon and pop. The Township received over $350 for the park from Ryan McBride’s
school project. Event insurance will cost $300 for the Open House. Need to get
lemonade and iced tea. Girl Scouts will be bringing brownies. Will have horse
drawn wagons and mounted posse on the site. Will have a moon walk. Planning
Coordinator Martin reminded the committee that they needed to fill out an event
application form.
The Boy Scouts have requested permission to camp at the park overnight the
night before the Open House so that they can be there to set up in the morning.
Their letter states in part “As setting these [dining canopies] up takes a
little while, we would like permission for a small group of scouts to set up a
campsite and stay the night of June 19, 1999 on the park property. This group
would consist of not more than 10 scouts and 2 or 3 parents. In this way we
could set up a nice display of Boy Scout camping and keep an eye on our troop
trailer and equipment. You may be assured we will leave the property as we
found it when we came or possibly in better condition.” Per the outdoor events
ordinance, the adjacent home owner needs to be contacted to determine that the
scouts being there between the hours of 10:00 PM and 10:00 AM will have no
impact on them. The Board generally agreed to authorize the camping use by the
Boy Scouts.
Will contact the Organization for the Preservation of Bats to see if they are
available for the Open House.
UNIFINISHED BUSINESS
ICRC 1999 Road Improvement projects - Brian Jennings
The Transportation Committee Recommended putting $50,000 aside for future
improvements of Mitchell and Vanneter Roads. Gravel reconstruction was
recommended for Milton Road at a cost of $6,960 to $9,500. $41,900 would be the
cost to pave this road. Supervisor Obst suggested allotting $7,500 for the
gravel reconstruction. Newman road should be done when Quarton is done and
preferably as late in the season as possible. This road would cost $32,000.
Transportation Committee Chair Jennings stated that If the Board writes a
letter to ICRC by July 1st they can roll over the unused matching county funds
to next year. Planning Coordinator Martin stated that from a planning view,
attempting to keep the rural nature of the Township, N. Branch Road does not
need to be paved. The farmers in this area don't need increased traffic on this
road. Clerk Graham would like to see some design work done on Mitchell Road.
She stated a need to go forward with design work now in order to get anything
done in the near future. First thing to be done is to get a plan of what needs
to be done. The Board will make a charge to the Transportation Committee to
form a committee consisting of Transportation Committee members,
representatives from The Ingham County Road Commission, The Township Planning
Commission, The Williamston School District and other interested parties to
determine what needs to be done on Mitchell and Vanneter Roads. Trustee Zaban
moved and Trustee Wiegandt supported to proceed with the following
recommendations for the 1999 Road Improvements: Gravel reconstruction of Milton
Road at a cost of $7,500; Bituminous resurfacing of Newman Road at the same
time as Quarton Road is being done for a cost of $32,000; Set aside $50,000 for
future work on Mitchell and Vanneter Roads; and to roll over $10,000 for next
year. Motion passed unanimously.
Committee for Legal Representation Selection - Norm Obst
The Township Board has received letters from several area attorneys expressing
an interest in representing the Township. A committee consisting of Supervisor
Obst, Clerk Graham, and Planning Coordinator Martin was formed to evaluate the
various prospects and make a recommendation to the Board.
Red Cedar Recreation - Jeri Mifflin, Director of Williamston Community
Education, expressed how well the use of the ball field is working out for Red
Cedar Recreation, and that they are happy to do the scheduling and improvements
on the field in exchange for its use.
NEW BUSINESS
The Document Company - Xerox - Clerk Graham received an unsolicited proposal to
replace the FAX machine. Due to the age of the Township’s current machine, the
service agreement is no longer renewable. There were three proposals submitted
for new machines. The Board decided to stick with the current FAX until it is
no longer operational.
Hilty Letter Of May 25, 1999 - Will respond by the next board meeting on June
29th. The Board needs to look at distribution of the REUs strategically and
decide where to commit them.
Community Hall Rental Reservation & Cancellation Policy
Due to problems with people canceling their hall rental reservation too close
to the date of their event for the Township to rent the hall to other parties
who have expressed an interest, there is a need for a cancellation policy. The
office secretary has proposed adding the following wording to the Community
Hall Rental Form:
Reservations shall be made upon receipt of Hall Rental fee. Payment secures
your date.
Cancellation Policy:
A. All refunds for cancellations shall be requested in writing.
B. A full refund shall be given for events canceled prior to one month of event
date.
C. A partial refund (50%) shall be given for events canceled within on month of
less
of event date.
Trustee Zaban moved and Treasurer Nilsson supported to approve the change of
the Township Hall Reservation Process as stated above. Motion passed
unanimously.
CONSENT AGENDA
Treasurer Nilsson moved and Clerk Graham supported to approve the Consent
Agenda, approving the minutes of the May 11, 1999 Regular Board Meeting;
acknowledging the Treasurer’s report of financial activity for May 1999;
approving the Clerk’s list of accounts to be paid June 1, 1999 - Check #s 9593-
9635 for a total of $32,809.57; and accepting and placing on file the following
reports - NIESA Minutes of May 6, 1999, Building Department Activities for May
1999, and the Assessor’s Report/Updates of May 19, 1999. Supervisor Obst called
for a roll call vote:
   Ayes: Trustee Wiegandt, Trustee Zaban, Supervisor Obst, Clerk Graham,
Treasurer Nilsson
   Nays: None.
Clerk Graham moved and Treasurer Nilsson supported to adjourn.
Meeting Adjourned At 10:13 PM.
__________________________________      ____________________________________
Shirley Graham, Clerk               Susan Jennings, Board Recording Secretary
JUNE 29, 1999
The regular meeting of the Township Board of Trustees was called to order at 7:
35 PM by Supervisor Obst. Clerk Graham was asked to record who was present and
recorded the following: supervisor Obst, Clerk Graham, Treasurer Nilsson,
Trustee Wiegandt, Trustee Zaban, and Building Inspector Aven.
The agenda was read over with the following additions: 425 proposal; auditor
report; McKenna contract; and fee schedule.
AUDITOR'S REPORT - Abraham & Gaffney
Received a clean or unqualified opinion. Also received favorable review of our
operations and procedures.
PLANNING COMMISSION - Mickey Martin
Need action on several items.
Nature Center Addition To The Zoning Ordinance - Moved by Supervisor Obst and
supported by Trustee Zaban to approve the Planning Commission’s recommendation
to add Nature Centers to the Zoning Ordinance. Motion approved unanimously.
Development Rights Ordinance - Participation would be completely voluntary on
the part of the land owner. There is nothing in the proposed ordinance that
would require a land owner to give up their development rights. This proposed
Ordinance is putting a vehicle in place should anyone decide they want to give
up their development rights by either gifting or sale. There is no funding
provided for at this time for the Township to purchase development rights.
Supervisor Obst moved and Trustee Zaban supported to approve the Planning
Commission's recommendations to adopt the Development Rights Ordinance. Motion
approved unanimously.
Royce Lockwood Rezoning Request - Mr. Lockwood owns 160 acres, he would like to
rezone 30 acres of it. He would like to rezone 20 acres to Ag Small Farm and 10
acres to Rural Estates parcels. The remainder would stay in Ag Commercial.
Supervisor Obst had a question on the Williamston School District’s
involvement. The school’s are purchasing 125 of the remaining 130 acres. The
house and barn are on the proposed 20 acre parcel. The two five acre parcels
have frontage on Sherwood Rd. Treasurer Nilsson moved and Trustee Wiegandt
supported to approve the Planning Commission’s recommendation of the rezoning
of 30 acres, out of a total of 160 acres, from Ag Commercial to Ag Small Farm
and Rural Estates. Motion approved unanimously.
Revision To Zoning Ordinance - Splitting By Right 4 Parcels In An AG-Commercial
Zone. If a property owner takes advantage of this opportunity then they give up
all development rights on the remaining acreage. Moved by Supervisor Obst and
supported by Trustee Wiegandt to approve the Planning Commission’s
recommendation of the revision to the Zoning Ordinance allowing splitting by
right four parcels in the Ag-Commercial Zone. Motion approved unanimously.
ADVISORY COUNCIL - Rud Hoag
No meeting in June. The Master Plan should be revisited by the Advisory
Council, Committees and the Planning Commission in a joint effort.
Park And Recreation Committee - Chris Nilsson
Wonderful turnout for the Open House on June 20th. In addition to the
publicized items there was a butterfly release. Trustee Wiegandt did a
wonderful job mowing the park and marking parking areas for the Open House.
Hope to make it an annual event as a kick off to jubilee. Mr. Pollok needs to
be thanked for all the work he did with his horses. The focus for the Park
Committee is now back to access in and out of the park. What is there is a
temporary access. Need to work on getting a permanent access which will require
a survey and engineering work. There will be extensive coverage of the park in
the August newsletter. Discussion followed that if the Open House is going to
be an annual event, then a catchy name needs to be given to the event to help
maximize interest and turn out.
Regional Recreation Authority Survey - The Park Committee does not recommend
the Township participate in the survey. At least half of the questions on the
survey are ones that the Township has already polled its residents on via last
year’s Open Land survey. The results of this survey will be forwarded to the
committee looking into the feasibility of a Regional Recreation Authority. In
lieu of the Township participating in the current survey, Chuck Withey is going
to write an article for the Township Newsletter explaining what the regional
authority is.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
John Kane Building Permit and Site Plan- Mr. Kane provided pictures to the
Township Board of possible model homes that could go on the site. Mr. Kane's
attorney stated that they believe they are in compliance with the Special Land
Use Permit. All of the models are the same size and can use the same
foundation. Planning Coordinator Martin stated that wording needed to be added
to the original Site Plan Approval to allow for repeated use of the site for
model homes. Current wording states that the home had to be removed after three
years (which it was), but did not state any provisions for replacing it with
another model. Need to be specific in the motion so that it is clear to all
parties that what is on the site at any given time, model home or fencing, is
what is allowed. Mr. Kane would like to replace the models at least every three
years in perpetuity. Building Inspector Aven suggested that a Building Permit
be issued immediately to remove the current hazard that currently exists on the
site, with the stipulation that a recommendation be provided to the Board at
the August 2nd meeting for what is going to happen in the future. Clerk Graham
moved and Trustee Wiegandt supported to allow the Building Inspector to issue a
Building Permit subject to a proposed addendum to the Site Plan being agreed to
and adopted by the Board at the August meeting. Building Inspector Aven,
Planning Coordinator Martin, Mr. Kane and his attorney will meet to work out a
proposal for the Board’s consideration. Motion approved unanimously.
Ingham County Road Commission
Moved by Supervisor Obst and supported by Trustee Wiegandt to sign the
agreement for the 1999 Road Improvements; Newman Road along with 195 feet of
Quarton Rd that is part of Pebblebrook 5, and Milton Road, for a total
expenditure of $27,300 and $24,800 respectively, totaling $52,100. The Township
is also requesting a carry over of any unused ICRC Matching Funds to the year
2000. Motion approved unanimously.
Complaints
Barry Road - Car and brush pile are being addressed. The old farm equipment
will not be addressed. As stated by Trustee Wiegandt - you can’t condemn farm
machinery in the front yard and promote yourself as a rural Township at the
same time. If the Township goes after this property owner for old farm
equipment in the yard, then they would have to go after every other property
owner in the Township who has old farm equipment in the yard.
423 Grand River - being cleaned up somewhat. Still looks junky. Working on cars
at 2:30 A.M. Have alternative of the appearance ticket rather than taking him
to court.
Shoeman Road has been cleaned up.
Zimmer And Grand River - Spagnuolo Property. Selling of cars on the property.
Need to determine if the owners are authorizing this use of the property.
4100 Thatcher Road - Unsafe area. The Constable almost fell in the hole in the
back of the house himself. Needs to be fenced. Township will send a letter to
the owner stating the immediate danger that needs to be addressed.
Legal Representation - Supervisor Obst
Interviewed many attorneys. Decided to recommend Vincent Spagnuolo. He was the
one attorney interviewed that no one on the committee could find any complaints
with. He is currently general council for Delta Township. Recommendations from
other clients is that he is good on giving you the why you should or shouldn't
go down a particular path. Will have first review in six months. Up to the
Township on whether or not he comes to the meetings. Charges $135 per hour.
Generally agreed on a six months trial basis to go with Vincent Spagnuolo as
the Township’s general council.
NEW BUSINESS
Donated Park Funds - Supervisor Obst
Need to set up a separate accounting for donations to the park. Generally
agreed that the books need to be kept so that it is clear where funds that are
donated for park development are spent. Unnecessary to set up a separate
physical bank account to track these funds.
Hilty 425 Proposal - Supervisor Obst faxed a proposal to Hilty. Discussion
followed. Decided that once the Township has agreed with a property owner as to
the terms of a possible 425 agreement, it is the Township that should take the
proposal to the City of Williamston; not the property owner.
Bond Annexation Request - island property owners total less than 100 people, so
they could be subject to annexation without a vote. The Township will notify
the island residents of the Boundary Commission hearing regarding the Bond
annexation request.
August Newsletter - Christine Nilsson
Monday July 19th is the deadline for submitting articles to be included in the
August Township Newsletter.
FOI Request from Jeff Bartrem - 1500 Grand River
Mr. Bartrem has requested all electrical, mechanical, plumbing and building
permits, plans, inspection record, and plan review. Building Inspector Aven has
most of the records that are available to the township. The electrical,
mechanical and plumbing permits are at the State.
Bid Proposal From Sommerfield Landscaping - Clean up and removal of everything
around the outside, including weed barrier and woodchips. Grading and top soil
brought in and distributed as needed. Sod the lawn. Salvage some of the bushes
and remove others. Install irrigation system. $10,400. If accepted can start
late in July. Put down spouts down, cutting the cement and getting the water
away from the building and onto the parking lot. Mike Groh on Beeman Road
indicated he could remove the tree at no cost. Can then have the stump ground
down. Need to raise the cleanouts on the septic tanks. total of near $11,000.
No new plants in this proposal. Relocating some existing plants and trimming
and removing others. Need to check with the lawn care company that we currently
employ to determine how much it would cost to add maintenance of this lawn to
their contract.
McKenna Associates Contract - Planning Consultants - Mickey Martin
No complaints with the contract. Trustee Wiegandt asked Planning Coordinator
Martin if she was satisfied with their work. Ms. Martin stated that she is very
satisfied with their work and availability. This contract includes a 10% cost
increase over last year’s contract. Last year’s contract did not have an
increase over the previous year. Trustee Wiegandt moved and Trustee Zaban
supported to approve the contract for planning services with McKenna
Associates, Inc. Motion approved unanimously.
Proposed Escrow Fee - Mickey Martin
Planning Coordinator Martin is proposing adding a $1,500 escrow fee for
commercial rezonings to the Township’s fee schedule. Moved by Trustee Zaban,
supported by Clerk Graham to add the $1,500 escrow fee for Commercial Rezonings
to the fee schedule. Motion approved unanimously.
CONSENT AGENDA
Modification to the minutes. At the end of the second line under Legal
Representation on Page One - change from “his replacement” to “a possible
replacement”. Under Landscape Plan on Page One, second line, first paragraph,
change “trim plates” to “tread plates”. Trustee Zaban moved and Clerk Graham
supported to approve the Consent Agenda, approving the minutes of the June 1,
1999 Regular Board Meeting as amended; acknowledging the Treasurer’s report of
financial activity for June 1999; approving the Clerk’s list of accounts to be
paid June 29, 1999 - Check #s 9636-9695 for a total of $41,855.01; and
accepting and placing on file the following reports - NIESA minutes of June 3,
1999, Building Department Activities for June 1999, Assessor’s Report/Updates
of June 28, 1999, and Board of Appeals minutes of June 9, 1999. Roll Call Vote.
   Ayes:   Trustee Wiegandt, Trustee Zaban, Treasurer Nilsson, Clerk Graham,
Supervisor Obst
   Nays:   None.
Clerk Graham moved and Trustee Wiegandt supported to adjourn. Motion passed.
Meeting Adjourned 9:58 PM.
__________________________________      ____________________________________
Shirley Graham, Township Clerk            Susan Jennings, Recording Secretary
AUGUST 2, 1999
The regular meeting of the Township Board of Trustees was called to order at 7:
33 PM. Deputy Clerk DuBreuil was asked to record who was present and recorded
the following: Supervisor Obst, Treasurer Nilsson, Trustee Wiegandt, Trustee
Zaban, Building Inspector Aven and Attorney Spagnuolo. Clerk Graham was absent.
The agenda was read over, there were no additions.
PUBLIC COMMENTS AND QUESTIONS
Pat Callihan - Meals on Wheels Tri County Project Coordinator Williamstown
Township
Currently delivering to 16 people in the Williamston area and serving around 60
at the dining site. Reimburse volunteers at a rate of 25 cents a mile. Drivers
typically drive 45 miles a day. Average client receives 138 meals a year. Cost
$4.15 per delivered meal. Cost at dining site is $2.25 each. Ask for a donation
from the client of $2.00 for the hot/frozen meal and $1.00 for the sack lunch.
No one is refused a meal if they cannot pay. The Township’s requested
contribution of $1,250 was determined by a list of the Townships and the number
of people served. 0-10 clients was $500. Average between 50-100 clients in this
Township puts the Township in the $1,250 bracket. Reason for the request is
this year’s County budget and the cost of the food has gone up. The Board was
not clear on how the numbers were reached. They would like to get some
additional information from Jim Allen, director of Meals on Wheels, before
deciding how much to contribute. The Board generally agreed that they find the
program very beneficial and they will decide on a contribution at the next
meeting after talking to Mr. Allen.
QUESTIONS OF THE ATTORNEY - Vincent P. Spagnuolo, of Murphy, Brenton &
Spagnuolo, P.C.
Attorney Spagnuolo also represents CATA, East Lansing Meridian Sewer and Water
Authority, Delta Township, and the Ingham County Library Authority. He does not
believe it is always the best use of his time and the client’s money to have
the attorney at the Township meetings. He sees potential problems with
attorney/client privilege issues by speaking at the public meetings and views
“shooting from the hip” answers to public questions as being close to mal-
practice. Delta Township has him come to specific board sessions where he has
worked on a project. They pick and choose when he comes to maximize the value
for his services. He has represented Delta for over 20 years and two of the
other three for over 11 years. Supervisor Obst asked about the potential for
issues coming up at meetings where the Board may not even realize they should
consult the attorney. One way to keep him updated is to have him review the
agenda packet prior to the meeting, and then review the minutes afterwards.
Attorney Spagnuolo questioned who is authorized to contact him? The Supervisor
or the Clerk have access to the attorney. Anyone else with issues clears it
through one of those two people. Planning chair has access after clearing it
through the Supervisor.
The Boundary Commission approved the legal sufficiency for the Bond property
annexation request, and turned down the USA Plastics property annexation
request. The Attorney for the City of Williamston requested the island
properties be included in the annexation as well. The island property owners
held a meeting with a representative from Big Rapids Township. Big Rapids
Township was successful in a detachment bid against the City of Big Rapids.
Attorney Bill Fahey represented the Township in their detachment bid. There was
general agreement to hire Mr. Fahey if detachment goes forward.
Engineering and legal fees in a detachment proceeding can be paid by the
Township. Attorney left at 8:42.
PLANNING COMMISSION - Mickey Martin
Fred Foote’s Property at 5820 Shoeman Road - Proposed Pond
Mr. Chuck Hoffman of J&H Pondscapes, Inc., representing Mr. Fred Foote, was in
attendance requesting Site Plan Approval for a proposed pond on the Foote’s
property. Planning Commission recommending approval. Trustee Wiegandt moved and
Trustee Zaban supported, per the Planning Commission’s recommendation, to
approve the Site Plan of a proposed pond on the Foote property at 5820 Shoeman
Rd. Motion passed 4-0.
John Kane’s Property at 2346 E. Grand River Rd. - Site Plan Modification
Trustee Wiegandt moved and Treasurer Nilsson supported to approve the attached,
signed, proposed Site Plan Modification for 2346 E. Grand River Rd. Motion
passed 4-0.
Zoning Signs
The Zoning Board of Appeals has requested that all properties scheduled to come
before them be posted so that members can easily determine the properties they
are considering when driving by. Trustee Wiegandt moved to make it a Zoning
Ordinance application procedure requirement that the signs be posted by the
applicant on the property in question before a public hearing can be called,
and that they remain posted while the issue is pending. The signs are to be
sent home with the applicant at time of application. The motion was supported
by Treasurer Nilsson. Motion approved 4-0.
660 E. Grand River Rd - Mr. Gary Helfmann
A sign was seen on the property stating that there was mini storage for rent.
Units appeared to be rented out, all with different locks on them. No occupancy
permit has been issued and will not until the principal building occupancy
permit has been issued. Mr. Helfmann is in violation of the Zoning Ordinance if
he is conducting business on the property without an occupancy permit. A sign
company wanted a building permit for a sign. This also cannot be issued until
the main building is built. Mr. Helfmann’s attorney asked for an extension
until August 3 to address the situation.
PARK AND RECREATION COMMITTEE - Chris Nilsson
Suggestion from Dick Williams to have a ‘Fall Thing’ at the park. Will choose
an October Saturday. Postcards will be sent to Township residents. There will
be hay rides and wagon rides. There are a couple of bids out for road design
work. Trustee Wiegandt stated that he didn't think a gate was necessary. He has
only picked up two bottles out there. He has seen a lot of people using the
park, but no one abusing it. It is his opinion to hold off on spending money on
a gate.
OLD BUSINESS
Appointment of the Township’s N.I.E.S.A. Representative
Trustee Wiegandt moved and Treasurer Nilsson supported to approve the
appointment of Darrell Brown to serve on the N.I.E.S.A Governing Board for 4
years, retroactive to June 30, 1999. Motion approved 4-0.
Meeting with the Mayor of Williamston
Supervisor Obst will meet with Mayor DeForest of Williamston at 7:00 on
Thursday, August 5, 1999 to discuss Transfer of the property at 1500 E. Grand
River Rd., the Hilty property, and other concerns of mutual interest to the
Township and City.
CONSENT AGENDA
Treasurer Nilsson moved, and Trustee Zaban supported to approve the Consent
Agenda, approving the minutes of the June 29, 1999 Regular Board Meeting;
acknowledging the Treasurer’s report of financial activity for July 1999;
approving the Deputy Clerk’s list of accounts to be paid August 2, 1999 - Check
#s 9696-9753 for a total of $29,934.38; and accepting and placing on file the
following reports - NIESA minutes of July 1, 1999 and July 8, 1999 information
packet; Building Department Activities for July 1999; Assessor’s Report and
Updates as of July 13, 1999; and the Board of Appeals Minutes of July 13, 1999.
Roll Call Vote.
   Ayes:      Trustee Wiegandt, Trustee Zaban, Treasurer Nilsson, Supervisor
Obst
   Nays:      None
Treasurer Nilsson moved and Trustee Zaban supported to adjourn. Motion passed.
Meeting Adjourned 9:48 PM
______________________________________    ____________________________________
Florence DuBreuil, Deputy Clerk            Susan Jennings, Recording Secretary
SEPTEMBER 7, 1999
The regular meeting of the Township Board of Trustees was called to order at 7:
37 PM. Clerk Graham was asked to record who was present and recorded the
following: Supervisor Obst, Clerk Graham, Treasurer Nilsson, Trustee Wiegandt,
Trustee Zaban, and Building Inspector Aven.
The agenda was read over. There were no additions.
JIM ALLEN - MEALS ON WHEELS, DIRECTOR
They are predicting a $30,000 deficit for the Tri County Council on the Aging
for the next fiscal year. To determine each municipality’s share, they looked
at the need and divided it out by the number of clients served in a particular
township or city: 0-10 clients $500; 11-30 $750; 31-50 $1,000; 51-100 $1,250.
Williamstown Township served 60 people. They do not see service decreasing in
the foreseeable future. They do keep records detailing exactly where clients
live in relation to City/Township boundaries. They plan on requesting to be put
on the budget as an annual item. Federal grants cover administrative overhead.
State Grants cover some, also some from clients themselves. The cut backs in
USDA reimbursement along with increased clientele, have both contributed to the
current shortfall. Motion made by Trustee Wiegandt, Supported by Treasurer
Nilsson to approve the requested $1,250 for Meals-On-Wheels services in the
Williamstown Township community for the year 2000. Motion approved unanimously.
CHARLES WITHEY - RED CEDAR RECREATION
They are looking for additional ball and soccer fields. They primarily use the
school fields, but they have also used some church fields. They are looking to
expand the development and improvement of fields. Their current emphasis is on
maintaining current fields, rather than actually developing new fields. They
don't have the funds to build new fields. They anticipate the increase taking
effect with the fall 1999 billing. Will send out a summary letter indicating
number of children from each entity. Supervisor Obst asked if there would be a
report on what the extra money was spent for? There is not a separate category
for the extra funds. It will be brought in as a general fund item. Treasurer
Nilsson stated that the Township would appreciate a report on how the money was
spent for the year. Mr. Withey stated that they are in the process of changing
directors, and consequently, budgets. Will forward reports as they become
available. Treasurer Nilsson moved, and Trustee Wiegandt supported to approve
the increase in contributions to Red Cedar Recreation Association to $10.00 per
child per program, billed three times per year, beginning with the fall 1999
billing. Discussion followed as to what the impact on the budget would be. The
increase would be approximately $3,000 per fiscal year. The fall and winter
billings would include the increase for the 1999/2000 fiscal year. Motion
approved unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENTS AND QUESTIONS - None
PLANNING COMMISSION - Mickey Martin
2 action items - Larkin Countryside Acres and Planning Commission appointments.
Larkin Countryside Acres
The Planning Commission recommends granting Tentative Preliminary Plat Approval
with the following conditions:
1.   The sequence of development with respect to the proposed lot splits and
recording of the road right-of-way and construction of the road to achieve
compliance with access requirements of the Land Division Ordinance and
Subdivision Control Ordinance shall be worked out with assistance of the
Township Attorney.
2.   A T-turnaround shall be provided on lot 3 if Twin Ponds Lane is not
extended to provide a cul-de-sac at the end, subject to Road Commission
approval.
3.   Drainage issues as discussed shall be worked out with Drain Commissioner
and adjoining property owner, and issues regarding responsibility of drainage
basins and the legal means by which such responsibility would be assigned shall
be resolved, taking into consideration that certain basins will not be within
the boundaries of the plat.
4.   Submittal requirements specified in item 7 of the McKenna Associates’ July
30, 1999 letter must be complied with.
5.   Approval shall be subject to approval by agencies having jurisdiction,
including but not limited to the Drain Commission, Michigan Department of
Environmental Quality and the Health Department.
There is currently no public access to Meridian Road. The project needs to be
done with both land divisions and a plat. Cannot approve the land divisions
because of no road access. Not asking for final plat approval until after the
road is built. Looking for tentative preliminary and preliminary plat approval
before road construction. Originally asking to put only half the road in the
plat in the first part of the plat. Other half will be dedicated to land
divisions. Entire road easement will be dedicated to the Road Commission.
Supervisor Obst read the part of the Ordinance that stated that half roads
shall be prohibited. Several alternatives were read from the Planning
Consultant’s letter. Decided to include the entire road that goes in front of
the platted part of the development into the plat, instead of splitting it
between the plat and land divisions. Difficult development because part of it
is platted and part of it is land divisions. Will not take the plat all the way
out to Meridian Road. Trustee Wiegandt moved and Clerk Graham supported to
approve the Planning Commission’s recommendation to approve the Tentative
Preliminary Plat for Larkin Countryside Acres, with all the conditions as
stated above and with the half road issue being corrected. Motion passed
unanimously.
Planning Commission Appointments -
Nancy Fink, Gerald Eidt and Harold Powell’s positions are all up for re-
appointment. All three wish to remain and no one new has said that they want to
be on the Commission. These are all three year terms. Trustee Wiegandt moved,
Treasurer Nilsson supported to re-appoint Nancy Fink, Gerald Eidt and Harold
Powell to three year terms on the Planning Commission, effective September 1999
- September 2002. Motion approved unanimously.
PARK AND RECREATION COMMITTEE - Chris Nilsson
Trustee Wiegandt stated that the park seems to be self policed. Trash is being
picked up for the most part, and there hasn’t been any unruly behavior
reported. He sees no need for heavy patrol or gating at this time.
TRANSPORTATION COMMITTEE - Brian Jennings
Brian Jennings submitted a letter for the Board’s information updating the
situation at Grand River and Zimmer. Accidents at the intersection are up, but
it is unclear at this time if the increase is due to increased traffic or to
the construction that was taking place around the intersection. MDOT will do
another traffic study if the accident rate remains at its elevated level for
another six months. MDOT plans on repairing this section of M-43 in 2001.
UNIFINISHED BUSINESS
Helfmann Violation - Seven units still have locks on them. This is down from
the original 15. There has been no recent construction activity. A letter will
need to be sent to Mr. Helfmann regarding the units allegedly in use.
425/108 Discussions - meeting scheduled for Wednesday, September 8th with the
City’s Attorney, the Mayor of Williamston, the Township’s Attorney and
Supervisor Obst. The City has reapplied for annexation of the municipal
building, and the Demmer property. The legal descriptions were incorrect in the
original annexation applications for both properties. The State Boundary
Commission will meet on September 9th at 1:30 PM. They are ruling on three
sufficiency of petitions regarding annexation requests of the City of
Williamston against the Township of Williamstown and one Findings of Fact. The
State Boundary Commission will be holding a Public Hearing at 4:00 at the
Williamstown Township Hall on September 22nd. The Township is still trying to
reach agreements with the City. A citizen organization, the Township
Association for Preservation (TAP), is investigating detachment at the same
time due to the track record with agreements and the City.
NEW BUSINESS
NIESA - motion to amend the articles of incorporation. Any future tax
abatements (e.g., CFTs and IFTs) would need to be reimbursed by the Township or
City to fully fund NIESA. Trustee Wiegandt moved and Treasurer Nilsson
supported to approve the attached first amendment of the Articles of
Incorporation of the Northeast Ingham Emergency Service Authority as submitted
by NIESA Attorney, Mark Adams. Supervisor Obst called for a Roll Call vote:
   Ayes:   Trustee Wiegandt, Trustee Zaban, Treasurer Nilsson, Clerk Graham,
Supervisor Obst
   Nays:   None.
Petition To Establish And Clean The Private Drain That Empties Into North
Branch Of The Foster Drain. - Mr. Templeton here to address the issue. A drain
runs into the Foster Drain from the north half of the George Hart property and
across the Sheets property, the Hawkins property, the Templeton’s and Dr.
Jakubiak's property. The drain is not currently functioning. They are
petitioning to make the drain become part of the Ingham County drain system. If
it becomes a County drain, only the properties serviced by the drain would pay
the assessments for it. The Drain Commission would need to hold a Board of
Determination before any final decisions would be made. The Township is being
asked to get the process started. Clerk Graham moved and Trustee Wiegandt
supported to adopt the petition for the establishment and cleaning of the drain
that empties into the North Branch of the Foster Drain and forward it to the
Ingham County Drain Commission. Motion passed unanimously.
Township Hall Rental Form - Need to hold off on the form and investigate the
Township's liability insurance. Generally agreed to make the other changes
except for item six which will be addressed with the insurance carrier.
Pay Phone - Beginning Aug. 1 rent on the pay phone at the Township Hall will
raise to $64 per month. Discussion followed about whether or not to keep the
phone. Other options will be investigated, along with the change in insurance
costs for the Township if the phone is removed. Mickey Martin asked that
getting voice mail for the Township Office be investigated.
Open Burning - All Open Burning requires a permit, including bon fires. Will
put another article in the November newsletter.
Building Permits - Walt Aven
Building department is very active.
Ingham Intermediate School District Revenue Sources - Y2K Compliance - Clerk
Graham will forward the information to the Ingham Intermediate School District
that was compiled for the Okemos School District last year. She will also send
the information to the other school districts that have students in the
Township.
CONSENT AGENDA
Supervisor Obst moved and Treasurer Nilsson supported to approve the Consent
Agenda, approving the minutes of the August 2, 1999 Regular Board Meeting;
acknowledging the Treasurer’s report of financial activities for August 1999;
approving the Clerk’s list of accounts to be paid September 7, 1999 - Check #s
9754-9809 for a total of $31,083.95; and accepting and placing on file the
following reports - NIESA minutes of August 5, 1999, Building Department
Activities of August 1999, and the Assessor’s report/Updates of August 23,
1999. Supervisor Obst called for a roll call vote.
   Ayes:   Trustee Wiegandt, Trustee Zaban, Treasurer Nilsson, Clerk Graham,
Supervisor Obst
   Nays:    None.
Clerk Graham Moved and Trustee Wiegandt supported to adjourn.
Meeting Adjourned at 9:41 PM.
____________________________________    ____________________________________
Shirley Graham, Clerk               Susan Jennings, Recording Secretary
OCTOBER 5, 1999
The regular meeting of the Williamstown Township Board of Trustees was called
to order at 7:34 PM. Clerk Graham was asked to record who was present and
recorded the following: Supervisor Obst, Clerk Graham, Treasurer Nilsson,
Trustee Wiegandt, Trustee Zaban and Building Inspector Aven.
The agenda was read over with the following additions: Midwest Homes; Secretary
gone for 2 weeks for medical leave.
Public Comments/Questions - None
PLANNING COMMISSION - Mickey Martin
Pines Office Park - Requesting a one year extension on their Site Plan.
Planning Commission recommends the extension. The area has not changed, nor has
the plan. Trustee Wiegandt moved and Clerk Graham supported to approve the
Planning Commission’s recommendation for a one year Site Plan approval
extension with the previous conditions. Motion passed unanimously.
Perkins Property On Vanneter Road Rezoning From RR To R-1-S. R1-S provides for
Rose clustering option. The Planning Commission recommends approval of the
rezoning. Request meets the statements of fact for a rezoning request. They are
asking for, but it is not required to have, sewer capacity for R-1-S. Carl
McIntosh, engineer working for Mr. Perkins, is requesting the rezoning. He
stated that all public comments were favorable for the rezoning. Drainage has
been addressed and should not be a concern. Diversity issue - comment made to
vote against because we need diversity in a particular area. Mr. McIntosh
believes that layering is more desirable. Planning Commission was not made
aware that there was a County Drain established, as indicated by Mr. McIntosh.
There has been a petition for one, but it has not been established yet. Drain
Commission gave the impression that it was going to be established and that it
has been named. Hearing of necessity was held at the Township Hall two years
ago and it was determined at that time that it should be created. The drain was
created at personal expense to the property owner. Other developments wanting
to use the drain is why it is becoming a County Drain. Trustee Wiegandt moved
and Clerk Graham supported approving the Planning Commission’s recommendation
for the rezoning of 34.4 acres of Mr. Perkins’ property on Vanneter Road from
RR to R-1-S. Motion passed unanimously.
Woodview Subdivision - Stop signs are in place. Yield signs still need to be
posted. Planning Chair Martin wanted to thank Brian Jennings and the rest of
the Transportation committee for their help in getting the Stop and Yield signs
put up in the Woodview Subdivision. Mr. Jennings has an excellent working
relationship with the Ingham County Road Commission and knows who to contact to
get things done. Made the job of getting the signs very easy. Thanks to Brian
for his work.
Pine Hill Development - Another hearing will be held later this month regarding
this proposed development.
Master Plan Revision - The Planning Commission and Advisory Council are looking
at the Master Plan. McKenna and Associates has submitted a bid proposal based
on an hourly rate. There are several things the Township can do to bring down
the final cost, such as traffic counts and land use. Current Master Plan was
adopted in 1992. Looking at a 6 month time frame to revise the Plan. The 2000
census initial information should be available within the time frame and will
be incorporated if at all possible. Supervisor Obst would recommend going ahead
with the McKenna proposal. Trustee Wiegandt agreed. Trustee Wiegandt moved to
authorize Supervisor Obst signing the proposal, supported by Treasurer Nilsson.
Motion passed unanimously. Planning Chair Martin stated that they are looking
at digitizing the zoning map. Tri- County may already have done this, if not,
McKenna can do it for about $1500. Mrs. Martin is researching other options.
Supervisor Obst, Clerk Graham and Treasurer Nilsson are authorized by the Board
to make the decision when the proposals are available for digitizing the zoning
map.
Helfmann Property - Trustee Wiegandt asked about progress at the site.
Currently there is no indication of anything new being done at the site.
ADVISORY COUNCIL - Rud Hoag
Jim Ballard resigned as Chair of the Intergovernmental Affairs Committee. The
Advisory Council is looking for someone who would be active in the position.
Will put a notice in the Newsletter. Chairs of the various committees are
looking at their portion of the Master Plan. Mr. Hoag requested posting of a
time line for completion of tasks regarding the Master Plan. The Transportation
Committee is still working on the special assessments for road improvements.
Park Committee - Chris Nilsson
Color Tour on the 9th. Asked for and received extension on the temporary access
permit to the park for another year from MDOT. Have received bids from two
different companies for designing and engineering a permanent access to be
considered at the next committee meeting. Want to continue with more awareness
of the park. Will have one day per season where the committee will be at the
park for a couple of hours. Will begin work this winter on ordinances. Question
on Park usage - need to consider a policy for requests to use the park.
Supervisor Obst stated that Williamston Mayor DeForest is interested in having
a walkway go from the city out to the park. The Park Ordinance will go through
the regular process of review by the Planning Commission, and public hearings
before being submitted for approval to the Township Board.
Notice of MDOT meeting October 13th 1:00 PM at the Township Hall. Concerns
Grand River in the City of Williamston as well as out to Zimmer Road. Trustee
Zaban asked that the opportunity be taken to once again communicate concerns
about the speed limit on Mitchell Road to the appropriate authorities.
UNIFINISHED BUSINESS
Hideaway Woods Sewer Request - Carl McIntosh
They requested 55 sewer connections in 1995. At that time they were lead to
believe the sewer capacity was available. in 1996 they were again assured that
the capacity did exist and the zoning of R1 should not be denied on that basis.
They prepared construction plans for sewer but neither the City of Williamston
nor the Township would look at them at that time. After that the Township filed
a lawsuit against the City. Mr. McIntosh and Mr. Perkins considered drawing up
their own lawsuit. Instead, they joined in the lawsuit with the Township
against the City. This process took the better part of two years. Mr. Perkins
spent between $15,000 and $20,000 of his own money in this lawsuit. They need
to have the sewer connections guaranteed to them. Mr. McIntosh stated that he
was told the issue should be resolved at the court date in July. It was two
months later before a signed agreement was reached between the City and the
Township. The Boundary Commission issue is coming up. Again, parties agreed to
a delay of the hearing. Mr. McIntosh believes that he was again mislead and is
convinced that no other outside decisions will be made that will make the
decision to grant or deny them the 55 sewer connections any easier. Of the 100
connections that were negotiated, 15 are already gone. No one else has been
involved in this issue since 1995, spent their own money and time and received
the assurances that they have. Mr. McIntosh stated that it is time for the
Board to make the decision and allocate the 55 connections that have been
promised. Believe they are first in line since 1995 and request that the board
take action and allocate the connections now that the zoning has been approved.
Supervisor Obst stated that the Township never made a commitment to supply
sewer service to the development. He wrote a letter to Mr. McIntosh that stated
if they go ahead with the rezoning request it would be at your own risk. The
Township received a letter from June Stovers representative that they would
like all the capacity. The established deadline for a City agreement is October
22nd. Supervisor Obst recommends the board commit to making a decision at the
next board meeting. Will know at that time if the detachment is going to go
forward. He believes there is a reasonable chance that the Township is going to
reach an agreement with the City. Mr. Obst also questioned the 55 connections
as being the number requested. Is there a number less than 55 that would still
be feasible? Mr. McIntosh stated that two different conceptual layouts of the
property have 55 lots them. Some of the lots are in R1, some in R1S with a
density option, and the remaining lots in tonight’s rezoning. Neither the City
nor the Township has been willing to review the engineering plans for them to
be able to determine how many lots would be required to make the pumping
station economically feasible. None of the City's engineers have reviewed the
plans. They are changing their standards all the time. No way to know what they
will settle on and how they will affect the plans. Someone needs to determine
who reviews the plans - Township or City - in order for Mr. McIntosh to get a
cost estimate. Mr. McIntosh stated that it has been 4.5 years. They have done
everything asked of them to further this along. They need a decision ASAP.
Treasurer Nilsson agrees they've been caught in the middle. The Township never
intended to deceive anybody. This has been a difficult situation all around.
Supervisor Obst stated that he thought he had assured Mr. McIntosh that there
was never any intent to deceive, there were miscommunications that happened.
Mr. McIntosh accepted that. Trustee Zaban stated that the Township only got out
of the lawsuit what was in the original agreement to begin with. The Board are
all as frustrated as Mr. McIntosh. Mr. Charlie Perkins stated that he wants it
to be over with. He wants to be out of town by November 1st for the winter.
Supervisor Obst stated the Board will make every attempt to make a decision
before November 1st.
Pay Phone - Shirley Graham
Canceled the pay phone. Can have a regular phone put in with *69 and toll call
restrictions. Charge will be $29.76 per month. This is $10 less than what the
pay phone was originally. The old phone will come out the 12th, the new one
will go in the 13th. The Township Hall does need to have a phone available for
public use when the hall is rented out for liability reasons. This phone will
be in addition to the office phone lines. It will not ring in the office.
Boundary Commission - meetings have been delayed
Hall Rental Update
The Board needs to decide if they want to follow the Township Attorney’s
recommendation to ask hall renters to put a $1,000,000 rider on their
homeowners insurance. Treasurer Nilsson doesn't think requiring hall renters to
purchase insurance is necessary. The Township’s Insurance Agent said if the
Township goes ahead with the Attorney’s reccommendation, the Township should
require the renters to purchase a $1,000,000 rider for their home owners
insurance. Mickey Martin stated it was unreasonable to request the hall renters
renters to purchase this type of insurance. Sue Jennings agreed. The Township
has $3,000,000 coverage of their own. Supervisor Obst will go back to Attorney
Spagnuolo to see why he thinks this is necessary. The Board will defer making
the decision. Clerk Graham and Treasurer Nilsson think the idea for the
insurance rider sounds ludicrous.
Helfmann Property
Locks were still on some of the storage units a week ago. A barrier of flags
across the driveway went up in the past couple of days. Supervisor Obst will
send him a certified letter. Mr. Helfmann has indicated that some units were
rented out, some were for his church, and some were for personal use. They are
being illegally occupied is the bottom line. He had an original date to comply
of August 1. It is now October and he has not complied. The Board agreed to
give Mr. Helfmann one more chance to comply before taking him to court over the
issue.
NEW BUSINESS
City Municipal Building - They have temporary occupancy for the office building
pending compliance with all state codes including the barrier free code. State
never received their application nor the fee of $200. Waiting to see what
happens when the state receives the check. State has option to tell them that
they don't need the elevator, need to do it in 5 years or need to do it now.
Have filled out the paper work, but they have not sent in the application or
the fee. Was on the form that they need to send in the $200, but they have
communicated to Building Inspector Aven that they have had negative funds and
have not been able to write the check. Building Inspector Aven will check with
the State again in two weeks.
Williamston Schools Pool Update - Pool has operated at a $130,000 loss.
November Newsletter Reminder - Planning Chair Martin wants to plug the Master
Plan Review. Advisory Council Chair Hoag was asked to write a few words about
the Advisory Council and request for a volunteer to chair the Intergovernmental
Affairs Committee.
Midwest Homes - Lou Curilick, president of Midwest Homes, 3424 Corwin Road, is
a residential builder in the state. They share offices with Midwest Bridge.
They are requesting certification that they are doing business in a suitable
location in order to join The Greater Lansing Association of Realtors. Clerk
Graham moved to authorize signing the form, Treasurer Nilsson supported.
Discussion followed to determine if they were a legitimate business type for
the Light Industrial Zone. It was determined that they are. Motion passed
unanimously. Building Inspector Aven filled out and signed the required form.
Secretarial Medical Leave Of Absence
The Township secretary will be out of the office from November 8th through 19th
for surgery. The Board agreed to compensate the secretary during this time. The
Board also determined that since the Township currently only has one full time
employee, such requests will be entertained on a one by one basis and that
there is not a need at this time to adopt a formal policy.
Sewer Rate Fees
Question on whether the Township will continue to charge the $1,000 connection
fee. The Township will honor the current building permit without the $1000 fee
at this time. Clerk Graham will look at the numbers to determine if a
connection fee would still be required, and if so, what the connection fee
should be.
PUBLIC COMMENTS/QUESTIONS
Deb Apostol has observed that lot 18 in the Steeple Chase Subdivision has clear
cut to the river on the bend. They will end up having the river in their yard.
The lot owner does not own to the river. There is a Subdivision Association
Right of Way along the river. The Township will follow up. The property owner
is in violation of the Zoning Ordinance if they are cutting trees that are in
the association right of way.
CONSENT AGENDA
Mickey Martin stated that she had been asked what the Williamston Firefighters
Association was that the Safety Street money was being donated to. Trustee
Wiegandt, an Association member, stated that the Association is a community
service organization. They do things like sponsor the fire safety weeks at the
schools, buy some of the equipment for the fire department, and donate to the
Williamston Area Food Bank. Clerk Graham moved and Trustee Wiegandt supported
to approve the Consent Agenda, approving the minutes of the September 7, 1999
Regular Township Board Meeting; acknowledging the Treasurer’s report of
financial activities for September 1999; approving the Clerk’s list of accounts
to be paid October 5, 1999 - Checks #9810-9862 for a total of $30,678.62; and
accepting and placing on file the following reports - NIESA Minutes of
September 2, 1999, Building Department Activities for September 1999,
Assessor’s Report/Updates of September 1999, and the Board of Appeals Minutes
of September 23, 1999. Supervisor Obst called for a roll call vote:
   Ayes:   Trustee Zaban, Treasurer Nilsson, Supervisor Obst, Clerk Graham,
Trustee Wiegandt
   Nays:   None.
Clerk Graham moved and Trustee Wiegandt supported to adjourn.
Meeting adjourned at 9:33 PM.
_________________________________         ____________________________________
Shirley Graham, Clerk               Susan Jennings, Recording Secretary
NOVEMBER 2, 1999
The regular meeting of the Williamstown Township Board of Trustees was called
to order at 7:37 PM. Clerk Graham was asked to record who was present and
recorded the following: Supervisor Obst, Clerk Graham, Treasurer Nilsson,
Trustee Wiegandt, Trustee Zaban, Township Attorney Spagnuolo, and Building
Inspector Aven.
The agenda was read over with the following additions: Consider written legal
opinion of counsel, Community Ed - building usage.
PUBLIC COMMENTS AND QUESTIONS
Representing Forsberg - Pinehill partnership - Equestrian Estates. Asking for
44 sewer taps. Asking the Township to table the Perkins request for 55 until
they have a chance to consider the Zimmer Road project. Lots will be 20,000 to
30,000 sq. ft with walking trails, ponds and soccer field proposed.
Jim Creighton - wanted to clarify that the Equestrian Estates project was still
before the Planning Commission under consideration for rezoning. Supervisor
Obst stated that they are asking to reserve the sewer request until such time
as the project may be approved. Approval has not yet occurred.
PLANNING COMMISSION
Larkin Country Side Acres - Requesting Final Preliminary Plat Approval.
Township Attorney Spagnuolo recommended the following for Article XXIII -
Governmental Regulations:
All lots within Larkin Countryside Acres are subject to applicable ordinances,
laws, statutes, and regulations of Williamstown Township, and other applicable
governmental agencies. These restrictions may be more restrictive than the
applicable ordinances, laws, statutes, and regulations of Williamstown Township
and other applicable governmental agencies. These restrictions are to be
enforced by Declarant as private covenants, conditions, restrictions, easements
and reservations upon all lands within Larkin Countryside Acres. These
restrictions run with the land and apply to all present and future owners and
occupants of such lands. However, no restrictions contained herein may vary or
alter the minimum requirements of any applicable ordinances, laws, statutes,
and regulations of Williamstown Township and other applicable governmental
agencies.
Will include above statement from Attorney Spagnuolo and Article VII Paragraph
4 will be changed from Cinder Block, a construction material no longer in use,
to Concrete Block. All five conditions of the Planning Commission have been
met. The project will include 10 platted lots and 12 lots from land division.
Motion made by Clerk Graham, seconded by Trustee Wiegandt, to approve the
Planning Commission’s recommendation for Final Preliminary Plat approval for
Larkin Countryside Acres subject to final approval by state and county agencies
that have jurisdiction over any part of the project is required, including
approval of the road easements by the Ingham County Road Commission and drain
easements by the Ingham County Drain Commissioner; the condition of the
Planning Commission having been met to include the above wording in the
declaration and changing the wording in Article VII to Concrete Block from
Cinder Block. Motion passed unanimously.
Steeple Chase And Cutting Of The Trees - Trees will be replaced. The developer
is making a new brochure that deals with the conservation areas specifying what
can and cannot be done there and clearly defining who owns them.
MDOT is coming to speak at the Planning Commission meeting on the 16th
regarding the Grand River Road and Zimmer Road proposed upgrades.
Storm Water Phase 2 Program - Supervisor Obst received a letter from the City
of Lansing and Delta Township inviting them to an informal meeting regarding a
regional Storm Water Phase 2 program.
ADVISORY COUNCIL - no meeting
Park and Recreation Committee Meeting - Chris Nilsson
Will make a recommendation to the Advisory Council in November, and hopefully
to the Board in December, about hiring someone to do the permanent access road
into the park. Also working on an ordinance for the park so that law
enforcement will have the authority to question people who are at the park.
State Representative DeWeese - Update on what he has been doing since January.
The legislature has reduced personal income tax from 4.4% to 3.9% over 5 years.
They have begun the process of eliminating the Single Business Tax over 21
years. Even with the tax cuts, the State has been receiving record revenue.
Initiated scholarship for passing all 4 parts of the MEAP test. Expelling
violent students from the class room. Made prescription drugs more affordable
for Seniors. Health care coverage proposals for uninsured workers.
Representative DeWeese is heading a trade delegation to India. Amway, Domino’s,
Ford, and GM are all heavily involved in India. Explained some of the
challenges with redefining the Mobile Homes property tax laws. Working on local
zoning control for agricultural practices. Michigan Farm Bureau and MTA are
trying to hammer out a deal. Need to get the mega farms out of the deal. Meant
to just deal with family farms.
Transportation Committee Meeting - Brian Jennings
Nov. 10 meeting is an annual meeting that MDOT has at the Ingham County Road
Commission where they go over long range plans for the county. It is an
Informational meeting projecting out to 2005. October 13 meeting was open to
input regarding the Grand River Road and Zimmer Road intersection. Mr. Jennings
will attend the Planning Commission meeting and the next Board meeting and will
write up a proposal from there. Planning Commission and Advisory Council will
be presenting proposals to the Board.
UNIFINISHED BUSINESS
Township Hall Rental Update - Attorney Vincent Spagnuolo
Insurance that the Township carries may not cover all potential uses of the
hall. If policy covers it then don't need the renters to put the township on
their policy as another insured party. Insurance agent is of the opinion that
we should require the renter to put the coverage on their policy. Will wait
until we hear from the Insurance Agent.
Helfmann Violation - gated (some of the time). Still locks on some lockers.
Trustee Wiegandt stated the problem is the fact that he is non-compliant
without having the principal building in place. Has been made very clear that
the principal building needs to be built before he can have occupancy. Can file
complaint with circuit court. Supervisor Obst would prefer to send a certified
letter again informing him that he is in violation. Treasurer Nilsson thinks
that they should go ahead with the injunction right away. Have given him over 6
months to comply. Has said he would, but has not done so. Attorney Spagnuolo
will send a letter warning him that he has 10 days to comply or an injunction
will be filed against him.
423 E Grand River Complaint - Constable Dahlstrom is following up on the
situation.
Hideaway Woods Sewer Request - Carl McIntosh
Need to have a decision made. Cannot delay any longer. They need to know if
they will be working with sewer capacity or septic tanks. Asking the Board to
make a decision tonight. Realizes there is politics involved. Concrete evidence
that there is an agreement that there is sewer capacity available. Hoping to
receive the 55, but they need a decision one way or the other. Thought this was
going to be done by November 1st as indicated in last months minutes.
Supervisor Obst stated that the Township has been engaged in significant and
long efforts to reach an agreement with the City. There are other requests for
sewer taps on the board making demand greater than supply. Supervisor Obst
would like to explore the Township becoming involved in the cost of the lift
station and having a special assessment of the residents. Mr. McIntosh has
tried to explore this avenue over the past 2 years. Has heard the same thing.
Needs to know tonight if they can grant the sewer taps or not. Supervisor Obst
stated that the Township is not in a position to grant 55 taps tonight. It
would be irresponsible of the Township Board to designate these taps at this
time. Brian Jennings spoke in support of Mr. McIntosh’s position. Supervisor
Obst is attempting to see if there is something they can do with the developer.
Mr. McIntosh stated that Mr. Perkins has stated that he wants to keep all of
his property in the Township. He is not interested in a 425 agreement. Mr.
McIntosh would like to see a copy of the current proposed 425 agreement with
the City. Would like to see if it is as flexible as what Mr. Obst says it is.
Needs to know what provisions of a 425 Mr. Perkins could live under. Supervisor
Obst said discussions with the City would continue and invited Mr. McIntosh to
provide terms he would like to see in an agreement.
Sanitary Sewer Hookup Fee - Shirley Graham
Recommend that we cease collecting a sewer hookup fee. Treasurer Nilsson moved
and Trustee Wiegandt supported to approve the amendment of current Williamstown
Township Sanitary Sewer Hook-up fee collection to zero.
Certificate Of Occupancy For 1500 E Grand River Rd - Walt Aven
The City will send in another copy of the application to the State for barrier
free exception. Building Inspector Aven is meeting tomorrow at noon with the
City. Will ask for a copy of the check to go with the application.
NEW BUSINESS
NIESA resolution #7.
Charging for review of blue prints. Money goes back into NIESA general fund.
Webberville refused to add the NIESA funding back in with the abatements.
Upgrade Planning Commission Secretary's Work Station
Monitor comes up pink and fuchsia. Generally agreed to upgrade her machine as
necessary not to exceed unreasonable costs.
Community Education Horse Care Classes
The Board generally agreed to allow the use of the hall with no fee for these
classes.
Legal Opinion From Counsel
Clerk Graham moved to go into executive session to discuss the proposed 425
agreement with the City of Williamston. Supported by Treasurer Nilsson. Roll
call vote:
   Ayes:   Trustee Zaban, Treasurer Nilsson, Supervisor Obst, Clerk Graham,
Trustee Wiegandt
   Nays:   None.
The Township Board designated Planning Coordinator, Mickey Martin, to remain
for the closed session.
Public Comment Before Adjourning To Closed Session
Katy Lo had some comments regarding the T.A.P. kick off and the proposed
detachment from the City of Williamston. She stated that the momentum is there
and going. Supervisor Obst stated he hoped to reach a 425 agreement with the
City. Any 425 agreements that may be reached would be available for public
viewing prior to any public meetings being held for comment.
After a role call vote the Township Board proceeded to closed session for the
purpose of considering the written legal opinion of counsel in accordance with
Section 8(h) of the Open Meetings Act at 9:39 PM.
Closed session adjourned and the open session reconvened at 10:11 PM.
Returned Check From Resident Who Rented The Hall -Treasurer Nilsson
Claimed they mailed a money order which has not been received. Treasurer
Nilsson will send the party a letter stating that they have two weeks to pay
the rental, or the fee, along with collection fees, will be put on their tax
bill.
CONSENT AGENDA
Page 2, Paragraph 3 of the minutes - Line 2 - change wording from sewer project
to rezoning request; and line 4 - change wording from Boundary Commission
Deadline to established deadline for an agreement with the City. Moved by Clerk
Graham, supported by Supervisor Obst to approve the minutes of the October 5,
1999 Regular Board Meeting as amended; acknowledge the Treasurer’s report of
financial activities for October 1999; approve the Clerk’s list of accounts to
be paid November 2, 1999, check numbers 9863-9919 for a total of $53,691.52; to
accept and place on file the following reports: NIESA minutes of October 7,
1999, Building Department Activities for October 1999, Assessor’s Report/
Updates of October 18, 1999, and the Board of Appeals minutes of October 20,
1999. Supervisor Obst called for a roll call vote:
   Ayes:   Trustee Wiegandt, Trustee Zaban, Treasurer Nilsson, Supervisor Obst,
Clerk Graham
   Nays:   None.
Clerk Graham moved to adjourn, supported by Trustee Wiegandt.
Meeting adjourned at 10:21 PM.
______________________________________      ____________________________________
Shirley Graham, Clerk               Susan Jennings, Board Recording Secretary
DECEMBER 7, 1999
The regular meeting of the Williamstown Township Board of Trustees was called
to order at 7:36 PM. Clerk Graham was asked to record who was present and
recorded the following: Supervisor Obst, Clerk Graham, Treasurer Nilsson,
Trustee Wiegandt, Trustee Zaban, and Building Inspector Aven.
The agenda was read over with the following additions: Michigan Department of
Consumer and Industry Services - Liquor Control Commission - transfer of liquor
license at the plaza; and an irate tax payer issue.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS -
Township Hall Rental - Township’s Insurance Agent, Don Pixley
The Township currently carries an umbrella of $1,000,000 over the basic
liability of $1,000,000.00. Their insurance company’s legal staff has reviewed
a copy of our rental agreement. They are not going to give a legal opinion. One
of the things they pointed out was that the Township is carrying $1,000,000.
Someone renting the hall should be carrying the same. To increase the average
homeowner’s policy from $300,000 to $1,000,000 liability is usually around $11
or $12 per year. Other Townships in the area require renters to carry
$1,000,000. The renter would need to contact their insurance agent and name the
Township as an additional insured on their insurance. Takes 3 or 4 days
planning to do it. No liquor is allowed on the Township Hall premises, but it
still may happen when Township Officials and staff are not here to monitor. To
protect the assets of the Township it should be mandatory for renters of the
hall to have this coverage. Clerk Graham asked if there was a standard form?
Mr. Pixley stated that there is a standard certificate that the renter would
get from their agent. Other similar facilities require this type of coverage.
Mr. Pixley stated that his office issues this type of certificate frequently.
Question from the audience as to who would have primary liability? Mr. Pixley
stated that it would probably be the host, but that is an issue that would be
decided by the judge if there were a law suit. The judge could split the
liability at any percentage he deemed appropriate to the particular case.
Suggestion from audience to increase the rate to rent the hall and increase the
coverage at the Township. The Board generally agreed to delay the decision
until the next meeting. Clerk Graham will check with other municipalities to
see what kind of coverage they require.
PLANNING COMMISSION
Litchfield Commercial Center Site Plan and Special Land Use Permit - The
Planning Commission has recommended approval of the Site Plan with conditions
and approval of the Special Land Use Permit with conditions. The Site Plan
conditions are all still in effect, none of them have been completed yet.
Important that the Drain Commissioner sign off on this in lieu of the
neighbor’s situation. Clerk Graham asked if the 24" storm drain that runs 4"
tile inlet goes out beyond the property line. Mr. Litchfield stated that it
does. They have a private agreement with the neighbor behind, Mr. Siegel, for
the water to exit into the pond and back out onto Mr. Siegel’s property. This
is a line that Mr. Helfman could access. Mr. Litchfield is aware of Mr.
Helfman's contentions that runoff is going onto his property. There is a signed
easement agreement between Mr. Litchfield, Mr. Siegel and Mr. Helfman. The pond
was enlarged on the Helfman property. The fence is going to extend the entire
perimeter of the property. All landscaping is to be done by June of 2000. The
entrances will stay the same, but will be designated as an entrance or exit.
Supervisor Obst Norm would like to add the following to restriction 2 - “as
well as to be certain there is no run off on to neighboring properties, other
than by agreement.” The Drain Commissioner would be asked to be sure that the
allegations we have received from Mr. Helfman are without merit.
Trustee Wiegandt moved and Clerk Graham supported approving the Planning
Commission’s recommendation for approval of the Litchfield Commercial Center
Site Plan dated November 30, 1999, subject to the following conditions:
1)   The Commercial Center shall be permitted to open prior to the completion
of paving, provided that a performance bond or bank letter of credit is
submitted to cover the cost of paving of the driveway and parking area on the
east side and in front by June 30, 2000, and to cover the cost of paving on the
west side, as noted on the site plan, by June 30, 2002.
2)   The site plan shall be submitted to the Drain Commissioner for evaluation
of stormwater detention. If required, the plan shall be revised to provide
stormwater detention calculations and to make improvements deemed necessary by
the Drain Commissioner’s office, as well as to be certain there is no run off
onto neighboring properties other than by agreement.
3)   The Commercial Center shall be permitted to open prior to landscaping
being completed, provided that a performance bond or bank letter of credit is
submitted to cover the cost of landscaping prior to June 30, 2000, and provided
further that a plant material list is submitted to the Township for approval
prior to planting.
4)   If any modifications to above ground utilities are required, the applicant
shall pursue underground service leads, if practical.
5)   Site plan approval shall be subject to review and approval of the floor
plan and building renovation plans by the Building Official.
6)   Site plan approval shall be subject to Special Land Use approval.
Motion passed unanimously.
Moved by Trustee Wiegandt, supported by Trustee Zaban to approve the Planning
Commission’s recommendation for approval of the Litchfield Special Land Use
Permit with the following conditions:
1)   Final Site Plan approval.
2)   Re-evaluation of the Pollution Incident Prevention Plan by the Department
of Environmental Quality (MDEQ), pursuant to the September 16, 1996 letter from
Stephen R. Blayer, which stated that “any changes in present conditions or
operations at your establishment may require modification of the plan with
additional construction and should be reported to this office”. A letter from
the applicant stating that such a request had been sent to the MDEQ has been
received by the Township.
Motion passed unanimously.
Pinehill Rezoning - 35 acres on Zimmer Road. Request was made to change the
Zoning from Rural Estates (RE) with a 5 acre minimum, to R1 with a 20,000
square foot minimum if sewer is available, or R1S with a 40,000 square foot
minimum if sewer is not available. After receiving input from two public
hearings, the transportation committee, the planning consultant and considering
a great deal of information from the surrounding property owners and neighbors,
the Planning Commission recommends denying rezoning of the property to either
R1 or R1S. Supervisor Obst stated that additional information had been
received. He read a letter from the Vaughns opposing the rezoning. The Township
also received a letter this afternoon from Steven Hayward to Mr. Forsberg dated
Dec. 6th indicating he would attend tonight’s Board meeting. Dennis Forsberg,
representing Pinehill partnership, and Mr. Hayward made presentations. Mr.
Hayward is an architect that specializes in keeping the rural character of
developments. Mr. Hayward’s letter and comments were found to be either
inaccurate, or misleading as stated, in several instances.
Mr. Forsberg stated that in order to maintain the development’s proposed soccer
field they would need 44 homes in the subdivision. The Township would not be
liable for maintenance on the soccer field. It would be supported by the
homeowner association fees. The pond would probably not be as large as
currently indicated on the plan. Drain outlet would be across Zimmer road. Mr.
Hayward stated that the Township’s future land use map shows the 400 feet on
Zimmer frontage should be single family residential in nature. Development plan
shows a 50 foot buffer all around the development. The developer would
volunteer to put limits on the number of lots since there isn't a zoning that
really fits what they are requesting. This property requires sanitary sewers.
There is no obligation on the part of the Township to provide sewer taps to
grant the rezoning. The taps would not be an issue until the Site Plan approval
phase.
Public comments followed. All but one opposed the development, citing such
things as increased traffic, current availability of other building sites in
the Township, unwanted changes to the rural atmosphere, desire for the Township
to follow the master plan that they adopted, and too high of a density for the
area. Would like to see larger lots.
Mr. Forsberg conceded hearing that the residents were against a R1S or R1
zoning, but that maybe Rural Residential (RR) would be acceptable. He stated
that they would take a look and see what they can come up with. He was informed
that this would mean going through the entire process again if they decide to
request RR Zoning. Supervisor Obst stated that a decision on a future RR
rezoning request would be based on zoning ordinance criteria applied to
information received at that time.
Trustee Zaban moved and Trustee Wiegandt supported to adopt the Planning
Commission’s recommendation for denial of the Pinehill Partnership rezoning
request for either R-1 or R-1-S zoning, based on considerations required by
Section 27.06(C)4 of the Zoning Ordinance and information in Planning
Consultant, Christopher Doozen’s, letters of July 29 and November 8, 1999.
Motion passed unanimously.
Transportation Committee Report - Brian Jennings
Zimmer and Grand River Options presented by MDOT - MDOT is recommending a
modern roundabout for the intersection. However, they have been unable to
satisfactorily answer many of the Transportation Committee’s questions about
this type of intersection. Mr. Jennings has done some research on his own and
found that modern roundabouts are fairly new to the U.S. and are different than
the traditional center of town traffic circle. They have been in Europe for
several years. There seem to be a lot of circumstances where traffic circles
eliminate a lot of problems that other options have not been able to. The
majority of modern roundabouts in the U.S. are in the West, Florida and New
England. There are very few in the Mid-west. Road structures differ in
different parts of the country. Very little data on how well one might work in
this area, especially at an intersection such as Grand River and Zimmer, where
the two roads have very different traffic volumes. The Township has a video
tape of a seminar that states the modern roundabouts don't work everywhere and
if they are not designed correctly they can cause more problems than they fix.
MDOT has not done a final feasibility study on this intersection, and
consequently they don't know if they can fit a modern roundabout into the
available land at this intersection with the correct geometry. The
Transportation Committee is recommending informing MDOT that if they need an
immediate recommendation, the Township is not prepared to support a modern
roundabout at this time. If MDOT is willing and able to provide more factual
data about modern roundabouts, the Township would like to keep an open mind and
work with them. Until and unless modern roundabouts can be proven to be a
better option, the Township would like to recommend signalizing and adding left
turn lanes at all approaches for the intersection.. Mr. Jennings will keep
doing his research and contact MDOT to inform them that the Township is not
getting the information it needs, and wants some better answers to the
questions. If the State is having Mr. Crown design the modern roundabout, the
Township would like to have him give a presentation to the Board, Planning
Commission and the Advisory Council.
ADVISORY COUNCIL - Rutgar Hoag
The Planning Commission and Park Committee are working on a Park Ordinance. The
entranceway for the park should be done with whatever money is currently
budgeted for the Park. Treasurer Nilsson stated that she would like Board
approval to go ahead with the $3,000 proposed for the design work so that
construction could start as soon as possible in the Spring. The Township has an
extension on the temporary access until July 2000. The access would include the
work for Grand River and being made aware of all the requirements of MDOT.
Clerk Graham moved to approve the $3000 bid to hire Fitzgerald, Henne &
Associates for the design work for the park access engineering. Supported by
Trustee Zaban. Motion approved unanimously. Planning Coordinator Martin was
asked to work with Fitzgerald, Henne & Associates as soon as possible to obtain
construction cost estimates by budget time.
Hideaway Woods - Carl McIntosh
After some discussion concerning City negotiations, sewer capacity, and
development costs, Treasurer Nilsson moved and Trustee Wiegandt supported
allocating sewer taps for up to 55 approved lots in Hideaway Woods either
through the Township’s allotment or through a future 425 (or any other
agreement) with the City of Williamston to provide sewer. It is also assumed
that the progress for the development will go forward in a timely manner, which
the Planning Coordinator has stated would be one to two years for a standard
development. Motion approved unanimously.
Helfman violation - Mr. Helfman has hired a new attorney. Supervisor Obst wrote
the attorney a letter asking him to contact Planning Coordinator Mickey Martin
Certificate of Occupancy for 1500 E. Grand River Rd is coming along as well as
possible. The City needs to complete the form for the State.
423 E Grand River - Constable Dahlstrom is working on improving the situation.
Williamston Schools Annual Summer Tax Resolution - If there is any charge at
all they won't collect. Treasurer Nilsson will respond in writing.
Sattlemates hall rental request granted.
Complaint - 444 Haslett Rd - Letter needs to be sent again. It will be sent
certified. Parking lot expansion violated the zoning ordinance.
Leipprandt - Drainage issue. In the Drain Commission’s hands. The City cannot
dump water on a neighbor. Will write a letter to the Drain Commission asking
about the status of this and copy in Mrs. Leipprandt.
Albert LeBlanc - Farming Bill
The Planning Commission has written to State Senator Diane Byrum and State
Representative Paul DeWeese stating their opposition to Senate Bill 205 and
House Bill 4. The Township Board also needs to send a letter to Senator Byrum
and Representative DeWeese stating regulations of large live stock farms should
be handled locally. Planning Coordinator Martin requested that anyone on the
Board that has personal contact with Mr. DeWeese should call him and talk to
him about this bill.
Kyle Grice - Soccer Field.
Will forward the letter to the school district. He is referring to land that is
owned by the schools and not the Township. Will reply that there are soccer
fields in the master plan for the park. Will write a letter back encouraging
him to go forward with his project.
State Liquor Control Commission - Clerk Graham will return the form. The
Township Board has no objections to the Liquor License being transferred to the
new owners.
Irate Tax Payer - Treasurer Nilsson will answer the letter. The Township will
not be refunding any money. The Township did not receive any funds from the
penalty and interest. Ingham County collected these fees.
Staff Christmas Bonus
Clerk Graham moved and Trustee Wiegandt supported giving a Christmas Bonus for
all secretarial staff and deputies in the amount of $75.00.
CONSENT AGENDA
Moved by Clerk Graham and Supported by Trustee Zaban to approve the minutes of
the November 2, 1999 Regular Board Meeting; acknowledge the Treasurer’s report
of financial activities for November, 1999; approve the Clerk’s list of
accounts to be paid December 7, 1999, check numbers 9920-9970 for a total of
$49,793.54; to accept and place on file the following reports: NIESA minutes of
November 4, 1999; Building Department Activities of November 1999; and the
Assessor’s report and updates of December 1, 1999. Supervisor Obst called for a
roll call vote:
   Ayes:    Clerk Graham, Treasurer Nilsson, Supervisor Obst, Trustee Wiegandt,
Trustee Zaban
   Nays:   None.
Clerk Graham moved to adjourn, supported by Treasurer Nilsson. Meeting
adjourned at 10:53 PM.
_________________________________________   ____________________________________
Shirley Graham, Township Clerk         Susan Jennings, Recording Secretary
2000 Meeting Minutes
JANUARY 11, 2000
The regular meeting of the Williamstown Township Board of Trustees was called
to order at 7:44 PM. Clerk Graham was asked to record who was present and
recorded the following: Supervisor Obst, Clerk Graham, Treasurer Nilsson,
Trustee Wiegandt, Trustee Zaban, and Building Inspector Aven.
The agenda was read over with the following additions: Census information
advertisements; budget through November of 1999; and the newsletter deadline.
PLANNING COMMISSION - Mickey Martin
The Planning Commission is working on the update of the Master Plan. They are
having five guest speakers at their meeting on January 25th. They invited the
Board to attend this meeting. Have also invited the surrounding Townships’ and
City of Williamston’s Planning Commissions and the Advisory Council. Have
mapped all the active agricultural land in the Township. Mapped new housing in
the last nine years. Mapping the wooded lands. It appears that the Township has
been following the current Master Plan quite well. The majority of development
over the past nine years has been south of Sherwood Road.
Mr. Litchfield - Planning Coordinator Martin has worked with Mr. Litchfield on
getting his performance bond guarantees in place. Building Inspector Aven will
be working on it. Should wrap it up by the end of the week.
Mr. Forsberg requested the information we had about the round abouts. Has not
submitted any new plans.
ADVISORY COUNCIL - Rutgar Hoag
No meeting in December. Council has been asked to attend the Planning
Commission meeting on the 25th.
Park and Recreation Committee - Chris Nilsson
Regional idea has resurfaced as an issue that they are investigating. The
exploratory committee is back on track and has received support from
surrounding Townships. Tom Trepky will be attending these meetings representing
the Township. Starting work next Tuesday with the engineering firm for the
entrance. Firmed up plans for the Sunday February 6th Park Awareness - hot
chocolate and bon fire. Betty Challis will host nature walks in May. The Park
Committee is investigating designating a portion of the park as an off leash
area for dogs to run. The proposed Park Ordinance has been turned over to the
Planning Commission to work on. The committee’s recommendation was modeled
after Meridian Township's Park Ordinance.
Transportation Committee
A reply from Tony Kratofil of MDOT was received. They will continue to
investigate the feasibility of having a modern round about at the intersection
of Grand River and Zimmer and will meet with the township to answer any and all
questions. They are still willing to consider a signaled intersection if the
Township decides that a modern round about will not work satisfactorily at this
intersection.
PUBLIC COMMENTS AND QUESTIONS
Mr. Dwight Kampe volunteered that the City Council elected Mr. Kenneth Zichi as
mayor and Ms. Dawn Horstman as mayor pro tem. Jim Gilhouse asked to be an
alternate on the fire board rather than the #1 member. Dawn Horstman named to
NIESA as the City’s representative.
UNIFINISHED BUSINESS
Township Hall Rental - Shirley Graham
Received no response over the holidays. Trustee Wiegandt stated that the hall
belongs to the people, and he cannot see telling people they need to amend
their insurance in order to rent the hall. It is unnecessary and cumbersome. If
the Township needs to raise the rates to cover more insurance on the Township's
part, then that is the way to go. Need to compare what other Township hall's
are doing. Generally agreed to not pursue requiring renters to carry additional
insurance.
Helfmann violation - Letter of 12/6/1999. Have heard nothing back since then.
Mr. Helfmann sent one of his employees into the Township office to get a copy
of Mr. Litchfield's drainage plans per prior permit.
423 E Grand River Status Report - Constable Dahlstrom
If Constable Dahlstrom knows of three other locations in violation, then he
needs to investigate these as well. Need to follow up with the property owner
since it is the renter that is causing the nuisance.
Building Inspector - Barrier Free on the City Building. Appeared January 4th,
waiting for a decision.
NEW BUSINESS
Ingham Intermediate Summer Tax - no action required
Citizen Concern - Barry Road Shoulder
County Road Commission needs to look at it. Gas line went in off the road and
not on the other side of the ditch.
John R. Hoskins drain cleaning funding -
Will forward to the Drain Commission.
Ingham County Road Commission letters of 12/17 and 12/28, 1999.
Will put the Township's schedule for brush cutting and road clearing policy in
the February Newsletter.
Complaint - 510 E Grand River - taken care of.
Letter from 127 Bismark Street - would like to be detached into the Township.
This property is surrounded by Township property on three sides.
Census - company working with Lansing and East Lansing. Will send out a
postcard in mid February to promote people responding to the census. The
Township Board decided to put something in the February newsletter instead.
Freedom of Information Act Request - Board does not want, and does not believe
it is legally obligated, to create the disks for this request, the information
is available in the office.
Budget -
Need a budget meeting by next board meeting. Set for January 29th, at 8:30 a.m.
Attorney Spagnuolo arrived at 9:10 PM.
Newsletter deadline is January 17, 2000.
CONSENT AGENDA
The following amendments were made to the minutes of Dec. 7, 1999 in regards to
the Hideaway Woods motion: future 425 or any other agreement with the City of
Williamston to provide Sewer. Motion assumes that the progress for the
development will go forward in a timely manner. Planning Coordinator Martin
stated that this would be one to two years for a standard development.
Moved by Treasurer Nilsson, supported by Clerk Graham to approve the minutes of
the December 7, 1999 Regular Board Meeting as amended above; acknowledge the
Treasurer’s report of financial activities for December, 1999; approve the
Clerk’s list of accounts to be paid January 11, 2000, check numbers 9971-10036
for a total of $47,558.86; and to accept and place on file the following
reports: NIESA minutes of December 6, 1999; building department activities for
December, 1999; and the Assessor’s report and updates of December 17, 1999 and
January 5, 2000. Supervisor Obst called for a roll call vote:
   Ayes: Trustee Zaban, Treasurer Nilsson, Trustee Wiegandt, Supervisor Obst,
Clerk Graham
   Nays:   None
Motion passed unanimously.
Closed Session
Clerk Graham moved and Treasurer Nilsson supported to go into closed session to
consider the written legal opinion of Counsel. Planning Coordinator, Mickey
Martin, was asked to stay for the closed session. Supervisor Obst called for a
roll call vote:
   Ayes: Supervisor Obst, Treasurer Nilsson, Trustee Wiegandt, Trustee Zaban,
Clerk Graham
   Nays: None.
Meeting adjourned to closed session at 9:30 PM.
Trustee Zaban moved and Clerk Graham supported adjourning the closed session
and reopening the regular meeting at 10:25 PM.
Discussion Group
Supervisor Norman Obst, Treasurer Christine Nilsson and Planning Coordinator
Mickey Martin have been chosen as representatives of the Township Government to
work with the City of Williamston on all outstanding issues. The remaining
Board members will rotate as alternates should one of the regular Board
representatives not be able to attend.
Trustee Zaban moved and Trustee Wiegandt supported to adjourn. Meeting
adjourned at 10:26 PM.
_________________________________      ______________________________________
Shirley Graham, Township Clerk      Susan Jennings, Board Recording Secretary
FEBRUARY 1, 2000
The regular meeting of the Williamstown Township Board of Trustees was called
to order at 7:36 PM. Clerk Graham was asked to record who was present and
recorded the following: Supervisor Obst, Clerk Graham, Treasurer Nilsson,
Trustee Wiegandt, Trustee Zaban and Building Inspector Aven.
The agenda was read over with the following additions: Letter of agreement from
the auditors and a complaint that was received today.
Deputy Drain Commissioner - Eric Schertzing
Maintenance - The 1999 Drain Maintenance work in Williamstown Township included
digging on the Squaw Creek Drain which services the township and also the
outlet of the Bullett Lake Drain. We anticipate the year 2000 projects to
include clean out of parts of the Squaw, Atzinger, Bullett Lake Drains and
perhaps some work on the Corcoran Intercounty Drain. Clerk Graham asked about
the Leiprandt issue by the school. Mr. Schertzing stated that there is not a
county drain there at this time. School properties do not fall under the
jurisdiction of the Ingham County Drain Commission and could possibly create a
problem for neighboring properties without the Drain Commission being able to
prevent it. The Drain Commission is currently looking at the area to see if a
county drain needs to be put in place. Mrs. Leiprandt has been advised of the
status from the Drain Commission.
Supervisor Obst had a question on paragraph 4 of the proposed spending
resolution. The Drain Commission is authorized to spend up to $2,500 per mile
for maintenance before going to the local municipalities for authorization.
There are approximately 6 miles of the Bullett Lake Drain that need to be
cleaned out at an estimated cost of $30,000. This would be $15,000 above the
pre-authorized amount. The Drain Commission is asking to spend two years of
maintenance money in one year. They do not need to go to a Board of
Determination to maintain an existing drain. Mailing was done to everyone in
the watershed letting them know that Mr. Schertzing would be here tonight with
the spending resolution. The assessments for the cleaning of Bullett Lake Drain
are $1,400 at large to be paid by the Township, $9 per agricultural acre and
$11.25 per residential acre. To be spread over two years since they are
spending two years’ money to do the clean out. Property owner of the beginning
of the drain very much in favor of the clean out being done. The Drain
Commission needs the approval of both Williamstown and Locke Townships.
Treasurer Nilsson had a question on how the spending allowance and the actual
cost of cleaning out a drain are related. They are not. The spending allowance
is something determined by State Legislatures and does not reflect the actual
costs of doing the clean outs. Trustee Zaban moved and Trustee Wiegandt
supported that the Township approve the following spending resolution for the
clean out of the Bullett Lake Drain as proposed by the County Drain Commission:
WHEREAS, the Ingham County Drain Commissioner, Patrick E. Lindemann, has
advised the Board of Trustees for the Township of Williamstown that, pursuant
to Section 196 of the Michigan Drain Code (MCL 280.196; MSA 11.1196), an
inspection has been made of the Bullett Lake Drain and it has been determined,
as a result of the inspection, that certain maintenance must be performed upon
the Drain; and,
WHEREAS, the Ingham County Drain Commissioner, Patrick E. Lindemann, has the
authority to expend Two Thousand Five Hundred and no/100 Dollars ($2,500.00)
per mile in any one (1) year for the maintenance of the drain, and where it is
estimated that expenditures in excess of Two Thousand Five Hundred and no/100
Dollars ($2,500.00) per mile are necessary, those amounts may not be expended
until approved by Resolution of the governing body of each township, city and
village affected by more than twenty percent (20%) of the cost; and,
WHEREAS, the Ingham County Drain Commissioner, Patrick E. Lindemann, has
advised the Township of Williamstown Board of Trustees that it will be
necessary to expend funds in excess of Two Thousand Five Hundred and no/100
Dollars ($2,500.00) per mile for the maintenance of the Bullett Lake Drain and
that the Township of Williamstown is affected by more than twenty percent (20%)
of the cost; and,
WHEREAS, the Ingham County Drain Commissioner, Patrick E. Lindemann, estimates
that the cost for the maintenance of the Bullett Lake Drain will be
approximately $30,000.00, which constitutes $15,000 in excess of the authorized
Two Thousand Five Hundred and no/100 Dollars ($2,500.00) per mile.
NOW, THEREFORE, IT IS HEREBY RESOLVED by the Board of Trustees for the Township
of Williamstown, that pursuant to Section 196 of the Drain Code, the Ingham
County Drain Commissioner, Patrick E. Lindemann, is authorized to expend money
for the maintenance and repair of the Bullett Lake Drain in excess of Two
Thousand Five Hundred and no/100 Dollars ($2,500.00) per mile and, to the
extent that the drain fund for the Drain contains insufficient funds for the
payment of costs incurred for the maintenance or repair of the Drain, then the
Ingham County Drain Commissioner, Patrick E. Lindemann, is authorized to levy a
special assessment, as allowed by law.
RESOLUTION approved this 1st day of February, 2000, by the Township of
Williamstown Board of Trustees, governing body of Williamstown Township.
Supervisor Obst called for a roll call vote:
   Ayes: Treasurer Nilsson, Trustee Weigandt, Supervisor Obst, Trustee Zaban,
Clerk Graham.
   Nays: None.
Resolution approved unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENTS AND QUESTIONS
Catherine Easley voiced her concerns regarding the 425 negotiations between the
City of Williamston and the Township of Williamstown. She stated that the media
are only talking about the Bond Property annexation when discussing the
negotiations between the City and the Township. The detachment group is
concerned about more than just the Bond property and wondered if anything else
was on the table to address their concerns - especially the threat of future
annexations. Supervisor Obst stated that it is a misperception that only the
Bond property is being discussed. It is the intent of both the City and the
Township to address all the concerns of the people interested in the
detachment. There are several 425 agreements being looked at, not just one for
the Bond property. The City of Williamston has adopted a resolution opposing
annexation of any property owner that does not want to be annexed, and 425
negotiations are looking at a way of making this a more long term agreement.
There are scheduled meetings this week and next week between the City and the
Township. Both sides are well aware that there are many concerns besides the
Bond property. Supervisor Obst stated that TAP is, reportedly, scheduling a
meeting where they will invite him to address these concerns. Once preliminary
agreements are reached there would be public hearings scheduled to determine
needed revisions. The intent of the board is to address all of the concerns of
everyone involved in the detachment effort.
PLANNING COMMISSION - Mickey Martin
They had an excellent meeting last Tuesday with the 5 speakers. They spoke to
the Township regarding agriculture in the future in the County in general, and
in the Township in particular. Planning Chair Martin stated that they have
accomplished the current master plan goals to date. The majority of development
over the past ten years has been south of Sherwood Road. The Township has been
able to keep a lot of active agriculture even with the urban sprawl going
forward. Trends in the area and the state are for less live stock. Going
towards management intensive agriculture in the future. This area is not
challenged for agricultural suppliers and support systems. Zoning, purchasing
and transfers of development rights are tools used to keep the agriculture in
the Township. The Township needs to designate areas of the Township where
development rights can be transferred to and from. Will need to invest in these
procedures for the Township to retain the desired character. The Planning
Commission is looking at the east side and west side next to the City of
Williamston to make sure the Township’s plan for these areas are compatible
with what the City has in their master plan.
Neller property - haven't heard anything since last August. They were at the
conceptual plan point. Paid fee for rezoning application, which has been used
up.
Mr. Forsberg asked for another rezoning application. Haven’t heard back since
then. Nothing formal has been initiated.
Mr. McIntosh has come in with a couple of proposals for the Hideaway Woods
area.
ADVISORY COUNCIL - no meeting
Park & Rec. - meeting tomorrow night. Hot chocolate and bon-fire this Sunday at
the sledding hill in the Township Park.
Ingham County Road Commission -Barry Road shoulders will be taken care of.
OLD BUSINESS
Complaint Updates
Helfmann - Supervisor Obst and Planning Coordinator Martin are meeting with
them tomorrow.
Flemming - waiting to hear back from their attorney, Mr. Hanes. Discussion
followed regarding the status of the situation.
1500 E. Grand River - State still reviewing the handicapped accessibility of
the elevator issue. Plumbing meets all barrier free requirements.
NEW BUSINESS
Salary Resolutions
Trustee Wiegandt moved and Clerk Graham supported to approve the salary
resolution for fiscal year 2000/20001 for the Supervisor at an annual rate of
$12,900. Approved unanimously.
Trustee Wiegandt moved and Treasurer Nilsson supported to approve the salary
resolution for fiscal year 2000/2001 for the Clerk at an annual rate of
$20,448. Approved unanimously.
Trustee Wiegandt moved and Trustee Zaban supported to approve the salary
resolution for fiscal year 2000/2001 for the Treasurer at an annual rate of
$20,448. Approved unanimously.
Trustee Wiegandt moved and Clerk Graham supported to approve the salary
resolution for fiscal year 2000/2001 for the Trustees at an annual rate of
$9,840 for the two combined, with a base pay of $4200 each plus $60 per
meeting, maximum of 12 meetings. Approved unanimously.
Census
Mickey Martin suggested that big signs be put up to encourage people to ask us
about the census and informing the community of how important it is. Signs on
both doors and at the counter. Susan Jennings suggested putting a large ad in
the Enterprise to reach a larger audience. Will look into both ideas. Will
check with the Michigan Township Association to see what kind of materials they
may have.
Ingham County Board of Commissioners - No action required because we already
have a recycling program in the Township.
Auditors - $4,450 estimate from Abraham and Gaffney. Trustee Wiegandt moved and
Treasurer Nilsson supported to engage the firm of Abraham and Gaffney for the
fiscal year 1999/2000 audit. Motion passed unanimously.
All Terrain Complaint - Looking like a used car lot. Will send Constable
Dahlstrom back to investigate the complaint.
Building Department - Walt Aven
Zero (0) building permits were issued in January. Canceled two permits - have
to come in for new permits. A new state law makes agricultural buildings exempt
from building permits. The buildings cannot be used for retail purposes, only
for agricultural purposes.
Letter For Cable Increase - Steve Zaban
As of January 20, Millennium Digital Media is passing on an increase to all
cable customers in the Township. Basic will be increased by $0.72 and Enhanced
Basic was increased by $1.80 per month.
CONSENT AGENDA
Moved by Clerk Graham, supported by Treasurer Nilsson to approve the minutes of
the January 11, 2000 Regular Board Meeting; acknowledge the Treasurer’s report
of financial activities for January, 2000; approve the Clerk’s list of accounts
to be paid February 1, 2000, check numbers 10037-10082 for a total of
$29,385.07; and to accept and place on file the following reports: building
department activities of January, 2000 and the Assessor’s report/updates of
January 13, 2000. Supervisor Obst called for a roll call vote:
   Ayes: Trustee Zaban, Supervisor Obst, Treasurer Nilsson, Clerk Graham,
Trustee Wiegandt.
   Nays: None.
Clerk Graham moved and Treasurer Nilsson supported to adjourn.
Meeting adjourned at 9:34 PM.
______________________________________      ____________________________________
Shirley Graham, Clerk               Susan Jennings, Recording Secretary
MARCH 7, 2000
The regular meeting of the Williamstown Township Board of Trustees was called
to order at 7:33 PM. Clerk Graham was asked to record who was present and
recorded the following: Supervisor Obst, Clerk Graham, Treasurer Nilsson,
Trustee Wiegandt, Trustee Zaban and Building Inspector Aven.
The agenda was read over with the following additions: Budget Amendments; March
8 letter from Concerned Citizens for Township Government; Putnam lawn
maintenance bid and Grand River complaint.
PLANNING COMMISSION - Mickey Martin
Demmer Corporation is seeking site plan approval to add a bathroom to an area
of the building that does not currently have one. The site is already hooked up
to sewer and water. Trustee Wiegandt moved and Treasurer Nilsson supported
approving the Planning Commission’s recommendation for the approval of the Site
Plan as submitted by the Demmer Corporation. Motion passed unanimously.
ADVISORY COUNCIL - Mickey Martin
The Advisory Council would like the Board to approve the appointment of Sharon
Ellis to the Intergovernmental Affairs Committee. Function of this committee is
to meet with committee members of other municipalities to establish good
communications, address mutual concerns, and foster a community spirit of
cooperation in areas such as, but not limited to, recreation, planning, roads,
library, and the twin issues of economic development and quality of life.
Supervisor Obst moved and Treasurer Nilsson supported approving the appointment
of Sharon A. Ellis to the Intergovernmental Affairs Committee due to the
vacancy created. Motion passed.
Proposal of a permanent park entrance including a drive way and parking area.
Bid for $58,000.00 to do everything, including landscaping in the front and
side and a new sign. Trustee Wiegandt stated that he is in favor of the work
being done. He stated that the Township needs to keep doing a little bit all
the time to postpone the big chunk of development as much as possible. There is
currently $30,000 in the budget for park improvement this year. The entire plan
does not need to be done this year, and much of the landscaping can be done by
volunteers. The essential parts of getting a paved drive and parking lot in can
be done for the $30,000. There is general support from the board to go ahead
with this.
Nancy Fink suggested thinking about some sort of planting party for volunteers
to move trees from her property to the park.
Park & Rec. - Christine Nilsson
Sledding outing went well. There were even more people at this event than at
the summer open house. There has been some dumping of concrete and a TV at the
park. We will put an item in the next newsletter that there is no dumping at
the park, and will post the penalties stated in the Township Ordinances of
fines of $500 and up to 90 days in jail.
UNIFINISHED BUSINESS
Complaints
Helfmann property - Current proposal is that Keith Litchfield is going to buy
the property back. He would then like to hook the rear part of the lot with the
storage units back in with his store front property so that they could be used,
and then resell the front, if the Planning Commission and Township Board
approves the Site Plan if presented. Mr. Helfmann’s attorneys now realize that
the Township was acting properly.
Fleming issue - Mr. Fleming is going to contact Mr. and Mrs. George. They have
made proposals. Mr. Fleming’s attorney is out of town until the 14th.
423 E. Grand River - neighbor reported that he has added on to his garage. No
building permit was obtained. Building Inspector Aven will check it out. He
also has at least six (6) dogs that run loose. The neighbor was advised to call
Ingham County Animal control to deal with that situation. The number of cars on
the property is increasing. Constable Dahlstrom will also be sent out to the
property. The property is zoned residential, not commercial. He is violating
the Zoning Ordinance by running a repair shop on the site.
All Terrain - Selling of used cars. Only one out there now, which belongs to
the owner. All Terrain is reviewing the Township’s Ordinance.
Joint Resolution of Annexation - 1500 W. Grand River Avenue.
See attached for complete wording of the resolution. The Resolution states that
the Township and City agree to the annexation of the property to the City of
Williamston with the stipulation that a joint annual public meeting be held
with the Township Board and the City Council so that each can report on the
state of their respective municipalities with at least an hour allowed for
public comments and questions. Treasurer Nilsson moved and Trustee Wiegandt
supported to enact the Municipal Building Resolution. Supervisor Obst called
for a roll call vote:
   Yea:   Treasurer Nilsson, Trustee Wiegandt, Supervisor Obst, Clerk Graham,
Trustee Zaban
   Nay:   None.   
PUBLIC COMMENT
Mike Rogers, Michigan State Senator - Brief Presentation. Supervisor Obst
introduced Mr. Rogers. Mr. Rogers is a Republican running for House of
Representatives in the 8th Congressional District.
NEW BUSINESS
Board Of Review Federal Poverty Income Standards
Trustee moved and Treasurer Nilsson supported to adopt the Federal Poverty
Income Standards for the 2000 Assessments, to be used at the March 2000 Board
of Review. Motion passed unanimously.
Board Of Review Vacancy
Trustee Zaban moved and Clerk Graham supported approving the appointment of
Robert E. Tetzlaff to the Board of Review to fill the vacancy created by the
resignation of Lois Kill for the balance of the term (year 2000). Motion passed
unanimously.
District Court Historical Picture Request.
Will participate and let them know that we are researching to find a suitable
photograph.
Ingham County Road Commission - Year 2000 local road improvements.
Transportation committee will be looking into this.
Budget Amendments -
Legal fees and Inspection fees, need to be addressed. There is still $30,000 in
contingency. Clerk Graham recommended that $15,000 be moved from account 101-
890-965 (contingency) with $10,000 going to account 101-101-802 (legal fees)
and $5,000 going to account 101-371-811 (inspection fees). Trustee Wiegandt
moved and Supervisor Obst supported approving the Clerk’s recommendation for
amending the budget. Supervisor Obst called for a roll call vote:
   Ayes:   Trustee Zaban, Supervisor Obst, Trustee Wiegandt, Treasurer Nilsson,
Clerk Graham
   Nays:   None.
Ray Wood - Bid To Take Care Of Property At 716 N Putnam. Mr. Wood proposed
mowing the property from April 1 to Oct. 31 at a rate $75 per month. Moved by
Clerk Graham and supported by Trustee Wiegandt to accept Mr. Wood’s bid. Motion
passed unanimously.
Concerned Citizens For Township Government letter of March 8th regarding
funding of the municipal league through Worker's Compensation fees. This does
not apply to our Township since we pay our Worker’s Compensation through
another company and not through the Municipal League’s pool.
Date Set For April Board Meeting - Due to Spring Break and several people being
out of town, the April meeting will be held April 11, 2000.
CONSENT AGENDA
Moved by Treasurer Nilsson, supported by Clerk Graham to approve the minutes of
the February 1, 2000 Regular Board Meeting; acknowledge the Treasurer’s report
of financial activities for February, 2000; approve the Clerk’s list of
accounts to be paid March 7, 2000, check numbers 10083 - 10162 for a total of
$41,080.65; and to accept and place on file the following reports: NIESA
minutes of January 6, 2000 and February 3, 2000, Building Department activities
for February 2000, and the Assessor’s Report/Updates of February 11 & 24, 2000.
Supervisor Obst called for a roll call vote:
   Ayes:   Supervisor Obst, Trustee Zaban, Clerk Graham, Trustee Wiegandt,
Treasurer Nilsson
   Nays:   None
Clerk Graham moved and Supervisor Obst supported adjourning the meeting.
Meeting Adjourned at 9:06 PM.
____________________________________      ____________________________________
Shirley Graham, Clerk               Susan Jennings, Recording Secretary
APRIL 11, 2000
The regular meeting of the Williamstown Township Board of Trustees was called
to order at 7:34 PM. Clerk Graham was asked to record who was present and
recorded the following: Supervisor Obst, Clerk Graham, Treasurer Nilsson,
Trustee Wiegandt, Trustee Zaban and Building Inspector Aven.
The agenda was read over with the following additions: Complaint at 400 and 390
E Grand River Rd. Compensation for Deputy Treasurer to attend Treasurer's
Institute.
PUBLIC COMMENTS AND QUESTIONS:
Mr. Helfmann wanted to know what he can do to get his project going again.
Supervisor Obst said that a revised site plan is required to make the
modifications that Mr. Helfmann is seeking. The property is currently for sale,
but it is not listed. Due to alleged water drainage problems with water coming
from the Litchfield property, Mr. Helfmann claims that he cannot obtain a loan
to go further with the building project. Water is overflowing the storm drains
and backing up onto Mr. Helfmann's property and entering the buildings. Mr.
Helfmann would like to know if temporary use of the facility would be a
possibility. The Board requested that Mr. Helfmann set up a meeting with
Planning Coordinator Martin, Supervisor Obst and any other Board members that
can attend to present a written list of changes that Mr. Helfmann would like to
see made to the existing Site Plan so that he can go forward. The Board also
offered to set up a meeting between Mr. Helfmann and Mr. Litchfield with
members of the board present in an attempt to reach an agreement on the water
issue if Mr. Helfmann requests them to. According to Mr. Helfmann, the Drain
Commission told him that since a public drain is not involved it is an issue
that needs to be resolved by the individual property owners and not by the
Ingham County Drain Commission.
PLANNING COMMISSION - Mickey Martin
Working on master plan. Have a couple of special use permits in process. No
action items this evening.
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS AND BOUNDARY CHANGES REPORTS - Mickey Martin
Annual reports presented. Very few new parcels. There was a net of 6 new
parcels created between April 1, 1999 and March 31, 2000. There were only 5
issues presented to the Zoning Board of Appeals for the whole year.
PARK AND RECREATION COMMITTEE - Chris Nilsson
The Township has received a donation of 100 trees from the Secura Insurance
Company in honor of their Centennial Anniversary Celebration. There will be 20
ten foot trees and 80 seedlings. They will do the planting the week of the
24th.
UNIFINISHED BUSINESS
Complaint Updates
Mr. Helfmann has been addressed. He is no longer conducting any business on the
property.
Fleming - A five foot fence has been installed across the entire parking area.
Neighbor is happy.
423 E Grand River Rd - Constable Report. Took photos on the 29th checked again
on Friday and took pictures again today. The area has been cleaned up. Six
vehicles have been moved off site. The tenant is no longer in the auto repair
business and will be removing all equipment and vehicles related to that
business.
1500 E Grand River Rd
City Municipal Building. Issue closed. Will try to arrange the agreement’s
required joint annual meeting for Saturday May 13th at the Williamston Schools
Community Center.
Ingham County Road Commission - Facts & Figures
A bare bones quote for Mitchell and Vanneter has been received. This quote
covers repairing the existing road, widening gravel shoulders and some
ditching. It does not cover widening the road nor curbs and gutters. The
Township’s transportation committee met Saturday, will be driving the roads on
Wednesday and will report to the Board at the May meeting.
5th Grade Williamston Explorer Elementary School Community Projects
Students have circulated a petition to have a sidewalk installed on Mitchell
Road.
Miss Coralyn Grant is seeking to have a traffic light installed at Grand River
and Zimmer. Transportation Committee Chair, Brian Jennings has responded to her
letter and referred her to the MDOT employees that can assist her further.
Traffic Calming Techniques - Supervisor Obst
Referred to an article from the Planning & Zoning News/February 2000 by Michele
Manning, Associate Planner, Planning & Zoning Center, Inc., titled “Traffic
Calming Techniques” on how various communities are attempting to have traffic
blend in with the rest of the community. The article discusses issues such as
the impact of zoning on traffic, roundabouts, traffic circles, etc.
NEW BUSINESS
Recycling Cost Increase
Mr. Martin Wright needs to increase his monthly charge to the Township from
$360 to $400 due to increases in fuel and truck rental. The $360 charge has
been in effect since January of 1997. Trustee Zaban moved and Trustee Wiegandt
supported agreeing to the monthly rate of $400 for Township recycling beginning
May 1, 2000. Motion passed unanimously.
Sanitary Sewer Allocation Requests
Carl McIntosh - representing a potential buyer for the Kranz property on Rowley
Road is seeking some assurance that through a 425 or through the negotiated
settlement that the Township would allow them to have capacity to serve a
residential subdivision concurrent with the current zoning of R1. The buyer
does not want to end up with property that they cannot develop because of lack
of sewer. The property is adjacent to the Perkins property that is in the
process of being developed as Hideaway Woods 5. Mr. McIntosh is also involved
with that project and believes that if development efforts can be coordinated
between the Kranz and Perkins properties, it may be more appropriate to build
the pump station on the Kranz property. Working with Planning coordinator
Martin, a tentative number of 47 or 48 parcels has been agreed to for the
Perkins property. Approximately 27 lots are requested for the Kranz property.
Treasurer Nilsson moved and Trustee Wiegandt supported that the Township Board
will assure up to 27 hookups for the Kranz property either through the
Township's allotment or a 425 agreement with the City as long as the project
goes forward in a reasonable time frame. Motion passed unanimously.
Mr. McIntosh commented that he would like to see curb and gutter on Mitchell
and Vanneter Roads for safety reasons. He stated that you can also save more
trees by using curb and gutter.
Mr. Aker. - is requesting sewer for his property at Grand River and Glaser
Road. His letter does not specify how many Residential Equivalency Units he is
requesting. The Board needs more information from Mr. Aker before a decision
can be made. Mickey Martin has sent him applications and requests for
information. Have not received anything from him yet.
Ingham County Clerk - Qualifications To Run For Elected Office. Handed out
forms required to run for office. Forms and instructions are available in the
Clerk’s Office.
News Letter Deadline - Mickey Martin asked for an extension due to the Planning
Commission meeting that night. Need to put annual meeting date in the
newsletter.
Computer Equipment Memo - Deputy Treasurer, Sue Jennings
Postponed until we know who is going to be running for office.
Ingham County Equalization Request For Computerized Version Of Assessment
Information
Assessor/Supervisor Obst has declined to provide this information on the same
basis that the Township declined to provide it to a title company last year.
Creating the information for Equalization will then make it available for
anyone to request through the Freedom of Information Act. Any requests for
computerized information needs to come before the board before it is given out.
Email Policy
Need to set guidelines for email requests, similar to our fax policy.
Public Act 123 Questions And Answers
The Tax Sale will probably be canceled this year for 1997 delinquent taxes.
1997 delinquent taxes will be treated the same as 1999 delinquent taxes. They
will go into forfeiture in 2001 and will be foreclosed in 2002. 1998 delinquent
taxes will be treated like 2000 delinquent taxes. They will go into forfeiture
in 2002 and will be foreclosed in 2003.
Compensation For Deputy Treasurer Attending The Michigan Municipal Treasurers’
Institute
Trustee Wiegandt moved and Clerk Graham supported the Township paying the
Institute tuition, lodging, meals, mileage to and from the Institute, and the
Deputy Treasurer’s hourly rate for Township Office Hours of 10-4, M-F for the
Deputy Treasurer to attend the Michigan Municipal Treasurer’s Institute May 7-
12th. Motion passed with Supervisor Obst opposing and Trustee Zaban abstaining.
Township General Appropriations Act
See attached.
Township Board Meeting Dates For Fiscal Year 2000-2001
Trustee Wiegandt moved and Trustee Zaban supported approving the following
Township Board Meeting dates for fiscal year 2000/2001: April 11, 2000; May 2,
2000; June 6, 2000; July 11, 2000; August 1, 2000; September 5, 2000; October
3, 2000; November 14, 2000; December 5, 2000; January 9, 2001; February 6,
2001; and March 6, 2001. Motion approved unanimously.
Depository For General Fund Account, Tax Account And Trust & Agency Account
Treasurer Nilsson moved and Clerk Graham supported to retain the same
depository for the General Fund Account, Tax Account and Trust & Agency
Account. Motion approved unanimously.
CONSENT AGENDA
Moved by Treasurer Nilsson, supported by Clerk Graham to approve the minutes of
the March 7, 2000 Regular Board Meeting; acknowledge the Treasurer’s report of
financial activities for March 2000; approve the Clerk’s list of accounts to be
paid April 11, 2000, check numbers10163-10223 for a total of $52,929.09; and to
accept and place on file the following reports: NIESA minutes of March 2, 2000;
Building Department Activities for March 2000; and the Assessor’s Report and
Updates of March 30, 2000. Supervisor Obst called for a roll call vote:
   Ayes:   Supervisor Obst, Treasurer Nilsson, Clerk Graham, Trustee Zaban,
Trustee Wiegandt
   Nays:   None.
Clerk Graham moved and Trustee Zaban supported to adjourn the meeting.
Meeting adjourned at 9:57 PM.
_____________________________________      ____________________________________
Shirley Graham, Clerk               Susan Jennings, Recording Secretary
APRIL 17, 2000
A Special Williamstown Township Board meeting was called by the Township
Supervisor and posted the same, for Monday, April 17, 2000, at 12:30 PM. All
Township Board members being notified by telephone, or in person. The reason is
to set the possible dates for 1. A Public Hearing on the proposed 425
Agreements; and 2. The Joint Meeting with the City of Williamston and
Williamstown Township, as set forth by the Joint Resolution of the Annexation
of the property at 1500 W. Grand River.
The Special Meeting was called to order at 12:33 PM by Supervisor Obst. A
quorum was present: Supervisor Obst, Clerk Graham, Treasurer Nilsson and
Trustee Wiegandt. Absent, Trustee Zaban.
1.   425 Public Hearing: Moved by Trustee Wiegandt, supported by Treasurer
Nilsson, to hold the 425 Public Hearing at the McGoff Auditorium at 8:30 PM, on
Thursday, May 11, 2000. Passed by unanimous vote. (City meeting at 7:00 PM).
2.   First Joint Annual Meeting, with the City of Williamston, per Agreement of
March 7, 2000: Moved by Trustee Wiegandt, supported by Treasurer Nilsson, to
hold the First Joint Annual Meeting, per Agreement, on Thursday, May 18, 2000,
at 7:30 PM, at the Williamstown Township Hall, 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston.
Passed by unanimous vote.
Move to adjourn by Clerk Graham, supported by Treasurer Nilsson, mutual
agreement to adjourn, no objections. Meeting adjourned at 1:00 PM.
________________________________________
Shirley A. Graham, Clerk
MAY 2, 2000
The regular meeting of the Williamstown Township Board of Trustees was called
to order at 7:30 PM. Clerk Graham was asked to record who was present and
recorded the following: Supervisor Obst, Clerk Graham, Treasurer Nilsson,
Trustee Wiegandt, Trustee Zaban and Building Inspector Aven.
The agenda was read over with no additions.
PUBLIC COMMENTS
Conrad Taschner - Representing the Veterans
Found 70 graves that don't have markers. They are asking the City and Township
to share in the cost of marking these graves. The Township’s share would be
$469. The City of Williamston has approved it for their July 1st budget. Once
these graves are marked, they will be caught up and they will not need to come
back for additional funds. These fall under the petition that was presented to
the Board last year.. This is a supplementary request. Treasurer Nilsson moved
and Trustee Wiegandt supported to provide $469 to the Williamston Cemetery to
replace the missing markers. Motion approved unanimously.
GRAND RIVER & ZIMMER INTERSECTION PRESENTATION - Michigan Department of
Transportation
Tony Kratofil, Associate Region Engineer for MDOT, discussed the safety issues
that exist at the intersection of Zimmer and Grand River. Requests have been
made for a traffic signal, but the intersection does not meet the State’s
warrants for installing a signal. The Township Board had requested more
information on the modern roundabout option. Mr. Kratofil introduced Mr. Leif
Ourston, President of Ourston Roundabout Interchanges, the leading expert in
the United States on roundabout design, and the person hired by the State to
design a roundabout for the Zimmer and Grand River intersection. Mr. Ourston
showed a couple of videos of roundabouts in the Vail Colorado area and in
Britain. He is proposing a 150 foot diameter roundabout for the Grand River and
Zimmer intersection. Road reconstruction is set for the construction season of
2001. Treasurer Nilsson asked about the roundabout in Claremont, California
that was taken out after only eight months. Mr. Ourston stated that particular
roundabout was not designed by him, and was a poor design from the beginning.
23 roundabouts have been built that were designed by Mr. Ourston. All of them
have been successful. Roundabouts on average show a 75% reduction in injury
accidents, and a 50% reduction in accidents of all kinds, as compared to a
signaled intersection. There has never been a pedestrian or bicycle related
crash in a modern roundabout (last 10 years) in this country. Advantages of
modern roundabouts over a signaled intersection are low stop delays; easier to
make the left turn; easier for pedestrians to cross the street; enhanced beauty
of the intersection; elevate whole feeling of town; and reductions in
emissions, fuel waste and noise. France is currently building over 1000 a year.
More information on roundabouts vs. traffic signals can be found at
Ourston.com. MDOT and ICRC emphasized that the intersection is still not close
to meeting warrants for a traffic signal. Currently, the options are keeping
what we have or a roundabout.
Mr. Joe Dexter voiced his concerns about getting large farm equipment around
the roundabout. Mr. Ourston stated that it would be large enough to accommodate
the equipment. Mr. Dwight Kampe stated that he was in favor of the roundabout.
Ms. Jane Reagan, Planning Commission Chair for the City of Williamston, stated
that she was in favor of the roundabout design and that the City was
investigating installing roundabouts at up to three locations. Supervisor Obst
asked the transportation committee to study the information provided and make a
recommendation to the Advisory Committee in time for a recommendation to be
made to the Board by the June 6th Board meeting. Mr. John McLaughlin,
representing the Transportation Committee, stated that the committee would be
very much in favor of doing this. Mickey Martin, Planning Commission Chair,
stated that there will need to be a lot of public education to convince the
community that this is the correct thing to do. She suggested making the videos
available to loan out. Supervisor Obst suggested the Transportation Committee
get some feedback from the City officials as well. Mr. Bob D'Alcorn, P.E.,
Managing Director of the Ingham County Road Commission, stated that the
roundabout at Marsh and Hamilton will be in operation by mid June. They are
using their road construction radio station to educate people on how to drive
the circle. Mr. D’Alcorn also indicated that he was in favor of construction of
the roundabout at the intersection of Zimmer and Grand River.
ADVISORY COMMITTEE - Rutgar Hoag
Park and Recreation - Chris Nilsson
Advisory Committee is recommending that the Township proceed with the plans as
submitted for the Park Entrance. A Fifth Grade Benchmark project of planting
flowers and shrubs around the park sign has been completed.
Transportation Committee - John McLaughlin
They went over the ICRC’s list of suggested improvements. Started with gravel
roads. Feel should be left alone because of low density on them. Individuals
living on them should be contacted if decide otherwise.
Question about crack filling and micro surfacing for temporary repairs of the
roads. Cost for duration of crack filling not warranted. Impressed with micro
surfacing but want to wait for another winter before recommending it for the
township.
A resident of Red Cedar manor asked for repair. There are some spots that need
attention on Congdon. Overall it is in good condition. The committee will
advise the neighborhood of the rating system, and what their direct cost would
be, to see if there is interest in doing something.
It was brought to the committee’s attention that there is some subdivision
development pending across from the Middle School off of Vanneter. The
committee suggests waiting for a schedule of development before scheduling any
construction work on Vanneter and Mitchell. They recommend continuing to set
aside funds for the project and possibly use some of that money now to start
doing engineering work. Supervisor Obst had questions for Mr. D’Alcorn on the
ICRC’s previous proposal vs. their current bare bones proposal. The previous
proposal included curb and gutter, underground catch basins, rebuilding the
road. Current proposal was just for resurfacing, slight widening of shoulder,
slight improvement of drainage at Rowley and Vanneter and drainage that needs
to cross Mitchell at the athletic fields. Would not involve curb and gutter.
The County can roll over funds to next year. Mr. D’Alcorn suggested that the
Township state that they are saving for a larger project. The County
Commissioners are more likely to approve the request if they know it is to save
for a large project. The County approved carrying over the remaining $10,516
from 1999 to 2000. Williamston Schools will be asked by the Ingham County Road
Commission to pay for fixing the drainage problem that they created on Mitchell
Road when they built the athletic fields behind the High School.
Treasurer Nilsson and Trustee Zaban believe in crack filling and want more
information on why the Transportation Committee is against it. The
Transportation Committee was more impressed with micro surfacing than crack
filling, but they want to see how well the micro sealing stands up to another
winter before making a recommendation. Micro surfacing costs approximately
$15,000 to $20,000 a mile. Crack filling costs about $1,200 a mile, but only
lasts a year or two. The Board asked the Transportation Committee to come back
to them with a cost analysis of crack filling vs. micro surfacing and to
further justify their position on crack filling.
The Transportation Committee also reported that it is their belief that the
time has come for the Township to look more seriously at other sources of
income to maintain our roads. Even though there is not a lot going on now, the
Township is going to have more subdivision streets and more serious road
reconstruction in the future. Supervisor Obst requested that the Transportation
Committee come back to the Board with recommendations. Supervisor Obst also
asked for recommendations to implement the committee’s proposal to meet Master
Plan road objectives.
Clerk Graham was contacted by three residents on Barry Road that would like
their road paved. Various requests have been made in the past. The
Transportation Committee had not received any comments from anyone wanting the
roads paved. The Board has asked the committee to come up with recommendations
and cost estimates for paving Barry road.
PLANNING COMMISSION - Mickey Martin
Nothing to report. No action required.
COMPLAINT UPDATES
Helfmann - still ongoing.
390 & 400 E Grand River Rd. - Parking of R.V.s is not mentioned in the prior
edition of the Zoning Ordinance. Since this resident has parked his R.V.s in
the same location for over 20 years, it is the opinion of the Board that he may
fall under a grandfathered clause. No further action will be taken by the Board
at this time. A copy of the Constable’s report will be forwarded to the
property owner.
Mr. Snelson - 423 E. Grand River Rd. - Constable Dahlstrom will recheck in
another 10 days. Mickey Martin recommended that Constable Dahlstrom continue
checking every 10 days until the situation has been taken care of. The Board
generally agreed.
Sherwood & Beeman Roads - somebody is living there. The resident stated that
she will take care of the cars. Constable Dahlstrom has posted a 10 day notice.
425 Public Hearing - May 11, 2000 - 7:00 PM - City/ 8:30 PM - Township at
McGoff auditorium.
Boundary Commission Meeting - May 11, 2000. The Bond Property, 1500 Grand
River, and the Demmer property to be considered.
BUILDING INSPECTOR’S REPORT - Walt Aven
Litchfield’s Sign is in violation and, in violation of code, they have
connected the new pole building to the existing building. They have been
notified that the connection needs to be removed within 15 days. Mr. Litchfield
has applied to the Board of Appeals for a variance on a sign. Can have a 15
foot high 48 square foot sign by Special Land Use Permit.
County Solid Waste Issue -
The County had set up a meeting with Williamstown and Wheatfield townships.
They didn't realize that the Township already has its own recycling program.
Williamston Area Chamber of Commerce
Request for donation. Being a Township, we had to decline for legal reasons.
CONSENT AGENDA
Building Inspector, Walter Aven, pointed out a difference between the
Treasurer's Report and the Building Inspector's Report for fees paid in April.
The Building Inspector reported $1,735, the Treasurer reported $380. Treasurer
Nilsson will investigate. Moved by Clerk Graham, supported by Trustee Wiegandt
to approve the minutes of the April 11, 2000 Regular Board Meeting; acknowledge
the Treasurer’s report of financial activities for April 2000; approve the
Clerk’s list of accounts to be paid May 2, 2000, check numbers 10224-10271 for
a total of $38,601.06; and to accept and place on file the following reports:
NIESA minutes of April 6, 2000; Building Department Activities for April 2000;
and the Assessor’s Report and Updates of April 27, 2000. Supervisor Obst called
for a roll call vote.
   Ayes:   Treasurer Nilsson, Trustee Zaban, Supervisor Obst, Trustee Wiegandt,
Clerk Graham
   Nays:   None.
Supervisor Obst moved and Clerk Graham supported to adjourn the meeting.
Meeting Adjourned at 10:18 p.m.
______________________________________      ___________________________________
Shirley Graham, Clerk               Susan Jennings, Recording Secretary
JUNE 6, 2000
The regular meeting of the Williamstown Township Board of Trustees was called
to order at 7:35 p.m. Deputy Clerk Florence DuBreuil recorded those present as
Supervisor Norman Obst, Treasurer Christine Nilsson, Trustee Ronald Wiegandt,
Trustee Steven Zaban and Building Inspector Walter Aven. Clerk Shirley Graham
was absent. It was moved by Trustee Wiegandt, seconded by Trustee Zaban,
passed, that the absence of Clerk Graham be excused.
Supervisor Obst reviewed the agenda and added the following: Request from Doug
Stover from Ingham County Equalization and Tax Services, Tom Aker’s request for
sewer service, appointment to the NIESA Board, Planning Commission resignation
and appointment, information from Robert Bond’s attorney, and a possible
special meeting of the Board to sign 425 agreements with the City of
Williamston.
INGHAM COUNTY EQUALIZATION AND TAX SERVICES – Doug Stover, Director
Mr. Stover asked that the Township provide Ingham County with the electronic
export of the 2000 assessment roll. All other Ingham County townships had
already done so and the same software was used by 50 percent of the
municipalities in the state. They received many requests for property and tax
information, and such information was not always readily available from
townships. Questions could be answered by the County during regular business
hours. It would also allow the County to do studies and would assist in tax
mapping. The technology would streamline operations, and Mr. Stover would like
to see this done by the end of the year. Supervisor Obst explained that the
Township had not done this in the past due to a desire to maintain residents’
privacy. If such a list existed the Township would be required to provide it
with a FOIA request. At this time no such list exists. The option of denying
the request would be lost if the information were electronically available. He
agreed the process would be beneficial for the County. It was moved by
Treasurer Nilsson, seconded by Trustee Wiegandt, passed unanimously, that the
Township provide the electronic export of the 2000 assessment roll to Ingham
County Equalization and Tax Services.
INGHAM COUNTY SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT – Martha Knorek
Ms. Knorek reported that State law required that county Solid Waste Management
Plans be updated every five years. The new Ingham County plan was now finished
and had been provided to all municipalities. Approval of 67 percent was needed
prior to submittal to the MDEQ for their final approval. Waste generated in
Ingham County could now be sent to 18 facilities in 11 counties, and capacity
was provided for ten years. The budget would be done after the plan was
approved. The County has requested a fee of 62 cents per cubic yard to be
returned to the County for solid waste programs. She asked the Board to adopt a
resolution indicating their support of the County’s Solid Waste Management
Plan. It was moved by Trustee Wiegandt, seconded by Treasurer Nilsson, passed
unanimously, that the Township Board sign a resolution (see page 4) in support
of the Ingham County Board of Commissioners’ Solid Waste Management Plan, as
adopted on April 25, 2000.
COMPENSATION FOR OVER-BOOKING OF TOWNSHIP HALL - Tammy Kalzenski
Ms. Kalzenski explained that she had booked the Township Hall for her wedding
reception and had received a signed contract. It was later discovered by the
Township that there was a previous booking for that date. She had found a new
location after some concern and expense and it had necessitated her making new
invitations. The cost of the Township’s hall was $60 and St. Mary’s hall was
$560. She had been told by Clerk Graham that the matter would be brought to the
Board at this meeting for possible reimbursement. She requested compensation
and a quick resolution of the problem. The Board agreed that some payment was
due. She agreed that $310 would be satisfactory compensation. It was moved by
Trustee Zaban, seconded by Treasurer Nilsson, passed, that compensation in the
amount of $310 would be paid to Tammy Kalzenski for costs incurred due to
overbooking of the Township Hall.
TOM AKER, 1040 East Grand River Road – Request for Sewer Hookup
Mr. Aker had been asked at a previous Board meeting to show the sewer line
which had been placed under Grand River Road for his future use. He submitted a
plan dated May 13, 1996, and approved by the Drain Commission on June 8, 1998,
which showed where the sleeve was located under Grand River, and said he
realized he may have to pump up to the sewer line. He was now asking for one
connection for a single family home. Supervisor Obst explained that the tap
could only come from the Township’s existing allocation of sewer taps, but said
it would be prudent to wait until current 425 agreements were finalized before
making a decision.
PLANNING COMMISSION – Mickey Martin, Planning Coordinator
Fred and Theresa Foote, request to rezone 123 acres at 5820 Shoeman Rd. from
AG-SF to AG-C: The applicants wanted an accessory building larger than that
allowed in the AG-SF district, and requested rezoning to AG-C to allow
unlimited accessory buildings. The use would be for a private horse arena,
which would be in keeping with goals expressed in the Township’s Master Plan as
an alternative use of agricultural land. There had been no comments at the
public hearing and the Planning Commission recommended approval of the
application. It was moved by Trustee Wiegandt, seconded by Trustee Zaban,
passed, that the Board approve the Foote request to rezone 123 acres on Shoeman
Road from AG-SF to AG-C, based on the recommendation of the Planning Commission
and McKenna Associates, Inc.’s letter of May 8, 2000.Bob and Susan Lombardini,
1500 Epley Road, special land use permit and site plan for private riding arena
larger than 2400 square feet in size: All requirements were met. Several
neighbors submitted letters expressing no opposition to the plan. The Planning
Commission recommended approval with the following conditions: (1) the stable
remain in private use, and (2) no outdoor storage to be allowed behind the new
stable. Zoning Ordinance criteria for approval of special land use permits had
been reviewed and were in compliance. It was moved by Trustee Zaban, seconded
by Trustee Wiegandt, passed, that the special land use permit for the
Lombardini private riding arena be approved, with conditions for continued
private use and indoor storage only. Planning Chair Martin reported that many
requests were being received for large accessory buildings for riding arenas,
and the Commission would consider changing the 2400 square foot limit.
Master Plan: A public hearing on the revised Plan would be held on June 27,
2000. Areas with particular revisions included transportation, agriculture
(including alternative agriculture), the Grand River corridor, population, and
an overall update of the entire plan. Also noted and expanded were regional
planning and cooperation, public transit, and affordable housing. The Planning
Commission had gathered master plans from neighboring municipalities and many
of those officials had attended a meeting on the future of agriculture in the
Township.
Hideaway Woods No. : An application had been received from Charles Perkins
requesting rezoning from R-1-S/DO to R-1 for 3.86 acres in Hideaway Woods. The
applicant had asked to use open space from Hideaway Woods No. 3 as open space
in plat No. 5 as well. When the same question had been raised in plat No. 4 in
1996, the Township Attorney had ruled against it. The Township did not plan to
pursue it further at this time, and the applicant had not challenged the
decision.
Planning Coordinator Martin reported that Planning Commissioner Chuck Cleland
had resigned due to retirement and relocation, and she recommended Rutgar Hoag
to fill his term until September 2000. Mr. Hoag had experience with the
Township through the Advisory Council and Zoning Board of Appeals. Supervisor
Obst nominated Rutgar Hoag to fill the Planning Commission vacancy, with his
term to end in September 2000. The motion was seconded by Trustee Wiegandt and
passed unanimously.
ADVISORY COUNCIL – Rutgar Hoag
Transportation Committee
Mr. Hoag reported the Transportation Committee’s recommendation that a study
for Vanneter and Mitchell Roads begin now and other items be put on hold.
Treasurer Nilsson said an Ingham County engineer may have time to work on that
project in the fall, but suggested listing it as a budget item in the event the
County was unable to do the work; Trustee Wiegandt agreed. Mr. Hoag said once
the Township committed to the proposal, the County would see that it was done.
Supervisor Obst suggested working with the County in the fall. It was moved by
Treasurer Nilsson, seconded by Trustee Wiegandt, passed, that the Board accept
the Transportation Committee’s recommendation for year 2000 road improvements,
and commit to and plan for engineering work to be done this year on Mitchell
and Vanneter Roads in conjunction with the Ingham County Road Commission.
Trustee Zaban will check with other counties to see what types of road repairs
they favor.
Mr. Hoag stated it was the recommendation of the Advisory Council that the
Township Board support the concept of a roundabout with five conditions listed
in their report. An effort would be required to educate residents about
benefits, which would include reduced speed and better access to Grand River
and Zimmer Roads. Deputy Clerk DuBreuil reported that Clerk Graham did not
favor the roundabout. Trustee Wiegandt had received calls from 11 people
opposing such a change. Some preferred turn lanes on both roads if a traffic
light could not be installed. Planning Coordinator Martin said MDOT had not
contacted adjoining property owners to inform them of possible plans. The
Supervisor said MDOT had asked for a recommendation from the Township prior to
their decision. Trustee Wiegandt said he could not support a roundabout without
seeing a specific plan for this location, but such a plan would not be
available before fall and a recommendation was requested now.
It was moved by Trustee Zaban, seconded by Treasurer Nilsson, that the Township
Board recommend that the Michigan Department of Transportation go forward with
the roundabout at Grand River and Zimmer Roads with the following conditions:
(1) MDOT start an aggressive informational campaign in the area regarding
roundabouts, how they work, safety features, etc., (2) MDOT contact all
landowners surrounding the proposed roundabout and review the plans for
workability, (3) MDOT and the Board start educational meetings for the public
on how to use a roundabout, (4) MDOT make every effort to lower the speed on
Grand River Road in the area east and west approaching the roundabout, (5) MDOT
contact the Post Office and try to work out another entrance/exit plan onto
Zimmer and Grand River, and (6) a final recommendation will not be made until a
specific site plan is seen. A roll call vote was taken:
   Aye:   Supervisor Obst, Treasurer Nilsson, Trustee Zaban
   Nay:   Trustee Wiegandt
Parks and Recreation Committee
Treasurer Nilsson said a regional park authority would be desirable. It had
been decided not to request a millage for park support in November. The group
planned to have Chuck Withey discuss the issue with them in the future.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Supervisor Obst reported that, with the appointment of Mr. Hoag to the Planning
Commission, there was now a vacancy on the Zoning Board of Appeals. He also
said Senator Rogers’ office had called regarding Gary Helfmann’s complaint that
the Township was making it impossible for him to open his mini-storage
business. Supervisor Obst had explained the history of the case, and no further
action was requested.
Complaints
Constable Howard Dahlstrom’s report of June 6, 2000 indicated that complaints
at 1436 East Grand River appeared to be internal problems between tenants.
Complainant Michael Musser would be notified of Constable Dahlstrom’s findings.
Report from Treasurer
Treasurer Nilsson had reviewed Building Inspector Aven’s question about
discrepancies in totals for building permit fees, and said the differences
appeared to be due to reporting from different sources within the office, done
at different times during the month.
Mr. Aven said he would be retiring from Meridian Township at the end of the
month and would give more attention to Williamstown Township. He also said
State law required that building permit funds be held separately, and he would
discuss this further with the Treasurer.
NIESA Appointment
An appointment was needed to replace Clerk Graham on the NIESA Board. Deputy
Clerk DuBreuil reported that the Clerk had recommended Trustee Wiegandt. It was
moved by Trustee Zaban, seconded by Supervisor Obst, passed, that Trustee
Wiegandt be designated as NIESA representative, with Treasurer Nilsson as
alternate. It was noted that Darrell Brown was now alternate to the NIESA Board
and should be appointed in Clerk Graham’s place. It was moved by Treasurer
Nilsson, seconded by Trustee Wiegandt, passed, that Darrell Brown be appointed
as replacement for Clerk Graham on the NIESA Board, with Trustee Wiegandt as
alternate and Treasurer Nilsson as second alternate.
Cable Commission
George Durak asked to serve on the Cable Commission and new resident Hector
Luna also offered assistance. However, Commission positions were already
filled. It was recommended by Supervisor Obst, seconded by Trustee Wiegandt,
passed, that George Durak, Hector Luna and Trustee Zaban serve in liaison
positions between the Cable Commission and the Township Board.
Robert Bond – Proposed Settlement Agreement from Attorney
Supervisor Obst said attorney Kevin O’Malley had submitted a proposed
settlement agreement, asking the Board to approve the Robert Bond subdivision
plat as submitted five years ago, in exchange for not challenging the proposed
425 agreement with the City of Williamston. Mr. Obst recommended the request be
submitted to the Planning Commission for their consideration after discussion
with the Township Attorney.
Special Meeting
A special meeting of the Township Board was set for Monday, June 12, 2000 at 1:
00 p.m. at the Township Hall, with the intent of considering the adoption of
Act 425 agreements with the City of Williamston. The City Council is expected
to consider adopting the agreements at their June 12 evening meeting.
Park Entrance Proposal
Planning Coordinator Martin reported that a proposal had been received, as
requested by the Board, for the entrance to the Township park, and she would
proceed with sending it out for bids.
CONSENT AGENDA
It was moved by Treasurer Nilsson, seconded by Trustee Zaban, to approve
minutes of the May 2, 2000 regular Board meeting, minutes of the May 18, 2000
First Annual Joint Meeting of the City of Williamston and Williamstown
Township, acknowledge Treasurer’s report of financial activities for May 2000;
approve the Clerk’s list of accounts to be paid June 6, 2000, check numbers
10272 to 10336 for a total of $40,917.08; to accept and place on file the
following reports: Zoning Board of Appeals minutes of May 24, 2000; NIESA
minutes of May 4, 2000; Building Department Activities of May 2000; Assessor’s
Report and Updates of May 26, 2000.  A roll call vote was taken: 4 aye, 0 nay,
1 absent.
It was moved by Trustee Zaban, seconded by Trustee Wiegandt, passed, that the
meeting be adjourned. The meeting adjourned at 10:15 p.m.
___________________________________      ___________________________________
Florence DuBreuil, Deputy Clerk            Rosemary B. Philip, Recording
Secretary
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP
ESOLUTION OF APPROVAL
INGHAM COUNTY SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT PLAN
WHEREAS, Michigan counties, under the “Public Health Code”, have a
responsibility to prevent and control environmental hazards; and,
WHEREAS, the “Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act” requires
counties to conduct solid waste planning processes and to adopt a countywide
solid waste management plan; and,
WHEREAS, the Ingham County Board of Commissioners has approved the Solid Waste
Management Plan; and,
WHEREAS, Part 115 of the “Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act”
requires 67 percent municipal approval for a Solid Waste Management Plan to
obtain approval by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED, that the WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP Board of
Trustees approves the Solid Waste Management Plan as adopted by the Ingham
County Board of Commissioners on April 25, 2000.
AYES:         Supervisor Norman Obst
         Treasurer Christine Nilsson
         Trustee Ronald    Wiegandt
         Trustee Steven Zaban
NAYS:         None
ABSENT:      Clerk Shirley Graham
ABSTENTIONS:   None
I hereby certify that the foregoing Resolution was adopted at a regular meeting
of WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP Board of Trustees held on June 6, 2000, a quorum being
present.
__________________________________________      _______________________________
Signature                     Date
JULY 11, 2000
The regular meeting of the Williamstown Township Board of Trustees was called
to order at 7:30 p.m. Deputy Clerk Florence DuBreuil stated a quorum was
present and recorded the following: Supervisor Norman Obst, Treasurer Christine
Nilsson, Trustee Ronald Wiegandt, Trustee Steven Zaban, Deputy Clerk Florence
DuBreuil and Building Inspector Walter Aven. Clerk Shirley Graham’s absence was
excused due to illness.
The agenda was reviewed with the following addition: Litchfield letter
requesting a refund of their Special Land Use Permit application fee.
AUDITOR’S REPORT - Michael Gaffney
The Township received an unqualified opinion. There was a 10% increase in
revenues over the previous year. This was partially due to the one time
settlement payment from the City of Williamston. There was a 5% decrease in
expenditures. This was partially due to the reduction of road work last year.
Report on Internal Control Structures - Overall systems work quite well. There
were a couple of minor issues noted. The Sewer Replacement fund and Debt
Service fund did not have an adopted budget. The Township needs to adopt one
for the Debt Service Fund for the 2000/2001 fiscal year. The Sewer Replacement
fund no longer exists.
Accounting transactions - Initial transaction of a performance bond was not in
the general ledger, but the pay back of the bond was. Need to report the entire
transaction in the general ledger.
PLANNING COMMISSION REPORT - Mickey Martin
There were no action items for the Board. A public hearing was held June 27th
to obtain input regarding the proposed changes to the Master Plan. The majority
of the comments were on traffic. In general, people seemed happy with the way
development has progressed in the Township and is planned to progress in the
future. The Planning Commission will deliberate and vote on the plan this
month. MDOT is saying now they will address the problems at Grand River and
Zimmer absent a roundabout and absent a traffic light. There are three Public
Hearings scheduled for July 18th. 1) Rezoning request for Charles Perkins for
the R1S - D/O open area; 2) Shoemaker request for a Special Land Use Permit for
a 2300 sq. foot building; and 3) All Terrain Alterations request for a Special
Land Use Permit and Site Plan Review to expand their facility. Treasurer
Nilsson questioned the Perkins rezoning request. Some of the Open Space
established with Mr. Perkin’s density option was designated as temporary open
space. This means that if circumstances change the property has a possibility –
though not a guarantee – of being rezoned. The recent availability of sewer in
the area is such a change.
PARK AND RECREATION COMMITTEE - Chris Nilsson and Mickey Martin
The construction for the park entrance has been put out to bid. Waiting for
bids to come in. Will also post it on the door at the Township Hall. George
Durak had a question on the Township's involvement in the regional recreation
authority. Chuck Withey has a committee looking into the viability of such an
authority. The Board supports the idea, but not a millage at this time. Need to
do further investigation and planning before money is needed. Have not gotten
past the general concept phase yet, which they need to do to get this going.
1999 Public Act 123 and Legislative update from the Treasurer's Institute - Sue
Jennings
Report accepted. No questions.
OLD BUSINESS
ICRC/ Carryover of Road Improvement Allocations, 1999-2001
MDOT: Grand River Road & Zimmer Road Considerations
The Board hopes the MDOT engineering department can come up with some ideas and
plans for the intersection since the roundabout has been turned down. Will stay
on top of it and see if they can come up with some good ideas for the
intersection. Mr. Durak had a question on how Meridian and Grand River compared
to Zimmer and Grand River. Studies a few years ago showed that a small minority
goes east on Grand River from south bound Meridian.
425 Agreements
The three Act 425 agreements have been signed by both the City and the
Township. The detachment election is cancelled. The injunction is permanent
pending further action from the court.
Sewer For Other Residents And Possible Additional 425's. – Norman Obst
We have opened up talks with the City regarding a possible fourth Act 425
agreement for services to non contiguous property.
Bond Property
There is a meeting with Mr. Bond's attorney, the City and the Township on
Wednesday July 12th at 9:00 a.m.
NEW BUSINESS
Cable Commission
The Board needs to appoint a replacement for Charles Wilson. Trustee Wiegandt
moved and Treasurer Nilsson supported to appoint George Durak to the Cable
Commission for the remainder of Mr. Wilson's term. Motion passed unanimously.
Mr. Durak stated that he would like to see an amendment that would require a
member of the Cable Commission to subscribe to the cable service.
Zoning Board of Appeals
Need to fill the vacancy left by Mr. Rutgar Hoag’s resignation when he was
appointed to the Planning Commission. Will advertise in the newsletter for a
new member of the ZBA unless the position has been filled by publication date.
Greater Lansing Area Regional NPDES Phase II Storm Water Regulations Committee
Nancy Fink has volunteered to represent the Township. Motion made by Trustee
Zaban and supported by Trustee to Wiegandt to adopt the Greater Lansing Area
Regional NPDES Phase II Storm Water Regulations Committee Resolution, naming
Nancy Fink as the Township’s representative to the committee. Motion passed
unanimously. Trustee Steve Zaban stated that he would be willing to serve as a
backup to the committee if Mrs.Fink were not available for a meeting.
Newsletter Deadline for August 2000
Articles need tp be submitted by August 7th.
TOPS Request For Building Use
It was generally agreed that the building should be available for the Township
residents use and not tied up by another organization every week. AA currently
uses the building at no cost but they are willing to be bumped when there is a
need for the hall to be used by someone else. If they agree to the same
conditions that AA has then the board has agreed to address the issue again at
a later date. The Deputy Clerk will contact TOPS.
Litchfield Request
The Litchfields are requesting a refund of the $1,500 Special Land Use Permit
Application fee. The Township went to an escrow system because of this type of
situation where the plans change. Discussion followed on how to address the
situation. Trustee Wiegandt moved and Treasurer Nilsson supported giving the
Litchfield Commercial Center a credit of $300 on the application fees they have
already paid. The Township will hold the $1800 in escrow for the special use
permit, with any balance to be refunded at the end of the process. Motion
passed unanimously. Supervisor Obst will write a letter informing the
Litchfields of the Board’s decision.
Building Department - Walter Aven
Mr. Helfmann’s Building Permit has expired on the rental units. The Site Plan
has also expired. He needs to apply for new permits if he decides to go forward
with the project. Building Inspector Aven will cancel the permit this month.
Gypsy Moths
Nancy Fink asked about gypsy moth complaints this year. The Township Office has
only had one call inquiring about spraying. Mrs. Fink will get more brochures
at her convenience since there does not seem to be a large problem with gypsy
moths in the Township this year.
CONSENT AGENDA
Moved by Trustee Wiegandt, supported by Treasurer Nilsson to approve the
minutes of the June 6, 2000 Regular Board Meeting, the minutes of the June 12,
2000 Special Board Meeting and the minutes of the June 20, 2000 Special Board
Meeting; acknowledge the Treasurer’s report of financial activities for June
2000; approve the Clerk’s list of accounts to be paid May 2, 2000, check
numbers 10337-10409 for a total of $49,711.51; and to accept and place on file
the following reports: NIESA minutes of June 1, 2000; Building Department
Activities for June 2000; the Assessor’s Report and Updates of July 5, 2000;
and the ZBA minutes of May 24, 2000. Supervisor Obst called for a roll call
vote.
   Ayes: Supervisor Obst, Treasurer Nilsson, Trustee Zaban, Trustee Wiegandt
   Nays: None.
Trustee Zaban moved and Treasurer Nilsson supported adjourning the meeting.
Motion passed. Meeting adjourned at 9:25 p.m.
______________________________________      ___________________________________
Florence DuBreuil, Deputy Clerk         Susan Jennings, Recording
SecretaryGREATER LANSING AREA REGIONAL NPDES PHASE II
STORM WATER REGULATIONS COMMITTEE
WHEREAS, the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is requiring
nine communities in the greater Lansing area to obtain a National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System Phase II (NPDES II) Permit by March 2003, and
WHEREAS, the NPDES II permit process is an unfunded federal mandate, and
WHEREAS, the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ) has developed
criteria to obtain funding in the form of grants in part from the Clean
Michigan Initiative if communities adopt a voluntary approach to storm water
and watershed management, and
WHEREAS, representatives of the nine communities named by the EPA those being
City of Lansing, City of East Lansing, Meridian Township, Lansing Township,
Delta Township, Delhi Township, Bath Township, Dewitt Township, and
Williamstown Township, have met to develop a cooperative regional approach to
implementing a storm water and watershed management plan, and
NOW, THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED, that a committee composed of representatives
from the nine named communities meet on a regular basis to facilitate the
requirements of the NPDES II Permit by developing a regional storm water and
watershed management plan while seeking the input and assistance from other
agencies including but not limited to county commissions, county drain
commissioner’s offices, county health departments, county road commissions,
Tri-County Regional Planning Commission, and the Michigan Municipal League.
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, that the committee shall also meet to develop funding
strategies to implement this regional stormwater and watershed management plan.
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, that Nancy Fink or her designee is authorized to be the
official representative from Williamstown Township to the committee.
BE IT FINALLY RESOLVED, that the storm water and watershed management plan and
any funding strategies must be approved by the participating communities’
governing bodies before implementation.
AUGUST 1, 2000
The regular meeting of the Williamstown Township Board of Trustees was called
to order at 7:35 p.m. Deputy Clerk DuBreuil stated a quorum was present and
recorded the following: Supervisor Norman Obst, Treasurer Christine Nilsson,
Trustee Ronald Wiegandt, Trustee Steven Zaban, Deputy Clerk Florence DuBreuil,
Township Attorney Vincent Spagnuolo and Building Inspector Walter Aven. Clerk
Shirley Graham's absence was excused due to illness.
The agenda was reviewed with the following additions: Office secretary
resignation and replacement; Hector Luna appointment to Zoning Board of
Appeals; complaint in Woodview; and entrance proposal to the park.
REPORTS
PLANNING COMMISSION - Mickey Martin
Special Land Use Permit request for the Schoenmaker’s accessory building to
exceed the size allowed by ordinance. The Planning Commission recommends
approval. Treasurer Nilsson moved, and Trustee Wiegandt supported to accept the
Planning Commission’s recommendation for approval of a Special Land Use Permit
for total accessory building square footage to exceed 2,400 square feet in the
AG-SF district.. Approved unanimously.
The Planning Commission has updated the Master Plan and passed a resolution to
approve the Master Plan. The Planning Commission would like to encourage the
Board to consider the Master Plan in their future decisions. New Master Plans
are available. Main updates are in transportation, population updates, regional
planning/cooperation, and encouraging smaller farms. Encouraging residential
and low density commercial along Grand River. Encouraging multi family
dwellings along Grand River Rd. close to the City where sewer and water are
available.
Petition for road abandonment of Francis Road in the Meadowdale Subdivision.
Francis Road did not develop into another subdivision. The Road is surrounded.
No practical way that it will ever be able to extend to Vanneter Road. The
Planning Commission recommends voting in favor of abandonment. The current road
right of way will be split between the two lots that butt up to the road.
Trustee Wiegandt moved, and Treasurer Nilsson supported to approve the request
for abandonment of Francis Road in Meadowdale Subdivision. Motion passed
unanimously.
PARK & RECREATION COMMITTEE - Mickey Martin
Entrance into the park. We have received two bids for a permanent entrance into
the Township Park. One was for $105,000 and the other for $104,000. These were
about $50,000 more than anticipated. If we don’t do the entrance on Grand River
that is recommended by MDOT, we can reduce the cost by $20,000-$22,000. All
Terrain, which is located directly across the street from the park, has offered
to work on a time and material basis. The other bidder is Quality Landscape on
Chandler Road. Mrs. Martin will investigate further and make sure all MDOT
requirements are met.
UNIFINISHED BUSINESS
Cable Commission
Trustee Wiegandt moved and Treasurer Nilsson supported the re-appointment of
Richard Williams to the Cable Commission for a three year term to end in June
2003. Motion passed unanimously.
Treasurer Nilsson moved and Trustee Wiegandt supported the appointment of
George Durak to the Cable Commission for a three year term to end in June 2003.
Motion passed unanimously.
NEW BUSINESS
Budget Amendment - Recording Secretary
Auditors suggested having a separate line item for the Board Recording
Secretary instead of posting it under Deputy Clerk. Trustee Wiegandt moved, and
Treasurer Nilsson supported creating a new line item under the Clerk,
department 215, for recording secretary; and move $1000 from contingency to the
new account. Motion passed unanimously.
Current Office Situation.
Marilynn Garner can come back full time until November. Will have a meeting to
work out what needs to be done as far as other current office personnel taking
on additional responsibilities. The Board would like to thank Carol for her
service to the Township, express their happiness that she found a better
position, and regret that we are losing her at this time.
General Agreement to hire Marilynn Garner on a temporary basis as the Township
Secretary until November or a permanent replacement can be found.
Zoning Board of Appeals - Opening on the Zoning Board of Appeals due to Rutgar
Hoag being appointed to the Planning Commission. Treasurer Nilsson moved and
Trustee Wiegandt supported appointing Mr. Hector Luna to the Zoning Board of
Appeals for a three year term. Motion passed unanimously.
Two openings on the Planning Commission - Will put item in the newsletter
advertising these openings.
Tree movement complaint in Woodview. Trees were required to be planted
according to the Site Plan. Doug Price sent letters out advising about the
trees. If nothing in the covenants and nothing in the deed restrictions how do
they know that it is in the site plan? Will come back next month with a
recommendation.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Nancy Fink - Needs to know who to call about a tree in Foote Cemetery that fell
on her property and broke the stock fence. Someone cut the tree and left it.
Needs to call Wayne Fate from the Cemetery Board.
Kathryn Lo - Bob Miller from capitol area astronomy club talked to the Planning
Commission about light pollution. The Township parking lot has the right kind
of street lights (shoe box) to help prevent light pollution, but they need to
be aimed down. Will contact THEE Electric to see what can be done.
CONSENT AGENDA
Moved by Treasurer Nilsson, supported by Trustee Wiegandt to approve the
minutes of the July 11, 2000 Regular Board Meeting; acknowledge the Treasurer’s
report of financial activities for July 2000; approve the Clerk’s list of
accounts to be paid August 1, 2000, check numbers10410-10460 for a total of
$36,878.43; and to accept and place on file the following reports: Building
Department Activities for July 2000, and the Assessor’s Report/Updates of July
24, 2000. Supervisor Obst called for a roll call vote.
   Ayes:   Trustee Wiegandt, Trustee Zaban, Treasurer Nilsson, Supervisor Obst
   Nays:   None.
   Excused: Clerk Graham
Trustee Zaban moved and Trustee Wiegandt supported going into closed session
for purposes of discussing the written legal opinion of counsel. Supervisor
Obst called for a roll call vote.
   Ayes:   Trustee Wiegandt, Trustee Zaban, Treasurer Nilsson, Supervisor Obst
   Nays:   None.
   Excused: Clerk Graham
The Board designates the Recording Secretary, Building Inspector and Planner
remain for the session.
Trustee Zaban moved, and Trustee Wiegandt supported going back into open
session. Motion passed. Session opened at 9:18 p.m.
Treasurer Nilsson moved, and Trustee Zaban supported adjourning.
Meeting adjourned at 9:19 PM.
________________________________________   ____________________________________
Florence DuBreuil, Deputy Clerk         Susan Jennings, Recording Secretary
SEPTEMBER 5, 2000
The regular meeting of the Williamstown Township Board of Trustees was called
to order at 7:35 p.m. Deputy Clerk DuBreuil stated a quorum was present and
recorded the following: Supervisor Norman Obst, Treasurer Christine Nilsson,
Trustee Ronald Wiegandt, Trustee Steven Zaban, Deputy Clerk Florence DuBreuil,
and Building Inspector Walter Aven. Clerk Shirley Graham deceased August 17,
2000.
The agenda was reviewed with the following additions: appointment of committee
to review our burning ordinance and a resolution honoring Clerk Shirley Graham.
PLANNING COMMISSION: Mickey Martin
Special Land Use Permit for Litchfield Commercial Center. Permit for a sign to
exceed the maximum allowed height of six feet. The Planning Commission has
recommended approving the Special Land Use Permit to erect a sign with a
maximum of nine feet. The nine feet will include a planter on the bottom and/or
a roof and lighting on the top. Motion: Trustee Wiegandt moved and Trustee
Zaban supported approving the Planning Commission’s recommendation for approval
of a Special Land Use Permit for Litchfield Commercial Center for a maximum
sign height of nine feet, based on the fact that visibility was needed for
businesses at the rear of the site, and landscaping and a roof were found to be
attractive and appealing because they were consistent with the design of the
primary building. Motion passed unanimously.
All Terrain Special Land Use Permit to expand and improve their premises. All
conditions of the Planning Commission have been met. Contractors will be able
to go in and get their materials which is why parking in the front had to be
approved. Wholesale operation, not much retail. Can have 25% retail in the
district that they are in. Public comment was in favor. Motion: Treasurer
Nilsson moved and Trustee Zaban supported approving the Planning Commission’s
recommendation for approval of a Special Land Use Permit for All Terrain
Alterations. Supervisor Obst asked if any conditions needed to be added to the
motion. Planning Chair Martin stated that there were no conditions needed on
the motion because they have all been satisfied. Motion passed unanimously.
Larkin Country Side Acres Final Plat - Part of the development will be platted,
part will not. Deed restrictions will cover the entire development. Only the
first 10 lots are platted. The developers have put up performance bonds to
ensure that the infrastructure will be completed. The infrastructure is usually
complete at this point in the process, but they have decided to go with
performance bonds instead. Motion: Supervisor Obst moved and Trustee Zaban
supported approval of the Planning Commission’s recommendation for approval of
the final plat for Larkin Countryside Acres contingent on the execution of the
subdivision improvement agreement. Motion passed unanimously.
Spag's Bar and Grill Modification of Special Land Use Permit. Requesting
outdoor seating. Planning Commission recommending approving this contingent on
landscaping being brought up to standards set in the original Special Land Use
Permit. There will only be low lighting, no high direct lighting other than
what they already have in the parking lot. No current parking will be lost. The
current Special Land Use Permit specifies parking requirements that will still
need to be met. Motion: Treasurer Nilsson moved and Trustee Wiegandt supported
approving the Planning Commission’s recommendation for approval of a Special
Land Use Permit modification for Spag’s Bar and Grill to allow outdoor seating,
conditional upon landscaping being brought up to standards set in the original
Site Plan. There was a question raised on whether or not the prohibition of
outdoor music needed to be added to the motion. It is already stated on the
Site Plan that there will be no outdoor music, so it does not need to be
mentioned in this motion. Motion passed unanimously.
Rezoning Request For Perkins R1-S/Density Option To R1. Talking about the
parcels on either side of the pond. The Density Option stated that the parcels
had to be rezoned to R1 before any development could be done there. Possibility
of 6 to 8 more lots in that area. Land south of it is in R1-S. Mr. Dennis
Sell’s letter objecting to the rezoning was read into the record (see
attached). Carl McIntosh’s letter refuting the Planning Commission’s reasons
for recommending denial of the request was read into the record (see attached).
Motion: Treasurer Nilsson moved and Trustee Zaban supported approving the
Planning Commission’s recommendation for denial of the rezoning request for
Hideaway Woods #3 from R1-S/DO to R1, based on the following: (1) in light of
the original agreement for Hideaway Woods #3, open space would be lost, (2)
there is a potential for water problems caused by disturbing the area
significantly, (3) poor soils would be better suited for lower density
development, (4) the value of the area would not be improved by increasing its
density, (5) rezoning would create a special privilege by profiting only the
landowner while not contributing to the Township as a whole, and (6) public
comments did not favor the rezoning and it would not serve residents of the
Township. Motion passed 3-1 with Supervisor Obst, Treasurer Nilsson and Trustee
Zaban voting in favor and Trustee Wiegandt voting against denying the request.
Rezoning was denied.
PARKS AND REC. - Mickey Martin and Christine Nilsson
The Township heard back from MDOT that we do not have to put in the permanent
access off of Grand River at this time. This will make the entrance work more
affordable. Will start working on the access road. The next Park Committee
meeting will be on Thursday September 14th. Working on the Park Ordinance.
Planning Commission has gotten to the point where they need more input from the
Park Committee. Need to post the No Hunting signs again. Possibly a permanent
sign for the entrance that states no hunting as well. It is part of the DNR
Grant that there can be no hunting on the property.
UNIFINISHED BUSINESS
Woodview Trees - letter from Coralee Thelen of 4102 Vanneter Road. Trees that
were planted on the lot that backs up to her property for screening were moved
and now the required and desired screening no longer exists. The Thelens would
like to see trees of a similar size that were moved to be planted so that the
screening would be restored. This barrier was part of the approved conditions
and is specified on the Site Plan. The subdivision covenants that the developer
gave the property owners stated that trees could not be cut without prior
permission, it did not mention anything about trees being moved. Mrs. Thelen
stated that the intention was stated, and that a reasonable person would think
that if a tree couldn’t be cut without permission then it shouldn’t be moved
without permission either. She believes it is a sham to the surrounding
property owners if the agreements entered into in good faith to allow the
subdivision cannot be enforced. The Township’s Subdivision Ordinance has
clearer language and requirements now that should prevent this type of
situation in the future. Unfortunately, they were not in effect when this
subdivision was created. Mr. Thelen did tell the lot owner that the trees were
required to stay where they were before she moved them. Supervisor Obst
suggested the Board work with the developer, the Thelens and the lot owner to
work out a mutually satisfactory solution.
Aker Request For TAP.
It is appropriate to reserve capacity to properties in the Act 425 agreement
and to have a signed site plan before granting capacity. Purpose of the 425 is
to square off boundaries. Uncertainty about capacity on the east side of the
township. Supervisor Obst’s recommendation would be to hold back on capacity at
this point. Need criteria set up for people to meet in order to grant Taps. If
not doing on first come first serve basis then need a set of reasons on why we
want to reserve it. Recommend working with Planning Consultant Chris Doozen and
Township Attorney Vince Spagnuolo to come up with criteria for granting the
Taps.
NEW BUSINESS
Burning Ordinance - Marc Fabbo
Mr. Fabbo has used the burning permit vehicle to have barbecues/clam bakes in a
fire pit. As the subdivision (Hideaway Woods) is growing, when it reaches 45
homes he will be severely restricted for burning. Suggest a way to keep the
spirit of what they are trying to do, not trying to burn lumber and brush, but
have in ground fire pits. Would like to spearhead a committee to investigate
this and address other issues with the burning ordinance. Board has generally
agreed to appoint Marc to head up such a committee. An announcement will be
made in the next newsletter asking for additional committee members.
Resolution Honoring Shirley Graham
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP
INGHAM COUNTY, MICHIGAN
At a Regular Meeting of the Board of Trustees of Williamstown Township, Ingham
County, Michigan held at the Township Hall, 4990 North Zimmer Road,
Williamston, Michigan on Tuesday, September 5, 2000 at 7:30 p.m. there were:
Present: Supervisor Norman Obst, Treasurer Christine Nilsson, Trustee Ronald
Wiegandt, Trustee Steven Zaban, Deputy Clerk Florence DuBreuil, Building
Inspector Walter Aven
Absent: None
The following resolution was offered by all and supported by all. The
Resolution was adopted unanimously.
Resolution Honoring
SHIRLEY A. GRAHAM, CLERK
Williamstown Township
   WHEREAS, the Township Board and building inspector of the Township of
Williamstown desire to record their heavy sense of loss at the death of their
Clerk, Shirley A. Graham, on August 17, 2000, as well as to record its
affection for Shirley, be it
   RESOLVED, that the Township Board of the Township of Williamstown extends a
heartfelt expression of its sorrow at the loss of Shirley, and does hereby
record in the September 5, 2000 Minutes of the Williamstown Township Board, the
passing of a person who was loved and esteemed by her friends and associates,
who was dedicated to her position of Clerk and to the people of Williamstown
Township, and who, by being so conscientious, was responsible for the efficient
operation of the Township Office and for the great range of services provided
to our residents; and be it further
   RESOLVED, that an original copy of this resolution is to be tendered to
Shirley’s family as an expression of the Williamstown Township Board’s earnest
sorrow and deepest sympathy.
____________________________      __________________________
Norman Obst, Supervisor         Christine Nilsson, Treasurer
____________________________      __________________________
Ronald Wiegandt, Trustee         Steven Zaban, Trustee
____________________________
Walter Aven, Building Inspector
____________________________      Dated: September 5, 2000
Florence DuBreuil, Deputy Clerk
ZBA Appointment
Motion: Trustee Zaban moved and Trustee Wiegandt supported re-appointing Gerard
Fields to the Zoning Board of Appeals for a three year term expiring on
September 9, 2003. Motion approved unanimously.
Clerk Appointment
Motion: Treasurer Nilsson moved and Trustee Wiegandt supported appointing
Florence DuBreuil to fill the remainder of Shirley Graham’s term as Township
Clerk until the general election in November. Motion passed unanimously.
Advisory Council for the Planning Commission
Supervisor Obst suggested creating an Advisory Council for the Planning
Commission. Motivation is to put the talent to use. Generally decided to
suggest appropriate committees of the Advisory Council for those who expressed
an interest in serving, but are not appointed to the Planning Commission at
this time due to a lack of openings.
Planning Commission Appointments
Motion: Supervisor Obst nominated Rudd Hoag, and Bob Hayes be re-appointed, and
Ron Cook to be appointed, replacing Mickey Martin, to three year terms on the
Planning Commission. Supported by Trustee Zaban. Motion passed unanimously.
Watershed Issues Committee - Nancy Fink
Called the Drain Commission to get their goals for the watershed issues and DEQ
for our areas involvement. The Township was named because Pebblebrook was of
concern in the eastern end of the urbanized area of the City of Lansing. Talked
to Ken Zichi to discuss formation of the committee. Ken does not want to
continue on the committee. Recommending that a Red Cedar Watershed Committee of
six be formed. Nancy would like to remain on the committee and has a couple of
names in mind. Ed Noonan is one of the people that would like to be involved.
Three separate situations that they would be dealing with. Meeting being
planned for representatives in the urbanized area in Delta Township. Nancy will
attend the next meeting.
Office Help - Christine Nilsson
Treasurer Nilsson moved to hire Susan Jennings for one day a week at a higher
pay (time and a half of regular hourly rate). This would be about the same as
the hourly rate for a Kelly Girl. Motion was not supported. Reason was to keep
posting up to date for counter receipts, checks and treasurer’s receipts;
computer things that come up, other procedures. With the turnover in the
secretary and Clerk's office think it would improve the service to the
community. Supervisor Obst asked if there is something not getting done that
needs to be done. If so, how are we going to do it. Trustee Zaban suggested
making the incoming Clerk and Treasurer be the new deputies if they are
available.
Reviewed The Minutes For The Closed Session.
Cable Committee - Steve Zaban
Trustee Zaban reported on the last Cable Commission meeting with the new owners
of Millennium Digital Media. Did not feel that the issues were being properly
addressed by the company.
Secretarial Search - Mickey Martin
Mrs. Martin reported that 16 applications have been received to date. She has
been very encouraged by the resumes. Lots of computer experience and
secretarial experience. Still accepting applications until Friday, September 8,
2000.
CONSENT AGENDA
Motion: Moved by Treasurer Nilsson, supported by Trustee Wiegandt to approve
the minutes of the August 1, 2000 Regular Board Meeting; acknowledge the
Treasurer’s report of financial activities for August 2000; approve the Clerk’s
list of accounts to be paid September 5, 2000, check numbers10461-10538 for a
total of $37,602.18; and to accept and place on file the following reports:
Building Department Activities for August 2000, the Assessor’s Report/Updates
of August 31, 2000; Minutes of the August 2, 2000 Zoning Board of Appeals
meeting; and the NIESA minutes of July 6, 2000. Supervisor Obst called for a
roll call vote:
   Ayes:   Trustee Zaban, Treasurer Nilsson, Supervisor Obst, Clerk DuBreuil,
Trustee Wiegandt
   Nays:   None.
Adjournment
Motion: Trustee Zaban moved and Supervisor Obst supported adjourning the
meeting.
Meeting adjourned at 10:05 p.m.
____________________________________      ____________________________________
Florence DuBreuil, Township Clerk         Susan Jennings, Recording Secretary
OCTOBER 3, 2000
The regular meeting of the Williamstown Township Board of Trustees was called
to order at 7:37 p.m. Clerk DuBreuil stated a quorum was present and recorded
the following: Supervisor Norman Obst, Treasurer Christine Nilsson, Trustee
Ronald Wiegandt, Trustee Steven Zaban and Building Inspector Walter Aven.
The agenda was reviewed with the following additions: Nancy Fink - sample
resolutions for the watershed phase II non source pollution authorizing her to
be on the committee. Mickey Martin - campaign signs.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Laura Baird for Circuit Court Judge
She has served as an Ingham County Commissioner and in the Michigan House of
Representatives. She has been a caucus leader on the judiciary committee in the
House. The vacancies are in the newly created family division of the circuit
court which fits her background. Combines probate courts and circuit court
functions into one court. Any newly elected judge goes into the family
division. Won an academic award for family law.
Eric Schertzing for Ingham County Treasurer
Chance to expand his public service. Enjoys working with numbers and figures.
Masters in Public Administration. Currently Chief Deputy Drain Commissioner for
Ingham County.
Campaign signs
Maximum size allowed is 16 sq. feet. Only one sign allowed per candidate or
issue per parcel. Maximum height of 10 feet. Supervisor Obst will write the
letter to Mr. Deweese informing him that he is in violation of the Township’s
ordinance.
PLANNING COMMISSION - Mickey Martin
No action required. Mr. Perkins came in with preliminary plot plan for Hideaway
Woods V. Action on this has been postponed until the Township can find out from
the City of Williamston the capacity in the sewer line.
Larkin Countryside Acres
Supervisor Obst moved and Trustee Wiegandt supported approving the Subdivision
Improvement Agreement with the developers of Larkin Countryside Acres. Motion
carried unanimously. Documents were signed by Supervisor Obst while we had a
notary in the audience.
Park and Rec. Committee - Christine Nilsson
Showed pictures of the progress on the driveway installation. All Terrain
Alterations is building the road. Construction is on schedule.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Woodview Trees
Supervisor Obst recommended the Township chip in $100 per tree for three trees.
The Evans’ have agreed to purchase three foot trees. Supervisor Obst’s thought
is that with the money contributed by the Township, larger trees could be
purchased and installed. Trustee Wiegandt sees the issue as the developer's
problem, not the Township's problem since the developer did not file the deed
restrictions with the County. He does not believe it is our responsibility to
fix the problem. Planner Mickey Martin stated that a solution is to make the
developers put these types of site plan conditions on the deed restrictions.
Supervisor Obst suggested contacting the subdivision homeowners association
about the issue. Treasurer Nilsson believed that when the Thelens addressed the
Board at the September meeting that they stressed that they wanted to make the
Township aware of the situtation so that they could take steps to prevent it
from happening in the future and not that they were necessarily looking for
retribution in this case. When Building Inspector Aven talked to Mrs. Thelen
about the situation away from the Board meeting his impression agreed with
Treasurer Nilsson’s impression of the situation. The Evans' want to know what
is expected of them. They have offered to replace the trees with three foot
trees. The Board generally agreed to having the Evans’ replace the trees with
three foot trees. Supervisor Obst will write a letter to the Thelen's thanking
them for their input.
Complaint - L. Alan Davies 6244 N. Williamston Rd.
Building Inspector Aven has talked to Mr. Horstman, the owner of the property.
Mr. Davies has already moved out. Mr. Horstman was having the heating taken
care of. Mr. Horstman will get a licensed heating contractor and electrician to
take care of the problems.
NEW BUSINESS
Consumers Energy Drilling Wells
The requested letter was not received from the complainant on this issue.
Tabled until further information is available.
Budget Adjustment – Florence DuBreuil
Need to set up a new account under elections. Currently we only have the salary
account, but with the church hall rentals and ballot expenses the Township is
incurring election related costs that are not salaries. Clerk DuBreuil moved
and Trustee Wiegandt supported creating account 101-191-725, Election Expenses,
and moving $2,300 from contingency to this account to cover the expenses
incurred in the 2000/2001 fiscal year. Motion passed unanimously.
Election Workers Pay Rate – Florence DuBreuil
From surveys of surrounding communities has been determined that our election
workers are due for a pay increase. Treasurer Nilsson moved and Trustee Zaban
supported increasing the stipend for precinct chairman from $5.00 to $15.00 per
election and increasing the hourly wage for all election inspectors from $7.00
per hour to $8.00 per hour including training time. Motion passed unanimously.
With 24 election inspectors working an average of 16 hours, plus the additional
$40 for the chairmen, this will result in an approximate increase of $424.00
per election.
MTA Resolution To Vote No On 00-2.
Moved by Trustee Zaban and supported by Trustee Wiegandt to adopt the following
resolution regarding Proposal 00-2. Approved unanimously.
RESOLUTION OF
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP, INGHAM COUNTY
In OPPOSITION to PROPOSAL 00-2 to Amend the Michigan Constitution
·Our country’s democratic principles are built on the principle that laws
reflect the will of the majority of citizens, and
·Proposal 00-2 will thwart the ability of a majority of our elected
representatives and senators to adopt new laws necessary for local government
to better serve its citizens, and
·Growing townships are entitled to more state shared revenues to meet the
service needs of expanding populations, and
·Townships are entitled to the same protection of boundaries as is afforded to
cities, and
·Proposal 00-2 does not merely require a two-thirds vote on legislation that
would usurp local control, but also will require a two-thirds vote in both the
House and the Senate for laws that enhance the statutory authority of
townships, and
·Local control can best be preserved through township residents and their
elected township officials communicating their expectations to the Michigan
Legislature that local government is the most appropriate institution for
resolving matters of local concern, now
Therefore be it resolved, that the Board of Williamstown Township opposes
Proposal 00-2 and urges its defeat at the November General Election.
Motion declared adopted.
Secretarial Position - Steve Zaban
From a pool of 24 applicants the Secretary Search Committee is recommending
hiring Debbie Smith, a Township resident on Lounsbury Rd.
Supervisor Obst moved and Trustee Zaban supported hiring Debbie Smith as the
Township’s secretary starting November 1, 2000 at a starting salary of $9.60
per hour. Her hours will be 30 hours per week, from 9:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.
Monday – Friday with an unpaid hour for lunch. Motion approved unanimously.
Watershed Issues – Nancy Fink
The Greater Lansing Area Regional NPDES Phase II Storm Water Regulations
Committee requires that all members be appointed by their respective
municipalities adopting the following resolution. Nancy Fink has agreed to
represent the Township on this committee as one of her responsibilities for
being on the Watershed Management Committee between the Township and the City
of Williamston as created by the third Act 425 agreement this April. Other
members of this committee are Ed Noonan, Ken Zichi, Helen LaBlanc. The
committee is still looking for three volunteers from the City. The Township
will be obliged to having something in place for Pebblebrook to discharge storm
water. Pebblebrook is part of the urban area of Lansing. The City of
Williamston is not included. Permit will be given by the DEQ if go with the
voluntary route or another option is to wait for a later date and go with the
obligatory permits in 2003. If the Township backs out of the regional committee
it will still have to develop its own permit process for Pebblebrook. Mrs. Fink
believes it makes more sense to stay with the committee at this point.
Supervisor Obst moved and Trustee Wiegandt supported that the Township adopt
the following resolution correcting the spelling of Williamstown Township and
replacing unfounded with unfunded. Motion passed unanimously.
Greater Lansing Area Regional NPDES Phase II Storm Water
Regulations Committee
WHEREAS, the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is requiring
nine communities in the greater Lansing area to obtain a National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System Phase II (NPDES II) Permit by March 2003, and
WHEREAS, the NPDES II permit process is an unfunded federal mandate, and
WHEREAS, the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ) has developed
criteria to help obtain funding in the form of grants in part from the Clean
Michigan Initiative if communities adopt a voluntary approach to storm water
and watershed management, and
WHEREAS, representatives of the nine communities named by the EPA those being
City of Lansing, City of East Lansing, Meridian Township, Lansing Township,
Delta Township, Delhi Township, Bath Township, DeWitt Township, and
Williamstown Township have met to develop a cooperative regional approach to
implementing a storm water and watershed management plan, and
NOW, THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED that a committee composed of representatives from
the nine named communities is hereby established and referred to as the Greater
Lansing Area Regional NPDES Phase II Storm Water Regulations Committee.
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, that the committee meet on a regular basis to
facilitate the requirements of the NPDES II Permit by developing a regional
storm water and watershed management plan while seeking the input and
assistance from other agencies including but not limited to educational
institutions & universities, county commissions, drain commissioner’s offices,
county health departments, county road commissions, Tri-County Regional
Planning Commission, Michigan Municipal League and the Michigan Township
Association.
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, that the committee shall also meet to develop funding
strategies to implement this regional storm water and watershed management
plan.
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, that Nancy Fink or her designee is authorized to be the
official representative from Williamstown Township to this committee.
BE IT FINALLY RESOLVED, that the participating community’s governing bodies
must approve the storm water and watershed management plan and any funding
strategies before implementation.
Resolution adopted.
Cable Commission - Martin Wright
Lee Broumburgh, East Sherwood Rd., informed Cable Commissioner George Durak
that he has had Basic at $14.00 per month for seven years and that he has been
informed that he has to go to Basic Enhanced at $38 per month. Cable Commission
Chair Wright will investigate the complaint. He knows that Millennium is in the
process of correcting billing and service errors and it may be a case where Mr.
Broumburgh has actually been receiving Basic Enhanced, while only being billed
for Basic.
CONSENT AGENDA
Trustee Wiegandt had a question on the bond renewal. It is a four year bond and
not an annual bill. With that clarification he thought the amount was
reasonable. Trustee Wiegandt moved and Clerk DuBreuil supported approving the
minutes of the September 5, 2000 Regular Board Meeting; acknowledging the
Treasurer’s report of financial activities for September 2000; approving the
Clerk’s list of accounts to be paid October 3, 2000, check numbers 10539-10588
for a total of $36,051.54; and accepting and placing on file the following
reports: Building Department Activities for September 2000, and the Assessor’s
Report/Updates for September 2000. Supervisor Obst called for a roll call vote:
   Ayes: Trustee Wiegandt, Supervisor Obst, Trustee Zaban, Clerk DuBreuil,
Treasurer Nilsson
   Nays: None.
Motion approved.
Trustee Zaban moved and Supervisor Obst supported adjourning the meeting.
Meeting adjourned at 9:20 p.m.
________________________________         ___________________________________
Florence DuBreuil, Clerk            Susan Jennings, Recording Secretary
NOVEMBER 14, 2000
The regular meeting of the Williamstown Township Board of Trustees was called
to order at 7:36 p.m. Clerk DuBreuil stated a quorum was present and recorded
the following: Supervisor Norman Obst, Clerk Florence DuBreuil, Treasurer
Christine Nilsson, Trustee Steven Zaban, Trustee Ronald Wiegandt and Building
Inspector Walter Aven.
The agenda was reviewed with the following additions: Budget items moving
$5,000 from contingency to park maintenance.
PUBLIC COMMENTS
Carl McIntosh is concerned that the plat of Hideaway Woods is still not
approved with no motion before the Planning Commission to consider approval.
The City is alleging there is a potential problem with the sewer line that
needs to be studied. He has not received any written documentation from the
City about the problem, nor has the Township. The City has received notices of
sewers backing up when it rains, and these have been dealt with as they come
in, but not documented in a way that Mr. McIntosh is looking for. Planning
Coordinator Martin confirmed that the City has not provided any hard
documentation about problems in this line, but they do have studies going
forward. At this time they need to wait for a good rain to continue with the
wet weather study. The line has checked out for the dry weather study. Ms.
Martin stated that we would rather have the study done, then tell the City they
have to hook the people up and then find that there is a problem later. As soon
as they get enough rain they will do the study, but that might not happen until
next Spring. The Planning Commission will deliberate this month and make a
motion. Ms. Martin stated that she has received a response that the City is
trying to get a report in order.
Nancy Fink - Watershed Committee
Had a meeting. There are six people on the committee. City is looking for
ordinance information. Nancy is researching that. 425 district - Huron/
Shiawassee district will be used as a sample. Storm Water Regional Meeting -
Nancy has been attending. Ed Noonan has been attending the meetings with county
health to improve and test the water in the Red Cedar River. Ms. Fink stated
that Phase II invited the Drain Commissioners and Road Commissioners to the
meeting. Found out that drainage in the Red Cedar is not our jurisdiction, it
is the Drain Commission’s jurisdiction. The Township does not have the
authority to go through the permitting process, the Drain Commission does. City
has jurisdiction over their drainage, but the Township doesn't. Still some
details to work out, but believe the permitting will be done through the Drain
Commission instead of the regional group.
As incoming Treasurer, Ms. Fink also request a status of the winter tax bills.
Treasurer Nilsson stated that she would have something for her by Thursday
morning.
Kathryn Lo offered her appreciation for a job well done to the departing Board.
PLANNING COMMISSION - Mickey Martin
No action items. Trustee Zaban mentioned that Mr. Helfmann is looking into the
possibility of a cellular tower being installed on his property.
Township Assessor
Incoming Supervisor Martin asked about the status of the Township Assessor’s
duties, as several state-required deadlines for document filing and notices
begin November 22, and she will not be a certified Assessor by then.
Supervisor/Assessor Obst said he would not prepare the documents before leaving
office on November 20th, but would be willing to be hired to assist after
leaving office.
Park and Recreation - Christine Nilsson
Need a motion to transfer $5,000 from contingency to the park fund to pay the
entire All Terrain bill and for the port-a-potty that is out there for the
remainder of the fiscal year. Wayne Baum of All Terrain understood stopping at
$30,000 because of the budget, but continued working anyway. Needs to install
culverts before more gravel and then do the grading and the seeding. The
Township has had a donation of one hundred pounds of seed. All Terrain is going
to continue with the work and will bill us for the remainder next fiscal year.
It is more cost efficient for him to continue with the work at this time. The
Township has spent $3500 this fiscal year to date on design work, port-a-
potties, no hunting signs, etc. Trustee Wiegandt moved to transfer $5,000 from
the contingency budget, account number 101-890-965 to the park maintenance
budget, account number 101-751-881. Treasurer Nilsson supported. Motion passed
unanimously.
UNIFINISHED BUSINESS
MDOT Letter & Map - Zimmer Road and Grand River Road Configuration. Supervisor
Obst recommended the Transportation Committee prepare a report for the new
Board. Trustee Wiegandt believes it is a done deal. County is willing to
improve Zimmer and the State is willing to improve Grand River, and doing
something is better than doing nothing at all. Supervisor Obst believed it
would be beneficial to invite Tony Kratofile and Bob D'Alcorn to the next Board
meeting to discuss the intersection. Trustee Zaban offered that this
intersection is no different than Cornell and Grand River which has a light,
should have a light at Zimmer and Grand River. Steve will meet with a State
Police officer informally to discuss Mitchell Road speed limit. The Board
generally agreed, with the incoming members of the Board in attendance
concurring, that they would like a recommendation from the Transportation
Committee for the next board meeting.
Resolution thanking Ron Wiegandt for his 25+ years of service as a Trustee of
the Township.
The following resolution was offered by all, supported by all and adopted by
all with Trustee Wiegandt abstaining:
EXPRESSION OF APPRECIATION TO RONALD E. WIEGANDT, TRUSTEE
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP
WHEREAS, the Township Board and Building Inspector of the Township of
Williamstown desire to record their great sense of appreciation to Ronald E.
Wiegandt, Trustee, for his more than twenty-five years of service to the people
of Williamstown Township, be it
RESOLVED, that the Township Board of the Township of Williamstown recognizes
the more than twenty-five years of outstanding and devoted service of Ronald E.
Wiegandt, and does hereby record in the November 14, 2000 Minutes of the
Williamstown Township Board, its heartfelt expression of appreciation and
admiration for Ron’s dedicated service to the people of Williamstown Township
in the position of Trustee on the Williamstown Township Board, and who, by
being so responsible , so knowledgeable, so honorable, and so motivated by the
best interests of the community, was an invaluable and exceptional member of
the Board; and be it further
RESOLVED, that an original copy of this Resolution is to be tendered to Ron as
an expression of the Williamstown Township Board’s deep feelings of
appreciation.
The resolution was signed and dated by the following: Supervisor Norman Obst,
Treasurer Christine Nilsson, Clerk Florence DuBreuil, Trustee Steven Wiegandt,
and Building Inspector Walter Aven.
CONSENT AGENDA
Treasurer Nilsson renewed the Old Kent CD. They were running a special and she
was able to renew for 13 months at a 6.7% interest rate. Trustee Wiegandt moved
and Clerk DuBreuil supported approving the minutes of the October 3, 2000 Board
Meeting; acknowledging the Treasurer’s report of financial activity for the
month of October 2000; approving the Clerk’s list of accounts to be paid
November 14, 2000, check numbers 10589-10696 for a total of $71,845; and
accepting and placing on file the following reports: Building Inspector’s
report of October, 2000 and the Assessor’s report and updates of October 2000.
Supervisor Obst called for a roll call vote:
Ayes: Trustee Zaban, Treasurer Nilsson, Supervisor Obst, Clerk DuBreuil,
Trustee Wiegandt
Nays: None.
Motion passed unanimously.
Clerk DuBreuil reported that the Township had close to 90% participation in the
general election.
Treasurer Nilsson moved and Trustee Wiegandt supported to adjourn.
Meeting adjourned at 8:45 PM.
___________________________________      ____________________________________
Florence DuBreuil, Clerk            Susan Jennings, Recording Secretary
DECEMBER 5, 2000
The regular meeting of the Williamstown Township Board of Trustees was called
to order at 7:30
p.m. Clerk Sharon Ellis stated a quorum was present and recorded the following:
Supervisor
Mickey Martin, Clerk Sharon Ellis, Treasurer Nancy Fink, Trustee Steven Zaban,
Trustee Martin Wright, and Building Inspector Walter Aven.
The agenda was reviewed with the following additions: Aetna/Graham issue.
CONSENT AGENDA
Clerk Sharon Ellis moved and Trustee Steven Zaban supported approving the
minutes of the November 14, 2000 Board Meeting; acknowledging the Treasurer’s
report of financial activity for the month of November 2000; approving the list
of accounts to be paid December 5, 2000, check numbers 10697-10738 for a total
of $23,567.27; and accepting and placing on file the following reports:
Building Inspector’s report of November 2000.
Supervisor Martin called for a roll call vote:
Ayes: Clerk Ellis, Treasurer Fink, Trustee Zaban, Trustee Wright, Supervisor
Martin
Nays: None
Motion passed unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Chuck Withey, 111 Jackson St., Webberville, gave the 1999/2000 RCRA Annual
Participation
Report. The program is growing with more participation from Williamstown
Township. Supervisor Martin stated that the recreation organization has
improved our fields.
Kathryn Lo of Sherwood Road inquired on the new township office hours.
Supervisor Martin stated that the new hours were instituted to be more
convenient for the public. Ger Schultink of Germany Road commended the township
board on the new hours.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
MDOT - Zimmer Road and Grand River Ave. Configuration The Board reviewed a
report from Transportation Committee Chair Brian Jennings but wanted more
information. Suggestion was made to invite MDOT to the next Board meeting;
referred to Supervisor Martin to extend invitation.
Watershed Committee - Treasurer Fink gave reported on the Watershed Committee.
She also asked if the Board wanted her to continue on with the committee;
Supervisor Martin approved.
NEW BUSINESS
Baker/5000 N. Meridian Road - Special Use Permit Planning Commission Chair Dan
Kraft presented the Commission’s recommendation to approve the Special Use
Permit with conditions as noted on the revised site plan dated 12-01-00.
Trustee Zaban so moved; Clerk Ellis seconded; motion passed unanimously.
Stuwe property/ Sherwood and Williamston Roads - Rezone AG-C to AG-SF
Planning Commission Chair Kraft Presented the Commission’s recommendation that
the rezoning request be denied. He cited concern that the proposal was
inconsistent with the Master Plan, and the fact that the current zoning allowed
development via clustering or ROSE. Clerk Ellis moved denial of the rezoning;
Trustee Zaban seconded.
Attorney David Pierson, appearing for Applicant Susan Stuwe, said that nearby
residents have been dumping various trash on the property, making it impossible
to farm, specialty farming is not economically feasible, and perk tests were
done on the property showing proper soil on four of the five proposed lots.
Nena Bondarenko of 2645 Hagadorn Road, Mason, stated that she is Applicant’s
real estate agent and she has talked to residents near the property who favor
AG-SF-type development rather than clustering .
Treasurer Fink recommended having graphic samples of the various options
available under current zoning to show interested residents.
Trustee Zaban offered a friendly amendment to Ellis’ motion that the rezoning
be denied on the basis of the Planning Commission’s recommendations; Ellis
accepted.
Supervisor Martin called for a roll call vote:
Ayes: Ellis, Fink, Wright, Zaban, Martin
Nays: none
Motion passed unanimously.
Commission Appointments
Cable Commission- Supervisor Martin recommended appointment of Norma Johnson
and Gerald Brazil; Clerk Ellis moved, Trustee Wright seconded the appointments;
motion passed unanimously.
Planning Commission: Supervisor Martin recommended appointment of Trustee
Wright as Township Representative, replacing Trustee Zaban, and Rosemary
Philip, to complete Treasurer Fink’s unexpired term. Clerk Ellis moved, Trustee
Zaban seconded the appointments; motion passed unanimously.
TOWNSHIP HALL RENTAL Crossroads United Methodist Church has asked to rent the
hall from April to October because of remodeling and adding to their church.
Supervisor Martin was concerned that the hall would not be available to
township residents during the spring and summer months which are the busiest
for hall rental. She asked if other options had been explored. Russ Strickel of
5271 Williamston Rd said the Township Hall was the first choice and didn’t
check elsewhere. Harold Powell stated that the hall should be open to the
township taxpayers. Board consensus was that the church try other options.
Charles Perkins property/ Hideaway Woods #5 - Tentative Preliminary Plat
Applicant did not appear nor send a representative. Planning Commission Chair
Kraft presented the Commission’s recommendation to approve the tentative
preliminary plat, and suggested approval be conditioned on the applicant’s full
payment of any outstanding fees before proceeding.
Clerk Ellis left the room.
Trustee Zaban moved approval of the Planning Commission’s recommendation along
with the condition of full payment of all outstanding fees; Trustee Wright
seconded; all present approved.
Clerk Ellis returned to the meeting.
Shirley Graham Memorial Fund - Suggestions were made as to how the memorial
would be most beneficial, including a water fountain or some shade trees.
Supervisor Martin contacted RCRA and they want to work with the Board. Harold
Powell said that the county may have free trees available. The Graham family
would like a decision as soon as possible. Ger Schultink said fencing along
Zimmer Road would be a good idea because of balls flying out into the road
during recreational use of the township property.
SCHOOL LEVY - The Williamston Board of Education requested that the Township
collect its summer school taxes. Treasurer Fink will get more information and
report at January meeting.
GRAHAM/AETNA Clerk Ellis advised that Aetna Financial Services has received a
request from former Clerk Shirley Graham’s widower, Thomas Graham, to remain in
the Township’s 457 plan. Ellis said Aetna assured her that the Township has no
liability exposure, Mr. Graham’s remaining in the fund would entail no work of
any kind for Township personnel, and all information would be sent directly to,
and all decisions regarding his account made by, Mr. Graham. Ellis moved that
Mr. Graham be allowed spousal continuance in the Township’s 457 Aetna plan as
long as conditions described above remain; Trustee Zaban seconded; motion
passed unanimously.
Trustee Wright moved to adjourn, Trustee Zaban seconded; motion passed
unanimously. Meeting adjourned at 9:00 p.m.
____________________________         _______________________________
Sharon Ellis, Clerk               Deborah Smith, Recording Secretary
2001 Meeting Minutes
FEBRUARY 6, 2001
The regular meeting of the Williamstown Township Board of Trustees was called
to order at 7:33 p.m. Clerk Sharon Ellis stated a quorum was present and
recorded the following: Supervisor Mickey Martin, Clerk Ellis, Treasurer Nancy
Fink, Trustee Steven Zaban, Trustee Martin Wright. Also present: Building
Inspector Walter Aven, Recording Secretary Lisa Badiee.
Clerk Ellis added three items to the agenda: Unfinished Business: Cable TV
franchise fees
New Business: Notary issue and office rearrangement; Supervisor Martin moved
the Building Inspector report to new business.
CONSENT AGENDA
Clerk Ellis moved and Trustee Wright supported the consent agenda, which
included the minutes of the January 9, 2001 Board Meeting, acknowledging the
Treasurer’s report of financial activity for the month of January, 2001; and
approving the list of accounts to be paid for February: check numbers 10778 to
10808 for a total of $16,249.43.
Motion passed unanimously.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
NIESA Property
Supervisor Martin presented a resolution that would convey the Township’s
interest in the property to NIESA and advised that the Township attorney finds
it acceptable. The City of Williamston has not yet seen the resolution. Trustee
Zaban moved to accept the resolution; Clerk Ellis supported. Ellis questioned
whether the motion should be contingent on the City’s agreement to transfer its
interest. Sense of the Board was that the Township wants to take the leadership
role in this issue and wants to turn over its interest to NIESA regardless of
what the City does.
Roll call vote was taken:
Ayes:   Supervisor Martin, Clerk Ellis, Treasurer Fink, Trustee Zaban, Trustee
Wright
Nays: None
Motion passed unanimously.
Former Board of Trustees Final Payment
Supervisor Martin advised that to date all but former Supervisor Obst have
returned overpayments, and he has responded negatively to correspondence sent
by the Township. Supervisor Martin asked to authorize the Township attorney to
send Mr. Obst a letter demanding repayment. She advised that she had been
trying to collect the debt without involving the attorney and spending Township
money. Clerk Ellis clarified that Trustee Zaban had not been involved in the
overpayment. Ellis moved supporting Martin’s request; Zaban seconded.
Motion passed unanimously.
Cable Franchise Fees
Clerk Ellis reported that franchise fees were paid to the Township by Horizon
in 1999 and Millennium in 2000. Millennium has not yet paid its 2000 fees and
she is waiting to hear from them as to when they will arrive. Millennium seems
to be offering discounted packages to certain subscribers; she is planning to
meet with the Cable Commission Chair to discuss. Trustees Wright and Zaban
requested copies of fax Ellis received from Millennium.
NEW BUSINESS
Appointment to Library Foundation Board
Supervisor Martin advised that the Williamston Community Library Foundation has
been incorporated and needs a Township representative to serve on its Board.
Martin said that Ray Challis, 4055 Vanetter Road, has volunteered.
Supervisor Martin moved and Clerk Ellis supported Challis’ appointment.
Motion passed unanimously.
Challis reported that the Library Board is in negotiations for purchase of
property in the City of Williamston, on which to build a library of
approximately 10,000 square feet. (The present library is 1200 square feet, the
smallest library in all of Michigan.) Studies show library usage at 4000 to
5000 people per month. The Library Board is currently awaiting a ruling from
the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality about cleanup of contamination
on the property.
Building Inspector Report
Extension: Knox property, 248 Barry Road
Inspector Aven provided background information regarding a letter received from
Thomas R. Knox, 4990 Zimmer Road. Knox was given a variance to build a second
home on his lot and was given six months to tear down the old house at 248
Barry Road. A bond should have been requested of Knox, but was not; therefore
the Township has no bond money to tear it down. Knox has asked for an extension
until May 1, 2001. Aven proposed that Knox be given the extension and Aven will
advise on the status at the May Board meeting.
Clerk Ellis moved and Trustee Wright supported the extension.
Motion passed unanimously
Building Permit Fees
Inspector Aven proposed an increase in building permit fees as follows:
   One and Two Family Dwellings
      Living Areas:   $50.00 (from $45.00)
      Garage:   $18.00 (from $12.00)
      Basement:   $12.00 (from $10.00)
The Township is a little under the national average of $51.00 for Michigan.
Meridian Township charges $44.00 and Delta Township, $51.00. City of Lansing
uses the same fees as the Township. The Township does not charge for plan
review, as some others do.
Clerk Ellis moved and Trustee Zaban supported adoption of the new fees.
Motion passed unanimously.
Township Notaries
Clerk Ellis reported that she is in the process of having all office personnel
certified as notaries public. Township paid for all application fees. Each
notary requires equipment and a state-mandated bond. The Township can purchase
a package which includes the notary bond and a $7,000 errors and omissions
policy for $30 each. Notary stamps are $8.95 each. Clerk Ellis suggested the
Township provide the policy and stamp for each employee.
Clerk Ellis moved and Supervisor Martin supported providing notary packages for
each employee.
Motion passed unanimously.
Ellis asked whether the Board wishes to continue the current policy of free
notarization for both Township residents and non-residents. Sense of the Board
was to continue as-is.
Office Rearrangement
Clerk Ellis reported that she received two estimates for rearrangement of
office furniture. The move will require additional telephone equipment to be
installed adding two new telephones and voice mail. The cost of moving the
furniture is $337.50 (provided by Two Men & a Truck); the cost of telephone
equipment is $1,539.85. Supervisor Martin explained to the public the need for
rearrangement of furniture. Questions were brought up about voice mail. Martin
explained why voice mail would be helpful, how it works and assured that phones
will be answered by an employee during regular office hours.
Clerk Ellis moved and Trustee Wright supported the expenditures for the office
rearrangement and new telephone equipment.
Motion passed unanimously.
Recycling and Solid Waste Disposal
Terry Guerin from Granger Group addressed the Board on Granger’s position on
the County’s proposed solid waste management plan.
Clerk Ellis moved to adjourn with support by Trustee Zaban.
Motion passed unanimously.
Meeting adjourned at 8:53 p.m.
________________________________      ______________________________
Sharon Ellis, Clerk            Lisa Badiee, Recording Secretary
MARCH 6, 2001
The regular meeting of the Williamstown Township Board of Trustees was called
to order at 7:32 p.m. Clerk Ellis stated a quorum was present and recorded the
following: Supervisor Mickey Martin, Treasurer Nancy Fink, Trustee Martin
Wright and Trustee Steven Zaban. Also present were Building Inspector Walter
Aven and Recording Secretary Deborah Smith.
CONSENT AGENDA
Clerk Ellis moved and Trustee Wright supported the consent agenda, which
included the minutes of the February 6, 2001 Board Meeting, acknowledging the
Treasurer’s report of financial activity for the month of February, 2001;
approving the list of accounts to be paid for March: check numbers 10809 to
10870 for a total of $32,866.08; approving renewal of audit contract with
Abraham & Gaffney, PC.; and accepting and placing on file the Building
Inspector’s report of February, 2000.
Motion passed unanimously.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Recycling Funds - Ingham County Solid Waste Management Plan
Jim Wilson from the Ingham County Health Department stated that the Ingham
County Solid Waste Management Plan will be signed by the State of Michigan by
the end of the month. He reiterated the fact that having competition between
landfills will lower the rate charged for disposal, even if the landfill is
further away. Supervisor Martin asked if the Township would receive funds if it
had a recycling drop-off center. Mr. Wilson said the center would have to run
for 10 days out of the month. Supervisor Martin stated that the Township is not
ready to make a decision on this contract at this time. Martin questioned
whether the pending lawsuit will affect the funding mechanism of the plan.
Wilson said the County Commission put the funding plan on hold so as not to
have some facilities pay and not others, so until the lawsuit is ended, there
will be no money collected. Therefore, the plan will be in effect, but the
funding will not. The plan is paid for with the general fund and will continue
until the lawsuit is finalized. Clerk Ellis questioned where things stand with
the lawsuit. Wilson stated that it had just started and he was not at liberty
to discuss it but could be a year or more before the funding mechanism is in
place. Treasurer Fink asked what the overall improvement would be with the new
plan. Wilson stated that not much would change. The plan that was in effect was
a five-year plan and should have been revised in 1995. Curbside recycling is
not cost effective. If we didn’t have recycling, solid waste disposal would be
cheaper.
NEW BUSINESS
Brookstone Subdivision: Tentative Preliminary Plat
Planning Commission Chair Daniel Kraft referred to the site plan in the
February 20, 2001 Planning Commission Minutes. Supervisor Martin stated that
the biggest problem is with FEMA and the floodplain. The applicant is going to
try to prove the parcel is not in the floodplain. According to FEMA floodplain
maps, it is in the floodplain. Supervisor Martin stated the Township is not
permitted to approve a plat that is in the floodplain. Martin asked if there
was any documentation or letter to FEMA asking for clarification. Kraft stated
that all he had was a letter from the Department of Environmental Quality
stating that the applicant would have to get a letter from FEMA amending the
floodplain map. Kraft stated that the Board has 90 days to make a decision on
the tentative preliminary plat. Carl McIntosh, 1145 Wild Cherry, has filled out
an application for FEMA and has requested a letter from the Department of
Environmental Quality to make a change on the map. Martin asked for a copy of
the application, stating the Planning Commission told McIntosh the Board would
want to see that some action was being taken. He did not have the application
with him. Martin reiterated that if FEMA does not amend its map, the plat will
not be approved.
Trustee Wright moved to approve the tentative preliminary plat with all
conditions a shown in the draft minutes of the February 20, 2001 Planning
Commission Meeting. Clerk Ellis seconded. Motion passed unanimously.
Proposed Zoning Ordinance Revisions
Planning Commission Chair Daniel Kraft recommended revisions to certain zoning
and subdivision control ordinances. He referred to a letter and attached
exhibits from McKenna
Associates, Inc. to the Township Board dated February 28, 2001. Discussion
proceeded on each revision.
Clerk Ellis moved and Treasurer Fink seconded to accept the recommended
revisions as detailed in the letter and exhibits with the following provisions:
   Regarding Sec. 2.03(C)(3.c): Approve except for subsection (3), which should
be returned to the Planning Commission for further discussion;
   Regarding Sec. 22.02(B)(29): Eliminate (c), re-letter (d), (e) and (f)
accordingly;
   Regarding Sec. 2.12(C) and (D): Replace language in Exhibit E with language
of McKenna memo dated March 5, 2001.
Motion passed unanimously.
Set 2001-02 Board Regular Meeting Dates
Williamstown Township Board of Trustees meeting dates will be as follows: 2001:
April 10, May 1, June 5, July 3, August 7, September 4, October 2, November 6,
December 4; 2002: January 8, February 5, March 5.
Clerk Ellis moved the schedule; Treasurer Fink supported.
Motion passed unanimously.
Electrical Inspector Position/Agreement
Gilbert Salazar, State Electrical Inspector, has applied to be the Township’s
electrical inspector as opposed to inspections being performed by the State of
Michigan. Supervisor Martin requested Board authorization to meet with Salazar
about his proposal.
Clerk Ellis moved the requested authorization; supported by Trustee Wright.
Motion passed unanimously.
2000-2001 Budget Amendment
Supervisor Martin explained the need to amend the current budget: Building
Inspector +$4,000; Cable Commission +$200; Assessing +$6,456; Treasurer
+$2,400; Supervisor +$1,430 for a total to be taken from the contingency fund
of $14,486.
Moved by Clerk Ellis to amend the budget as described. Trustee Wright seconded.
Motion passed unanimously.
2001-2002 Budget
Supervisor Martin prsented the 2001-02 budget, the result of the Board budget
workshop on March 2. Clerk Ellis moved and Trustee Zaban supported the budget
as presented; Ellis took a roll call vote.
YES:   Martin, Fink, Wright, Zaban, Ellis
NO:   None
Sewer Request
Russell T. Aker, 1040 E. Grand River Rd., requested one sewer tap. The sewer
line goes to his property and ICHD has recommended hookup.
Clerk Ellis moved to grant one secure tap from Township’s capacity for one
year; Trustee Zaban supported.
Motion passed unanimously.
Clerk Ellis moved to adjourn supported by Trustee Wright.
Motion passed unanimously.
Meeting adjourned at 10:12 p.m.
______________________________      ______________________________
Sharon Alston Ellis, Clerk            Lisa Badiee, Recording Secretary
APRIL 10, 2001
The regular meeting of the Williamstown Township Board of Trustees was called
to order at 7:35 p.m. Clerk Sharon Ellis stated a quorum was present and
recorded the following: Supervisor Mickey Martin, Clerk Ellis, Trustee Steven
Zaban, Trustee Martin Wright. Also present: Building Inspector Walter Aven,
Recording Secretary Lisa Badiee. Treasurer Nancy Fink arrived at 7:40 p.m.
Supervisor Martin added new items to the agenda: Graham Memorial, Parks
Ordinance, Road Allocation, Zoning Amendment Article 18 and Recycling.
CONSENT AGENDA
The Consent Agenda, which included the minutes of the March 6, 2001 Board
meeting, acknowledging the Treasurer’s report of financial activity for the
month of March, 2001; and approving the list of accounts to be paid for March:
check numbers 10871 to 10945 for a total of $37,990.52. Clerk Ellis advised
that the draft minutes of the March 6 meeting will be revised to include the
roll call vote on the 2001-02 budget and to correct the heading of the section
regarding the amendment of the 2000-01 budget. With that revision, Ellis moved
and Trustee Wright supported; motion passed unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Frans Wilbrink, 4701 Zimmer Road, asked if a Township newsletter would be
forthcoming. Clerk Ellis responded that she expected one to go out within 60
days. Bob Pease, 3795 Zimmer Road had questions regarding Crossroads Church.
Supervisor Martin advised that it would be the subject of a special public
hearing at the Zoning Board meeting on April 11 and is also on the Planning
Commission Agenda for April 17. Planning Commission Chair Daniel Kraft advised
that the Commission invites the Board to a joint meeting with the Williamston
Planning Commission on April 24, 7:30 p.m.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
SHIRLEY GRAHAM MEMORIAL
Supervisor Martin read a letter from Mrs. Graham’s daughter, Patricia Enfield,
which accompanied a check to the Township for $3,492.05 from Mrs. Graham’s
Memorial Fund. Martin advised that she is in the process of obtaining estimates
for the memorial the family suggested, a drinking fountain for the public area
behind the Township Hall.
SBA SITE PLAN
After receiving a recommendation of denial of requested rezoning, SBA, Inc. had
gone to the Zoning Board of Appeals requesting to place a cellular tower on
Grand River near the Litchfield property; the request was denied.
Motion to deny the request for rezoning by Clerk Ellis; supported by Trustee
Zaban; motion passed unanimously.
FORMER SUPERVISOR’S FINAL PAYMENT
The Township attorney sent former Township Supervisor Norman Obst a letter
requesting payroll repayment. Mr. Obst refused the request in a letter dated
March 7, 2001.
Clerk Ellis moved to give Supervisor Martin approval to find alternate ways to
pursue collection; supported by Trustee Zaban; motion passed unanimously.
NEW BUSINESS
PUBLIC PARKS ORDINANCE
Planning Commission Chair Daniel Kraft presented the Board a copy of the
proposed new Public Parks Ordinance. The Planning Commission recommends that
the Board adopt this ordinance as written March 21, 2001. The Board requested
the Planning Commission revisit the permitted alcohol policy.
Clerk Ellis moved to adopt the 3-21-01 draft of the Public Parks Ordinance;
Trustee Zaban supported. Ellis took a roll call vote:
Yes:   Martin, Fink, Zaban, Wright, Ellis
No:   None
AMENDMENT TO ARTICLE 18.00 OF THE ZONING ORDINANCE
Chair Kraft presented the Planning Commission’s recommended amendments to
Zoning Ordinance Article 18.00 as shown in the attachment to a letter from
Christopher Doozan of McKenna Associates, Inc. dated March 21, 2001. The Board
suggested several housekeeping changes for the Commission’s consideration and
noted correction of a typographical error in Section 18.02 E (5)(e) from “12
feet” to 13.5 feet.
Clerk Ellis moved and Trustee Zaban supported passing the amendments as written
and revised; Ellis took a roll call vote:
Yes:   Martin, Fink, Zaban, Wright, Ellis
No:   None
ROAD ALLOCATION
Brian Jennings, Transportation and Communications Committee Chair, presented
the Committee’s recommendations to the Board based on information from the
Ingham County Road Commission. The Board needed more information before acting
on the recommendations. Treasurer Fink will prepare an analysis of Township
funds available for road use; Supervisor Martin will provide Board and
Transportation Committee members with copies of the Township’s policy on road
repairs; Jennings will request the ICRC to give the Township a written
commitment to take over Vanetter and Mitchell Roads, ask for additional funds,
and clarification of rollover funds from last year; Supervisor Martin will
prepare a letter to residents regarding removal of trees; and Trustee Zaban
will prepare a letter for the City of Williamston and Williamston School
District regarding funding for road repairs. The Board scheduled a workshop on
this issue for April 17.
RECYCLING
Supervisor Martin stated that there have been many complaints regarding dumping
and trash throughout the Township. She suggested the Township have a “Clean
Your Township Day” next spring. Trustee Wright will prepare a proposal setting
guidelines for receiving drop-offs such as used tires, appliances, etc.
Clerk Ellis moved to adjourn; supported by Trustee Wright; motion passed
unanimously.
Meeting adjourned at 9:50 p.m.
__________________________________      _________________________________
Sharon Alston Ellis, Clerk            Lisa Badiee, Recording Secretary
TUESDAY, MAY 1, 2001
The regular meeting of the Williamstown Township Board of Trustees was called
to order at 7:40 p.m. Clerk Sharon Ellis recorded the following: Supervisor
Mickey Martin, Clerk Ellis, Treasurer Nancy Fink, Trustee Steven Zaban, and
Trustee Martin Wright and stated a quorum was present. Also present were
Building Inspector Walter Aven, Township Attorney Vincent Spagnuolo and
Recording Secretary Lisa Badiee.
Supervisor Martin added items to the Agenda: Salary Revisions, Hall Rental
Policy Revisions and Parks and Recreation Committee Meeting.
CONSENT AGENDA
The Consent Agenda, which included the minutes of the April 10, 2001 Board
meeting, the Treasurer’s report of financial activity for the month of April,
2001 and the list of accounts to be paid for May: Check numbers 10946 through
10999 for a total of $50,792.94. Trustee Zaban noted corrections to the
Building Inspector’s Report. With those revision noted, Clerk Ellis moved and
Trustee Wright supported the Consent Agenda; motion passed unanimously.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Road Improvements – Vanetter/Mitchell
Supervisor Martin sent letters to residents on Vanetter and Mitchell Roads
regarding removal of trees. Residents would like more information and the City
of Williamston would like to see engineered plans for the road improvements.
Supervisor Martin suggested sending a letter to the Ingham County Road
Commission for drawings and to find out if matching funds are available for
this use. When drawings are available, the Township would hold public meetings
for the residents, City and school officials.
Clerk Ellis moved that Supervisor Martin send a letter to the ICRC requesting
that work begin on engineered drawings and asking whether available matching
funds may be used for this purpose; supported by Trustee Wright.
Motion passed unanimously.
Road Improvements – Green/Barry
Meridian Township has requested Williamstown Township to fund a portion of
improvements on Green and Barry Roads. The Transportation Committee does not
recommend this funding.
Clerk Ellis moved to decline participation; Trustee Zaban supported.
Motion passed unanimously.
Township Road Improvements
Transportation Committee Chair Brian Jennings advised which roads, other than
Vanetter-Mitchell intersection, in the Township were most in need of repairs;
the Board discussed various options.
Clerk Ellis moved to do bituminous resurfacing of 2500 feet of the Red Cedar
Manor subdivision; Treasurer Fink supported.
Motion passed unanimously.
Removal of Home at 248 Barry Road
Building Inspector Aven reported that the house has been demolished and debris
is being removed.
Resolution to Establish Township Officer Salaries
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP INGHAM COUNTY, MICHIGAN
At a Regular Meeting of the Board of Trustees of Williamstown Township, Ingham
County, Michigan held at the Township Hall, 4990 North Zimmer Road,
Williamston, Michigan on Tuesday, May 1, 2001 at 7:30 p.m. there were:
Present: Supervisor Mickey Martin, Treasurer Nancy Fink, Clerk Sharon Ellis,
Trustee Martin Wright and Trustee Steven Zaban.
The following Resolutions, subject to MCLA 41.95(3), were offered by Clerk
Ellis and supported by Trustee Wright:
As of May 1, 2001 the annual salary of the Township Supervisor/Assessor shall
be $21,000 (exclusive of assessing duties); $42,000 (inclusive of assessing
duties).
As of May 1, 2001 the annual salary of the Township Clerk shall be $20,448.
As of May 1, 2001 the annual salary of the Township Treasurer shall be $20,
448.
As of May 1, 2001 the annual salary of the Township Trustee shall be $4,920.
Roll call votes were taken on each Resolution with identical results:
Yes:   Martin, Fink, Ellis, Wright, Zaban
No:   None
NEW BUSINESS
Telecommunications Ordinance
A Telecommunications Ordinance was passed in June 1999. It went to the Cable
Commission for review on April 18 and was returned on May 1, 2001. A public
hearing must be held regarding the application for telecommunication franchise
and by ordinance a decision made by June 26. Township Attorney Spagnuolo is
working out details on the ordinance and application and will contact the
Township with his recommendations.
Debris Complaint
Constable Dahlstrom cited the residents of 6975 Foster Road to remove debris
and abandoned vehicles n compliance with the Anti-Blight Ordinance 18. The
owner responded he could not and would not comply. A suggestion was made to
have the Township attorney send the owner a letter with copies of pertinent
ordinances asking for the owner’s reply of plan of action within seven days, to
be delivered by the Constable. If no response is made, court action will be
taken.
Clerk Ellis moved to authorize Attorney Spagnuolo to send a letter advising
residents to comply within seven days and if they don’t, to then petition the
circuit court for injunctive relief; supported by Trustee Wright.
Motion passed unanimously.
Transfer of Jurisdiction of Corwin Road
The City of Williamston has requested the Ingham County Road Commission to
transfer jurisdiction of Corwin Road from Grand River Ave. to the south right
of way line of the CSX Railroad to the City. The portion of Corwin Road south
of the railroad would remain under the jurisdiction of the Road Commission.
Clerk Ellis moved the Board’s agreement with the proposed transfer; Trustee
Wright supported.
A roll call vote was taken:
Yes:   Martin, Fink, Ellis, Wright, Zaban
No:   None
Motion passed unanimously.
The Planning Commission recommended amending Zoning Ordinance 8.02(N)(4)(a) to
require setbacks of farm buildings be located at least two hundred feet from
residences on other parcels.
Treasurer Fink moved approval; Clerk Ellis supported.
A roll call vote was taken.
Yes:   Martin, Fink, Ellis, Wright, Zaban
No:   None
Motion passed unanimously
The Planning Commission recommended amending Zoning Ordinance 8.02 to provide
site development standards for automobile body, frame, and fender
straightening, and similar collision repair service establishments.
Treasurer Fink moved approval; Clerk Ellis supported.
A roll call vote was taken.
Yes:   Martin, Fink, Ellis, Wright, Zaban
No:   None
Motion passed unanimously
The Planning Commission recommended amending Subdivision Control Ordinance 3.7
(1) to require final preliminary plat drawings to be submitted in digital file
format.
Trustee Wright moved approval; Clerk Ellis supported.
A roll call vote was taken.
Yes:   Martin, Fink, Ellis, Wright, Zaban
No:   None
Motion passed unanimously
Township Fee Schedule Revision
Building Inspector Aven suggested amending the Township fee schedule to include
a telecommunication escrow fee of $1500.
Trustee Wright moved to amend; Clerk Ellis supported.
Motion passed unanimously.
NIESA Board Appointment
Supervisor Martin recommended Trustee Zaban as the Township’s representative to
the NIESA Board. Trustee Zaban agreed.
Trustee Wright moved Trustee Zaban’s appointment; Treasurer Fink supported.
Motion passed unanimously.
Community Room and Pavilion Rental
Clerk Ellis recommended various changes to the Community Room Rental Agreement
and rental policies. A suggestion was made to give Supervisor Martin or a
designee authority to approve any requests for commercial use.
Trustee Wright moved the new policy, including requiring approval by Supervisor
Martin or her designee for any commercial use of the Township Community Room or
outdoor pavilion; Clerk Ellis supported.
A roll call vote was taken:
Yes:   Martin, Fink, Ellis, Wright, Zaban
No:   None
Clerk Ellis moved to adjourn; supported by Trustee Wright.
Motion passed unanimously.
Meeting adjourned at 9:30 p.m.
____________________________         ______________________________
Sharon Allston Ellis, Clerk            Lisa Badiee, Recording Secretary
JUNE 5, 2001
The regular meeting of the Williamstown Township Board of Trustees was called
to order at 7:35 p.m. Recording Secretary Smith recorded the following:
Supervisor Mickey Martin, Treasurer Nancy Fink, Trustee Martin Wright and
Trustee Steven Zaban, and stated a quorum was present. Also present were
Building Inspector Walter Aven and Recording Secretary Deborah Smith. Absent:
Clerk Sharon Ellis.
Supervisor Martin made additions to the agenda under New Business: 4701 Zimmer
Road, Township Park, June 11 meeting; and under Unfinished Business, the
Telecommunications Ordinance.
CONSENT AGENDA
Treasurer Fink moved and Trustee Wright supported the consent agenda; motion
passed unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Frans Wilbrink, 4701 Zimmer Road, questioned the ability of the new Township
Clerk, Sharon Ellis. He stated she has yet to publish a newsletter and he has
not received his voter registration card. He stated that he received a letter
in January 2001 saying he would be getting it soon. He also stated that he has
tried to contact Clerk Ellis but can never reach her. He questioned the
responsibilities of the clerk and her work hours. Supervisor Martin stated that
she agreed with the need for a newsletter and that the Deputy Clerk has been
working very hard to get the voter registration into the state voter computer
system. Martin stated the Board would discuss concerns in a workshop.
Wilbrink also questioned the use of the Township Park, stating that it was
gated off and not accessible to the public. Martin advised that the Township is
working with a contractor on the park road which was expected to be completed
by June 9; however, weather conditions delayed work.
NEW BUSINESS
Crossroads United Methodist Church Site Plan
Planning Commission Chair Daniel Kraft stated that the architecture of the
church was matched by every suggestion made by the Planning Commission. He
stated that those changes convinced the Commission to approve the site plan
with the conditions of receiving approval from the Health Department and Drain
Commission and submitting lighting details for entrance overhangs. Supervisor
Martin stated that the applicant has not yet met the conditions and no building
permit will be issued until it does. Russ Stickle, 5271 N. Williamston Road,
representing the applicant, stated that he would see that the conditions are
met. Martin also inquired about the gate at the Haslett Road entrance. Stickle
stated the church intends to keep the entrance gated at all times except during
heavy use by the church, which would eliminate cut-through traffic.
Trustee Wright moved and Trustee Zaban supported approving the Site Plan with
the conditions of receiving approval from the Health Department and Drain
Commission and submitting lighting details for entrance overhangs. Motion
passed.
Township Park
Supervisor Martin advised of an incident report from the Ingham County
Sheriff’s Office of May 30, 2001 of finding one vehicle stuck and numerous
other vehicles in the park area. The individuals were advised to leave the park
and their names were submitted to Supervisor Martin. Martin investigated and
found substantial damage done to the park. Martin suggested recommending to the
Parks Committee a gate for the entrance, and advised that she would pursue
working with the Sheriff’s Department on opening and closing the park.
Treasurer Fink stated that the destruction to the park is an ongoing problem.
The last quote of damage to the park was approximately $2100.00. Trustee Zaban
suggested that a letter be sent to the parents of the individuals involved.
Frans Wilbrink stated from the audience that the individuals should repair the
damage. Trustee Wright suggested the Board review the options provided in the
ordinance. Bob Pease, 3795 Zimmer Road, stated that he believed the individuals
should be responsible for the damage to the park, not the taxpayer, and the
Board should see that the laws are enforced. Commissioner Kraft referred the
Board to Section 4.06 of the Parks Ordinance, suggesting that the individuals
might want to put in a work day at the park in lieu of the $500.00 fine
provided by the ordinance. The Board advised Supervisor Martin to refer the
matter to the Township Attorney.
4701 Zimmer Road, Building Permit #3433
Trustee Wright read a letter to Frans Wilbrink, 4701 Zimmer Road, from Building
Inspector Walter Aven regarding Building Permit #3433, stating that Wilbrink
was never issued a Certificate of Occupancy for his home because the structure
did not meet Building Code requirements. Wilbrink said he was waiting for the
installation of a stair handrail. Trustee Wright advised an occupancy permit is
required to live in a home and Wilbrink has lived in the home for eight months
without one. Aven stated that he advised Wilbrink verbally and in writing of
the permit requirement and this is the first time he has had to write a letter
in this kind of matter. Wilbrink stated that he would call for a final
inspection in 30 days. Supervisor Martin stated that she expected it done and
asked Aven to submit a report at the July Board meeting.
McLeod USA Public Hearing
McLeod USA is a fiber optic phone company running a line through the Township
using the public right of way, which requires a permit under the Township
Telecommunication Ordinance. The applicant did not attend nor was there any
testimony after Supervisor Martin opened the hearing.
Trustee Wright moved and Trustee Zaban supported closing the public hearing;
motion passed.
McLeod USA Permit Agreement
Trustee Zaban moved and Trustee Wright supported the resolution    approving
the Permit Agreement between the Township and McLeod    USA.
   Roll call vote:
   YES: Martin, Fink, Wright, Zaban
   NO: none
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP RESOLUTION APPROVING
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PERMIT AGREEMENT
   At a regular meeting of the Township Board of Williamstown Township, Ingham
County, Michigan, held at the Township Hall in said Township on June 5, 2001 at
7:30 p.m., Eastern Daylight Time.
   PRESENT: Supervisor Mickey Martin, Treasurer Nancy Fink, Trustee Martin
Wright and Trustee Steven Zaban
   ABSENT: Clerk Sharon Ellis
                                                                                    
   The following resolution was offered by Trustee Zaban and supported by
Trustee Wright.  .
   WHEREAS, McLeodUSA, Inc. (“McLeodUSA”) applied for a Telecommunications
Permit to construct a part of its fiber optic network within the Williamstown
Township’s (“Township”) rights-of-way;
   WHEREAS, pursuant to the Michigan Telecommunications Act (“MTA”), McLeodUSA
is required to obtain a permit prior to construction of the telecommunications
system within the Township’s rights-of-way; and
   WHEREAS, the MTA provides that a local unit of government has the right to
review and approve a provider’s access to and ongoing use of the public rights-
of-way, easement or other public place and ensure and protect the health safety
and welfare of the public; and
   WHEREAS, the Township Board conducted a duly noticed public hearing on June
5, 2001; and
   WHEREAS, the Township Board determined that granting the telecommunications
permit to McLeodUSA is in best interests of the residents of the Township; and
   NOW, THEREFORE, the Township Board of Williamstown Township hereby resolves
as follows:
   1.   The Township Board resolves to approve the Telecommunications Permit
Agreement attached as an Exhibit to this Resolution and direct the Clerk to
send the Telecommunications Permit Agreement to McLeodUSA for approval, subject
to final verification of the number of lineal feet that McLeodUSA uses in the
Township’s rights-of-way by the Township attorney and the Township Supervisor.
   2.   The Township Board resolves to rescind all prior resolutions or motions
inconsistent with this current.
   YEAS: Martin, Fink, Wright, Zaban
                                                                        
   NAYS: none
   THE RESOLUTION WAS DECLARED ADOPTED.
STATE OF MICHIGAN      )
               )   
COUNTY OF INGHAM      )   
I, the undersigned, the duly qualified and acting Township Clerk of
Williamstown Township, Ingham County, Michigan, DO HEREBY CERTIFY that the
foregoing is a true and complete copy of certain proceedings taken by the
Williamstown Township Board at a regular meeting held on the 5th day of June,
2001 at 7:30 p.m.
                _______________________________________
            Sharon Alston Ellis
Employee Policy
Supervisor Martin presented an interim employee policy to be effective until
the Employee Manual she and the Township Attorney are developing is complete.
Trustee Wright moved and Trustee Zaban supported adopting the policy; motion
passed.
Concerned Citizens Meeting
Supervisor Martin advised of a meeting of the public scheduled for Monday, June
11, at 7:30 p.m. at the Township Hall to discuss the intersection of Zimmer
Road and Grand River Ave. Trustee Wright suggested inviting MDOT representative
Tony Kratofil. Robert Pease stated from the audience that he would like the
township residents to meet before going to MDOT. Supervisor Martin encouraged
all Board members to attend.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
6975 Foster Road
Supervisor Martin advised that the owners of 6975 Foster were sent a certified
letter from the Township Attorney, demanding they immediately remove the debris
and abandoned vehicles from the yard, and warning of the Township’s anticipated
legal action. The certified letter was refused and Constable Howard Dahlstrom
will attempt to deliver it in person.
 
Meeting recessed at 8:35 p.m.
Meeting was recalled to order at 9:00 p.m.
Trustee Zaban moved and Trustee Wright supported recessing the public portion
of the meeting to allow the Board to go into executive session to consider
written opinion from legal counsel.
Roll call vote:
   YES: Martin, Fink, Wright, Zaban
   NO: none
Meeting recessed at 9:05 p.m.; Board went into executive session.
Meeting was recalled to order at 10:00 p.m.
Telecommunications Ordinance
Trustee Zaban moved and Trustee Wright supported adopting the
Telecommunications Ordinance with the following changes:
Section 6(1) – change required number of submitted copies from 14 to 10.
Section 6(1)(c) – remove “Registered” for Land Surveyor and Professional
Engineer; require computer diskette or compact disc of the drawing compatible
with the Township’s geographic information system.
Section 6(7) – change review by Cable Television Committee Williamstown
Township Board to Transportation/Communication Committee.
   Roll call vote:
   YES: Martin, Fink, Wright, Zaban
   NO: none
RESOLUTION TO ADOPT TELECOMMUNICATIONS ORDINANCE
   At a regular meeting of the Board of Williamstown Township, Ingham County,
Michigan, held at the Township Hall in said Township on the 5th day of June,
2001 at 7:30 p.m.
PRESENT: Supervisor Mickey Martin, Treasurer Nancy Fink, Trustee Martin Wright
and Trustee Steven Zaban;
ABSENT: Clerk Sharon Ellis.
   The following Resolution was offered by Trustee Zaban and seconded by
Trustee Wright.
   WHEREAS, the statutes governing townships authorizes a township board to
adopt ordinances regulating the public health, safety and general welfare of
persons and property; and
   WHEREAS, the Telecommunications Ordinance is necessary to regulate access to
an ongoing use of the public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers to
ensure and protect the public health, safety and welfare; and
   WHEREAS, the Township enacted a Telecommunications Ordinance in June 1999;
and
   WHEREAS, Williamstown Township (“Township”) desires to provide greater
protection for the Township residents by repealing the existing
Telecommunications Ordinance and replacing it with a revised Telecommunications
Ordinance; and
   BE IT RESOLVED BY THE BOARD OF WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP, INGHAM COUNTY,
MICHIGAN, AS FOLLOWS:
      1.   Williamstown Township resolves to enact the Telecommunication
Ordinance attached as an Exhibit to this resolution as amended by the written
modification made at the June 5, 2001 meeting.
      2.   Williamstown Township directs the Township Clerk to publish the
Ordinance pursuant to the requirements provided by law.
      3.   Upon the effective date of this Ordinance, the former
Telecommunications Ordinance, adopted in June 1999, is hereby repealed.
ADOPTED:
   YEAS: Martin, Fink, Wright, Zaban
   NAYS: none
STATE OF MICHIGAN       )
               )
COUNTY OF INGHAM      )   
      I, the undersigned, the duly qualified and acting Township Clerk of
Williamstown Township, Ingham County, Michigan, DO HEREBY CERTIFY that the
foregoing is a true and complete copy of certain proceedings taken by the
Township Board of said Township at a regular meeting held on the 5th day of
June 2001.
                  _____________________________
                  Sharon Alston Ellis, Clerk
Supervisor Martin announced a Board workshop on Tuesday, June 19, at 4 p.m. to
discuss Board policies.
Trustee Zaban moved and Trustee Wright supported adjourning the meeting. Motion
passed.
Meeting adjourned at 10:15 p.m.
____________________________         _______________________
Deborah Smith, Recording Secretary         Sharon Alston Ellis, Clerk
JULY 3, 2001
The regular meeting of the Williamstown Township Board of Trustees was called
to order at 7:32 p.m. Clerk Ellis stated a quorum was present and recorded the
following as present: Supervisor Mickey Martin, Clerk Sharon Ellis and Trustee
Martin Wright. Also present were Building Inspector Walter Aven and Recording
Secretary Lisa Badiee. Absent were Treasurer Nancy Fink and Trustee Steve
Zaban.
CONSENT AGENDA
Clerk Ellis moved and Trustee Wright supported approving the amended minutes of
the June 5, 2001 Board meeting; approving the minutes of the May 16, (as
amended) and June 19, 2001 Special Meetings; approving the list of accounts to
be paid with the exception of All Terrain Alterations and New Construction Air
Conditioning; acknowledging the Treasurer’s reports of financial activity for
the month of May and the draft report for June; and accepting and placing on
file the Building Inspector’s report of June 2000. Motion passed unanimously.
Trustee Wright moved that the minutes of the June 5, 2001 Executive Session be
approved; Clerk Ellis supported. Motion passed unanimously.
NEW BUSINESS
AT&T – SPECIAL USE PERMIT AND SITE PLAN
Trustee Wright reported no public opposition at a public hearing held on June
19, 2001 for the proposed cellular tower at 160 E. Grand River Rd. The Planning
Commission voted unanimously to recommend approval of the special land use
permit conditioned upon final site plan approval. Matthew Jurson of AT&T
Wireless Service, Inc. was in attendance and brought with him a required surety
bond. Township Attorney Spagnuolo has not yet seen the bond, but will look at
it on July 5. In a letter dated May 21, 2001 from McKenna Associates, Inc.,
Jeremy Lopatin reported that the existing landscaping appears sufficient at
this time. Supervisor Martin stated that when the tower is completed, it will
be inspected to determine if further landscaping is necessary.
Trustee Wright moved and Clerk Ellis supported approval of the site plan for
AT&T Wireless, Inc. with conditions set forth in Planning Commission Chair
Daniel Kraft’s report of June 28, 2001. Motion passed unanimously.
Clerk Ellis moved and Trustee Wright supported approving the Special Use Permit
with final approval of Site Plan.
Motion passed unanimously.
6090 ZIMMER ROAD REZONING FROM AG-C TO AG-SF
A public hearing was held on June 19, 2001 the application for rezoning
submitted by Tom Graham requesting rezoning of a 10-acre parcel from Ag-C to
Ag-SF. The 10-acre parcel is part of a 78-acre parcel, which will remain Ag-C.
The Planning Commission recommends approval of the rezoning request. Supervisor
Martin stated that this request does not follow the Master Plan and further
requests should be looked at more closely. Supervisor Martin also suggested the
Planning Commission review the Master Plan.
Trustee Zaban moved and Trustee Wright supported approving the rezoning. Motion
passed unanimously.
WORKSHOP SET DATES
Supervisor Martin proposed the Board have a monthly workshop.
Clerk Ellis moved and Trustee Wright supported workshop dates to be held the
third Tuesday of the month from 5:00 to 7:00 p.m. Motion passed unanimously.
SUMMIT CEMETERY INCIDENT
On June 22, 2001 damage was done at the back of Summit Cemetery by teenagers
driving 4-wheelers. Harold Powell, 5235 Hart Road, was advised by the Sheriff
of the drivers’ names. He spoke with their parents and gave them two options:
Fix the damages or face court fees, fines, damages and probation. The families
agreed to fix the damages and were given one week to do the repairs. Mr. Powell
will report to the Cemetery Board when repairs are made and ask Board secretary
Wayne Fate to put a report in writing including the names of the persons
involved.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
ORDINANCE REVISIONS – ACCESSORY BUILDINGS
Two revisions are recommended to the Township Zoning Ordinance. The first is to
revise item 2.03(C)(b) to allow a reduced setback for only those accessory
buildings covering less than 2,400 square feet in area. Second, add a new item
5 to section 2.03(C) to require screening of detached accessory buildings
covering 2,400 to 4,000 square feet of area, when within 200 feet of a
principal residence on an adjacent property.
Clerk Ellis moved and Trustee Wright supported approving the Ordinance
revisions. Motion passed unanimously.
4710 ZIMMER ROAD OCCUPANCY PERMIT
Frans Wilbrink, 4710 Zimmer Road, has completed three of six items required for
issuance of an occupancy permit. Clerk Ellis requested all items be complete by
July 13 and asked Building Inspector Aven to ensure the deadline is met and
report to the Board at the August meeting.
NEW ROOF
The Township Hall roof is leaking and must be replaced. Trustee Wright got bids
from four roofing services. He suggests using Superior Services because they
use higher quality materials and have a ten year longer warranty than other
companies. Total estimated cost is $14,976, but could be higher if there is
damage that can’t be seen at this time under the shingles.
Clerk Ellis moved and Trustee Zaban supported contracting for the work with
Superior Services. Motion passed unanimously.
BUDGET AMENDMENTS
Election Supplies 101-191-725 increased by $1,600.00.
Site Improvements 101-265-975 increased by $10,000.00.
Clerk Ellis moved and Trustee Wright supported the budget amendments. Motion
passed unanimously.
MITCHELL/VANETTER ENGINEERING PLANS
In response to a letter from Clerk Ellis, Robert Peterson, Interim Director of
Engineering for the Ingham County Road Commission, responded in a letter dated
June 25, 2001 that the Road Commission will start design work as soon as the
Township has allocated appropriate funds. Clerk Ellis will write a letter
stating the Township’s willingness to allocate the estimated total expense of
approximately $170,000.
2001 CHIP SEAL PROGRAM
In a letter dated June 22, 2001, the Ingham County Road Commission stated they
will chip and seal one-half mile of Milton Road. Trustee Zaban wants to find
out if more chip and seal could be done. Supervisor Martin will ask Brian
Jennings, Transportation Committee Chair, to contact the Commission.
BOARD POLICIES
New Board policies proposed: 1) All bills shall be approved by the Township
Board prior to payment except the following: a) Payroll (Secretary); b) Payroll
taxes to federal and state; c) utility bills; d) Invoices with penalties or
discounts incurred if payment were not received prior to Board approval; f)
Expenditures deemed necessary by the Supervisor or, in t h Supervisor’s
absence, a Board member. These bills shall be post-audited at the next Board
meeting and reported along with those bills needing approval.
2) Township Board members will be notified a minimum of 18 hours prior to any
special meetings. 3) Township Board must approve all expenditures $200 and over
that are not itemized in the fiscal year adopted budget.
Trustee Zaban moved and Trustee Wright supported approving new Board policies.
Motion passed unanimously.
MEETING REVIEW
Publish workshop schedule – Clerk Ellis will include in summary for newspaper.
Incident report – Deputy Clerk will check files for a complaint form; if none,
Supervisor will draft a form.
New roof – Trustee Martin will schedule work and get a check from Treasurer
Fink.
Budget amendment – Put in summary to be published.
Mitchell/Vanetter engineering plans - Clerk Ellis will write a letter to the
Ingham County Road Commission to go forward.
Next workshop date – July 17, 2001. Supervisor Martin will prepare agenda by
July 13. Any topics of concern should be submitted to her by July 7.
Clerk Ellis moved and Trustee Wright supported adjourning the meeting. Motion
passed unanimously.
Meeting adjourned at 9:08 p.m.
______________________________      __________________________
Sharon Ellis, Clerk               Lisa Badiee, Recording Secretary
AUGUST 14, 2001
The regular meeting of the Williamstown Township Board of Trustees was called
to order at 7:33 p.m. Clerk recorded the following: Supervisor Mickey Martin,
Clerk Sharon Ellis, Trustee Steve Zaban and Trustee Martin Wright, and stated a
quorum was present. Also present were Building Inspector Walter Aven and
Recording Secretary Lisa Badiee. Treasurer Nancy Fink arrived at 7:40 p.m.
CONSENT AGENDA
Clerk Ellis moved and Trustee Wright supported approving the July 3, 2001
minutes with the following amendments: a) under Consent Agenda: acknowledging
the Treasurer’s reports of financial activity for May and the draft of the
report for June; b) under Zimmer Road Rezoning: Supervisor Martin suggested the
Planning Commission review the Master Plan; c) Board Policies: remove Recycling
from list of exceptions of bills to be approved by Board prior to payment,
change Detroit Edison to utility bills, re-letter list; approving the list of
accounts to be paid and the list of bills paid; acknowledging the Treasurer’s
reports of financial activity for the months of June and July; and accepting
and placing on file the Building Inspector’s July report. Motion passed
unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Al LeBlanc, Chair of the Pebblebrook Estates Homeowners Association, invited
Board members to attend the Pebblebrook annual Kids Day and Neighborhood Picnic
on August 25.
NEW BUSINESS
Audit Report
Aaron Stevens of Abraham & Gaffney, CPAs, reviewed the Township Audit Report
for fiscal year 2000-01 showing the Township in “very sound” financial
condition. The Board accepted and placed the report on file.
Pres Kool Special Use and Site Plan
Jim Reminga, Development Advisors Equity Corp., representing the applicant,
advised that seven of the 11 conditions listed on the August 9, 2001 letter
from McKenna and Associates, were met. Of the remaining four: Condition #5
(regarding storm water management): Reminga faxed calculations to Jeremy
Lopatin of McKenna Associates and will submit a maintenance agreement for the
french drain system after Drain Commissioner approval.
Condition #8 (regarding lighting): Lights at the front, side and on the parking
lot island are considered essential.
Condition #11 (regarding agency approvals): MDOT has approved the existing curb
cut for driveways; no permit is necessary from MDEQ; Drain Commission is still
pending.
Condition #12 (regarding driveways): Location of other driveways will be shown
on the updated site plan.
Clerk Ellis moved and Trustee Wright supported Site Plan approval subject to
the conditions stated in the August 9 McKenna letter, the revised site plans
submitted, and McKenna approval of revised site plan and landscaping. Motion
passed unanimously.
Clerk Ellis moved and Trustee Wright supported approving the Special Use Permit
contingent on final site plan approval. Motion passed unanimously.
Park Alcohol Policy
The Township Planning Commission submitted to the Board a draft Alcohol Use
Permit form for the Community Park. Supervisor Martin suggested posting a sign
at the park stating no alcohol is allowed without a permit. Changes to the
draft: change form title to Special Park Use Permit for Alcohol; change fee
schedule to Size of group: 1-20/$50; 21-50/$200; 51+/$500; add notations on the
form stating that the permit shall be posted during all hours of event and the
application shall be submitted five business days prior to event. Clerk Ellis
suggested faxing a copy of all approved permits to the Sheriff.
Trustee Wright moved and Clerk Ellis supported adopting the alcohol policy and
permit form with changes as noted; motion passed unanimously.
Speed Limit at Mitchell/Vanneter
Trustee Zaban discussed his memo to the Board of July 10, suggesting installing
signs reducing the speed limit in front of the high school from 40 to 25 one
hour before and after school hours. The Board will send a letter to the School
Superintendent offering to pay half the cost of the new signs.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Overpayment of Past Supervisor
Supervisor Martin asked what the Board wished to do regarding former Township
Supervisor Obst’s outstanding debt to the Township. The Board discussed options
including writing the debt off due to mounting attorney fees in attempting to
collect the debt. Clerk Ellis suggested, in an effort to make every reasonable
collection effort, contacting the Ingham County Prosecutor’s Office for advice.
She volunteered to make the contact, Supervisor Martin agreed to consult
Michigan Townships Association, and the Board agreed to wait for their reports.
Complaints
Gardiner – Hearing on Motor Home Parking Ordinance Violation
Supervisor Martin reported that she had received written complaints about
William Gardiner, 4518 Sandstone, parking his motor home in violation of the
Zoning Ordinance. She visited the site and wrote Mr. Gardiner regarding his
violation of Township Zoning Ordinance 4.01(E.2.c), parking his motor home in a
prohibited location. Mr. Gardiner requested this hearing before the Township
Board, for which these Minutes shall serve as the official record. He read a
statement suggesting he should be permitted to continue parking in that he was
grandfathered to that location; Supervisor Martin replied that the Township
Attorney advised that the use is not one to which the concept of grandfathering
can be applied. Mr. Gardiner was given 30 days to comply with the ordinance, to
which he agreed.
Bath – Blight Ordinance Violation
The required court order has been signed by Ingham County Circuit Judge Glazer
and is ready to be served on the defendant by Constable Dahlstrom.
Board Policies – Committee Expenditures, Complaints
Supervisor Martin proposed the following new policies:
1. Committee Expenditures: All Township committees that are advisory in
capacity shall abide by the following:
1.   All expenditures $100 and over must receive Board approval prior to
purchase.
2.   Requests must be accompanied by:
      A full description of the item
      Drawings if available
      Bid proposals
      Reason for purchase
2. Complaints: All complaints must be stated in writing then submitted to the
Supervisor or his/her designee. The Township Board will be updated on
complaints at its regularly scheduled meetings.
Clerk Ellis moved and Trustee Wright supported approving the Board policies;
motion passed unanimously.
REPORTS
Parks Commission
Treasurer Fink reported that the Commission needs guidelines from the Board
regarding bookkeeping expenses. Supervisor Martin suggested an informal ledger
with a monthly report and Treasurer Fink will check with the accountant to
determine proper procedure.
NIESA
The fire department has leased a new fire truck from Webberville and purchased
a new ambulance. The City of Williamston has not deeded its half interest in
the fire building to NIESA as the Township did; instead, it has requested some
type of payment, greater than the $1 paid the Township, for its interest.
Demmer Corp. Delinquent Property Taxes
Treasurer Fink advised that a Demmer Corp. representative requested a four-
payment plan to avoid being turned over to collection, which she agreed to. No
payment has yet been made and the company is unreachable by phone. Treasurer
Fink will send a certified letter reiterating the agreed-to payment plan and if
no payment is made, Demmer will be submitted to collection for the delinquent
taxes and costs.
MEETING REVIEW
School Zone Speed Limit – Trustee Zaban will write the School Superintendent on
the Board’s behalf.
Complaints – Supervisor Martin will send a letter to Mr. Gardiner with
excerpted minutes from today’s meeting.
Obst Repayment – Clerk Ellis will contact the Prosecutor’s office; Supervisor
Martin will contact MTA.
Parks and Recreation Committee – Treasurer Fink will contact the accountant and
advise the Committee accordingly.
Supervisor Martin reminded the Board of its regularly scheduled workshop on
Tuesday, August 21 at 5 p.m.
Clerk Ellis moved and Trustee Wright supported adjourning the meeting; motion
passed unanimously.
Meeting adjourned at 10:02 p.m.
____________________________         ___________________________
Sharon Ellis, Clerk               Lisa Badiee, Recording Secretary
SEPTEMBER 4, 2001
The regular meeting of the Williamstown Township Board of Trustees was called
to order at 7:33 p.m. Present were Supervisor Mickey Martin, Trustee Steve
Zaban, Trustee Martin Wright and Treasurer Nancy Fink, Building Inspector
Walter Aven and Recording Secretary Lisa Badiee; absent: Clerk Sharon Ellis.
CONSENT AGENDA
Trustee Wright moved and Trustee Zaban supported approving the August 14, 2001
minutes with the following changes (additions in italics): Gardiner Complaint:
“parking his motor home in violation of the Zoning Ordinance;” “…parking his
motor home…;” and “to which he agreed”at the end of the paragraph; and Park
Alcohol Policy: “Special Park Use permit;” approving the lists of accounts to
be paid and bills paid; acknowledging the Treasurer’s reports of financial
activity for the months of July and August; accepting and placing on file the
Building Inspector’s July report; and adding Stormwater Resolution under
Unfinished Business. Motion passed unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Frans Wilbrink, 4701 Zimmer Rd., questioned the status of voter ID cards.
Deputy Clerk Badiee informed him that progress was being made and the Clerk
will send cards to voters as soon as they are ready. HE ALSO BROUGHT UP AND
DISCUSSED AT LENGTH THE FOLLOWING ISSUES OF CONCERN IN RELATIONSHIP TO THE
OFFICE OF THE CLERK: IS THERE A MEETING ATTENDANCE REQUIREMENT FOR TOWNSHIP
BOARD MEMBERS; LACK OF TIME COMMITMENT BY THE CLERK; WHAT ARE THE JOB
QUALIFICATIONS FOR CLERK; DID THE CLERK RECEIVE A SALARY RAISE. SUPERVISOR
MARTIN INFORMED HIM THAT THERE ARE NO ATTENDANCE OR QUALIFICATION REQUIREMENTS;
THE CLERK DID NOT RECEIVE A RAISE.
NEW BUSINESS
MPC Cashway Lumber
Dan Kraft, Planning Commission Chair, addressed the Board regarding approval of
site plan for MPC with two conditions: Tree species to be specified in a letter
to the Township Board and receipt of approval from the Ingham County Drain
Commission. The Planning Commission and ZBA granted MPC a variance to allow an
eight-foot fence. No details were given on what may be built on-site in the
future. Treasurer Fink would like the Planning Commission to expand their list
of trees that may be used. The Board suggested reviewing that portion of the
ordinance and considering a workshop meeting to discuss trees used for
screening with help from a landscape expert.
Trustee Wright moved and Trustee Zaban supported approval of site plan for MPC
Cashway Lumber with the two conditions noted. Motion passed unanimously.
Planning Commission Appointments
Supervisor Martin nominated Daniel Kraft, Rex LaMore and Martin Wright for
three-year appointments to the Planning Commission. Commissioners Kraft and
LaMore submitted letters indicating their desire to serve; Trustee Wright made
a verbal acknowledgement to serve.
Trustee Zaban moved and Treasurer Fink supported approving Supervisor Martin’s
nominations for the Planning Commission. Motion passed unanimously.
Fire Ordinance
Amendments to Ordinance No. 27 of the Township of Williamstown Code were
proposed, removing reference to subdivision names AND THE WORDING “SIMILARLY
NAMED” WAS REMOVED. An updated list of subdivision sizes and burning dates will
be kept in the Township office.
Trustee Wright moved and Treasurer Fink supported amending Ordinance No. 27 to
remove reference to subdivision names. A roll call vote was taken.
Supervisor Martin   Yes
Treasurer Fink   Yes
Trustee Wright   Yes
Trustee Zaban   Yes
The motion passed unanimously.
Complaints
Haslett Road dirt piles
A letter of complaint was received from Sandra Metzger, 895 Haslett Rd., dated
August 13, 2001 referring to piles of dirt directly across the street from her
home. Supervisor Martin spoke with the homeowner where the dirt is piled, and
was informed that a private company was responsible for the piles, not the
Ingham County Road Commission. Supervisor Martin will send a letter stating
that they are in ordinance violation and must clean up the site or get a
special use permit, to which they will have five days to reply or ten days to
comply.
Snelson property, 423 E. Grand River
A letter of complaint was received from Chris Reisig, 410 E. Grand River, dated
August 15, 2001 referring to noise and junk cars and trucks on the property AT
of Duke Snelson, 423 E. Grand River RENTED BY DUKE SNELSON. Supervisor Martin
will proceed according to the zoning ordinance.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Complaints
Bath junk pile
Supervisor Martin appeared in court on August 30, 2001 on behalf of the
Township. The owner was given 30 days to clean up the junk pile and agreed in
writing to do so.
Gardiner motor home
Mr. Gardiner has agreed to comply with the Township ordinance, of which he has
a copy, and will screen the vehicle and WILL move THE VEHICLE to the side of
his property.
Stormwater Resolution
A tentative resolution, as mandated by the EPA, was presented to the Board by
Treasurer Fink. Wording in paragraph two should be changed to include
Williamstown Township. Verification is needed for the dollar amount authorized
by the Township in paragraph seven.
REPORTS
NIESA
Trustee Zaban attended three meetings and a workshop. Concerns raised were the
lack of Fire Department inspections of downtown businesses; the need to upgrade
EMTs to paramedics; the need for money to upgrade equipment to raise the level
of services.
Meridian Township
Treasurer Fink spoke with Susan McGillicuddy, Meridian Township Supervisor,
regarding passing an ordinance to limit growth. Treasurer Fink will pursue the
matter and she and Trustee Zaban will attend Meridian Township meetings.
ICRC Open House
The Board of Ingham County Road Commissioners invited the Board to attend an
open house honoring new Managing Director John Midgley and in recognition of
their newly constructed Metro District Garage Facilities on October 11.
Meeting Review
Supervisor Martin will move forward on letters of complaint.
Deputy Clerk Badiee will determine whether the Township or schools will be in
charge of November’s election.
Treasurer Fink will communicate with the Planning Commission MPC CASHWAY LUMBER
regarding the types of trees to be planted at the MPC site.
Trustee Zaban moved and Trustee Wright supported adjourning the meeting; motion
passed unanimously
Meeting adjourned at 9:00 p.m.
____________________________         ____________________________
Sharon Alston Ellis, Clerk            Lisa Badiee, Recording Secretary
OCTOBER 2, 2001
The regular meeting of the Williamstown Township Board of Trustees was called
to order at 7:34 p.m. Present were Supervisor Mickey Martin, Clerk Sharon
Ellis, Trustee Steve Zaban and Treasurer Nancy Fink, Building Inspector Walter
Aven and Recording Secretary Lisa Badiee; Trustee Martin Wright arrived at 7:50
p.m.
CONSENT AGENDA
Clerk Ellis moved and Trustee Zaban supported approving the list of bills to be
paid, payroll report and bills paid; acknowledging the Treasurer’s report of
financial activity for September; accepting and placing on file the Building
Inspector’s report. Motion passed unanimously. Minutes of the September Board
meeting will not be approved until corrections and amendments are made. Road
repairs, Mitchell/Vanneter Roads speed limit signs, and NPDES Phase II
Resolution permit were all added under Unfinished Business.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Dr. Terrance Braden, 951 Haslett Rd., brought a complaint against the Ingham
County Road Commission to the Board’s attention. During the reconstruction of
Haslett Road, his yard and driveway were altered and have as yet not been fixed
to his satisfaction. Clerk Ellis made copies of correspondence from the ICRC to
Dr. Braden for Board review. Supervisor Martin offered to contact Mr. John W.
Midgley, Managing Director of ICRC, on Dr. Braden’s behalf.
Daniel Kraft, 4049 Beeman Rd., asked when voter identification cards would be
mailed out. Deputy Clerk Badiee informed him that cards would be sent out when
redistricting is completed in March 2002.
Frans Wilbrink, 4701 Zimmer Rd., questioned whether the Township would become a
Charter. Supervisor Martin stated that the public would have to petition to
Charter and that the Board has no plans to pursue it in the future. She feels
there is no advantage to becoming a Charter township.
NEW BUSINESS
Modification of Special Land Use Permit -Williamston Free Methodist Church
Daniel Kraft, Planning Commission Chair, stated that the Planning Commission
recommended approved the new site plan, having received no public comment at
the public hearing. The driveway will remain gravel for ONE YEAR AT THE OUTSET,
BUT CONTINUANCE WILL REQUIRE BOARD REVIEW. at least two years, at which time
other options will be considered. Supervisor Martin recommended approval of the
new site plan. Clerk Ellis moved to accept the Planning Commission’s
recommended approval of the site plan and special use permit; Clerk TRUSTEE
Zaban supported. Motion passed unanimously.
Treasurer Fink asked Kraft about the Commission’s workshop meeting regarding
bike paths and green space along the river. He said they decided to separate
the concept of greenways and bike paths and look at each issue separately. They
want to get easements for green space along the river before any further
developments take place. Supervisor Martin asked Kraft’s opinion on the GIS
computer program presented recently by Marvin Fouty, President of MicroScan
Maps. Kraft said the Commission’s consensus is that it is a usable tool at a
good price.
Zoning Board of Appeals Appointment
Supervisor Martin received a letter dated October 2 from Hector Luna requesting
RE-appointment to the ZBA for the next three years. Mr. Luna has served on the
ZBA for the past year. Supervisor Martin recommended his appointment.
Trustee Zaban moved and Clerk Ellis supported appointing Hector Luna to the ZBA
for a three-year term.
Motion passed unanimously.
Cable Commission Survey Results
Rick Williams, Cable Commission Chair, gave an overview of the results of the
cable survey that was sent with the Township newsletter in July. The Commission
was pleased with the number of responses to the survey and stated that Rick
Clark, VP of Government Relations for Millennium, has been very cooperative.
Supervisor Martin thanked Mr. Williams and the Cable Commission for their work
and excellent results.
Janitorial Services
Supervisor Martin expressed her continued dissatisfaction with the current
office cleaning crew. She informed the Board that she interviewed Julie Merritt
as the new office cleaning service and recommended hiring Merritt and
discontinuing the services of Hayward Janitorial. She agreed to contact Hayward
Janitorial.
Trustee Zaban moved to approve Supervisor Martin’s request; supported by Clerk
Ellis.
Motion passed unanimously.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Complaints
Bath Junk Pile
Supervisor Martin reported that she and Constable Dahlstrom visited the site
and cleanup is complete.
Pebblebrook Recreational Vehicles
As of today, Mr. Gardiner has not yet moved his RV. He was given 30 days,
effective September 14, to comply with the ordinance.
Haslett Road Dirt Pile
Dirt piles have mostly been cleaned up. John Powell, 780 Haslett Rd., permitted
C&D Hughes to use his property to stockpile dirt and also received a permit to
use Ingham County Road Commission right-of-way for stockpiling. Sandra Metzger,
885 Haslett Rd., wrote the Township complaining about the dirt piles.
Supervisor Martin wrote C&D HUGHES WITH A COPY TO Powell, informing him of the
complaint and advising he was in violation of Zoning Ordinance Sec. 2.11(c)(3).
C&D HUGHES Powell replied with a written plan for cleanup on September 10.
Supervisor Martin responded to his letter on September 18, stating in part,
“The stockpiling on Township property was not part of that approval process…”.
Powell took great offense to that statement. Supervisor Martin apologized,
stating that what she meant to say was “stockpiling on property within the
Township…”. In response to Powell’s request, Supervisor Martin will send
letters of apology to him, his father and C&D Hughes. C&D Hughes will send the
Township a letter when work is completed, at which time Supervisor Martin will
visit the area with Powell and the contractor.
Repair Business - 423 E. Grand River
Constable Dahlstrom reported to Supervisor Martin that a good portion of junk
has been removed from the property. Since all remaining cars on the property
are licensed to Duke Snelson, he is not in violation of THAT SECTION OF the
BLIGHT Zoning Ordinance.
Road Repairs – Mitchell & Vanneter Roads
In a letter to the Township dated September 21, Robert Peterson, Director of
Engineering for the Ingham County Road Commission, indicated $254,800 would
have to come from the Township for road improvements as opposed the $170,000
stated in his letter dated June 25. Clerk Ellis called to question the
discrepancy and Peterson advised his letter of the 25th should have said ‘a
minimum’ of $170,000. Ellis will draft a letter to him requesting clarification
of the difference in dollar amounts and asking specifically what improvements
will be made, the definition of a “primary road,” when site plans will be ready
and specific boundaries of the roads in discussion.
Speed Limit Signs
Trustee Zaban attended the Williamston School Board Meeting on October 1. The
School Board will send a letter to the Ingham County Road Commission requesting
signs be placed both Mitchell and Vanneter Roads. The signs will slow traffic
to 25 mph before and after school. The Township will divide the APPROXIMATE
$6,000 cost with the school district.
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP RESOLUTION APPROVING NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE
ELIMINATION SYSTEM PHASE II PERMIT
At a regular meeting of the Township Board of Williamstown Township, Ingham
County, Michigan, held at the Township Hall in said Township on October 2, 2001
at 7:34 p.m., Eastern Daylight Time.
PRESENT: Supervisor Mickey Martin, Treasurer Nancy Fink, Clerk Sharon Ellis,
Trustee Martin Wright and Trustee Steven Zaban.
The following resolution was offered by Clerk Ellis and supported by Treasurer
Fink:
WHEREAS, The United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is requiring
nine communities in the greater Lansing area to obtain a National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System Phase II (NPDES II) Permit by March 2003, and
WHEREAS, nine communities consisting of the City of Lansing, City of East
Lansing, Meridian Charter Township, Lansing Charter Township, Delta Charter
Township, Delhi Charter Township, Bath Charter Township, Williamstown Township
and DeWitt Charter Township have previously established the Greater Lansing
Area Regional NPDES Phase II Storm Water Regulations Committee, and
WHEREAS, the Committee has had prepared, reviewed and adopted a Step I – Permit
Strategy Development Report outlining its recommended program, and
WHEREAS, the governmental resolutions establishing the Committee require that
each community’s governing body approve any storm water and watershed
management plan and funding strategies before implementation.
NOW, THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED, Williamstown Township hereby approves the
recommended program as presented in the report titled “Greater Lansing Regional
Committee on Phase II Nonpoint Source Pollution Prevention – Step I – Permit
Strategy Development”.
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, that Williamstown Township authorizes the Greater
Lansing Area Regional NPDES Phase II Storm Water Regulations Committee to
proceed to implement the proposed program.
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, that Williamstown Township authorizes an expenditure
not to exceed $3,549. for the preparation of the voluntary permit application
including Outfall Mapping, Illicit Discharge Elimination Plan, and Public
Education Plan.
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, that Williamstown Township requests the Drain
Commissioner to prepare and submit draft Red Cedar River, Grand River, and
Remey-Chandler Watershed Management petitions under Section 8 of the Drain Code
for its consideration.
BE IT FINALLY RESOLVED, that the participating community’s governing bodies
must approve the final Voluntary Permit before submission to the State of
Michigan.
Clerk Ellis moved and Treasurer Fink supported passing the resolution. A roll
call vote was taken:
      Trustee Wright   Yes
      Trustee Zaban      Yes
      Treasurer Fink   Yes
      Supervisor Martin   Yes
      Clerk Ellis      Yes
   THE RESOLUTION WAS DECLARED ADOPTED.
STATE OF MICHIGAN      )
               )
COUNTY OF INGHAM      )
   I, the undersigned, the duly qualified and acting Township Clerk of
Williamstown Township, Ingham County, Michigan, DO HEREBY CERTIFY that the
foregoing is a true and complete copy of certain proceedings taken by the
Williamstown Township Board at a regular meeting held on October 2, 2001 at 7:
34 p.m.
                  ___________________________________
                  Sharon Alston Ellis, Clerk
REPORTS
NIESA
Trustee Zaban reported that the Fire Department does not inspect downtown
businesses; ambulance service is not at a level 1 rescue service, and $155,000
will be spent to upgrade the ambulance service.
Red Cedar Watershed Workshop
Trustee Wright has been to four workshops with one remaining. He will compile
and share the information received from Ingham County, MDEQ and USEPA when
workshops are completed.
Parks
Treasurer Fink met with the Parks Committee. The Williamston Rotary Club
donated $2,000 for kiosk signs. The Committee may develop a proposal to solicit
contributions from the American Legion and the Rotary Club for a picnic
pavilion with a restroom and a hand pump water source. Anything built will be
maintained by the Township. The possibility of a pavilion will be a topic for a
workshop discussion.
MEETING REVIEW
Supervisor Martin will prepare the following letters: Dismissal of Hayward
Janitorial; hire Julie Merritt for office cleaning; apologies to John Powell,
his father and C&D Hughes; notifying Hector Luna of appointment to ZBA; and a
thank-you note to the Rotary Club. Clerk Ellis will prepare a letter to the
ICRC. Minutes of the September Board meeting will be amended.
Clerk Ellis moved and Trustee Zaban supported adjourning the meeting.
Motion passed unanimously.
Meeting adjourned at 9:33 p.m.
______________________________         ________________________________
Sharon Alston Ellis, Clerk            Lisa Badiee, Recording Secretary
NOVEMBER 6, 2001
The regular meeting of the Williamstown Township Board of Trustees was called
to order at 7:30 p.m. Present were Supervisor Mickey Martin, Clerk Sharon
Ellis, Trustee Steve Zaban, Trustee Martin Wright, Treasurer Nancy Fink,
Building Inspector Walter Aven and Recording Secretary Lisa Badiee.
CONSENT AGENDA
Trustee Zaban moved and Trustee Wright supported approving the list of bills to
be paid, payroll report and bills paid; acknowledging the Treasurer’s report of
financial activity for September; accepting and placing on file the Building
Inspector’s report. Minutes from the July 31, September 4 and October 2, 2001
Board Minutes were approved as corrected. Motion passed unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Frans Wilbrink thanked the Clerk’s office for his new voter identification
card.
NEW BUSINESS
James Wolf – Rezoning of 5.42 acres at 820 Barry Road
Daniel Kraft, Planning Commission Chairman, advised that the Commission
recommended approval of James Wolf’s application to request rezoning of five
acres from AG-C to AG-SF. Kraft noted there had been no public opposition to
the request. Trustee Wright moved and Clerk Ellis supported approving the
rezoning request. A roll call vote was taken:
Trustee Zaban   Yes
Trustee Wright   Yes
Treasurer Fink   Yes
Supervisor Martin   Yes
Clerk Ellis      Yes
Motion passed unanimously.
Supervisor Martin informed the applicant that the amendment would take effect
seven days after publication in The Enterprise.
Frans Wilbrink Correspondence
Frans Wilbrink, 4701 Zimmer Rd., wrote requesting the Board adopt a resolution
opposing incorporation as a charter township. Supervisor Martin explained that
no Board action is necessary.
Board Policies
Meals will be reimbursed up to $30 per day when a township representative is
attending an educational/informational meeting . No expenditures for alcohol
are reimbursable.
Only Township Board members and staff will have direct access to any files in
the Township.
Clerk Ellis moved and Trustee Wright supported Board Policies. Motion passed
unanimously.
Complaints
Gardiner motor home – 4518 Sandstone Drive
Supervisor Martin advised that Mr. Gardiner informed her that he will not move
his recreational vehicle to comply with the Township ordinance as he had
originally agreed at the Board’s September 4 meeting. She will refer the matter
to the Township attorney.
Repair Business, Junk – 423 E. Grand River Rd.
Several complaints have been received regarding junk and noise at property
occupied by Duke Snelson. Township attorney has advised nearby residents to
keep track of dates of disturbances. Constable Dahlstrom will be forwarded the
list of complaints.
Mitchell/Vanneter Roads Project
Clerk Ellis had previously distributed correspondence between her and Robert
Peterson of the Ingham County Road Commission. The Board asked her to invite
him, along with the Township Transportation and Communication Committee, to the
November 29 workshop.
The Ingham County Road Commission has agreed to install FOUR SCHOOL ZONE SPEED
LIMIT signs in the spring. There is currently no electricity available for
signs on Mitchell Rd. Detroit Edison will be contacted.
Overpayment of Past Supervisor
As agreed at the Board’s August 14 meeting, Clerk Ellis contacted the Ingham
County Prosecutor and has been gathering information at the request of the
Chief Assistant Prosecutor. Trustees Wright and Zaban stated the pursuit of
repayment is not worth the time spent BECAUSE OF THE PERCEIVED SMALL AMOUNT.
Trustee Zaban moved and Trustee Wright supported ending all pursuit of
overpayment. Yes: 4; No: 1; motion carried.
REPORTS
NIESA
Trustee Zaban presented several pages of information regarding budget and
ambulance response statistics. He noted that the Township supplies 44% of the
annual income, which far exceeds the City’s and other townships’ percentages.
Treasurer
Treasurer Fink reported she and her deputy are preparing tax bills. This year’s
bills will have a tear-off slip for taxpayer to return with payment. She will
also be reviewing CD rates to consider for investing Township funds.
Parks
Supervisor Martin received a memo from Jerry Fulcher of the Parks and
Recreation Committee regarding a grant for which he wants to apply. The grant
would be used to build three soccer fields at the Township Park on Grand River
Ave. Supervisor Martin stated that no Township money would be needed. She will
attend the Parks and Rec meeting to discuss the application and ask Mr. Fulcher
to go forward to see what funds are available. Treasurer Fink created a poster
displaying items needed for the Park to be used in fundraising.
Red Cedar Watershed Course
Trustee Wright gave a synopsis of the course he attended and will leave in the
Township office all brochures, newsletters and other written materials gathered
during the course.
MEETING REVIEW
Supervisor Martin will continue work on complaint issues.
Clerk Ellis will publish the Wolf rezoning and invite Robert Peterson of the
Ingham County Road Commission and the Township Transportation and Communication
Committee to the Board’s November 29 workshop.
Treasurer Fink and Supervisor Martin will attend the Parks Commission meeting.
Treasurer Fink will attend the Meridian Township meeting.
Clerk Ellis moved and Trustee Wright supported adjourning the meeting; motion
passed unanimously.
Meeting adjourned at 9:23 p.m.
_________________________________      ______________________________
Sharon Ellis, Clerk               Lisa Badiee, Recording Secretary
DECEMBER 4, 2001
The regular meeting of the Williamstown Township Board of Trustees was called
to order at 7:30 p.m. Present were Supervisor Mickey Martin, Clerk Sharon
Ellis, Trustee Steve Zaban, Trustee Martin Wright, Treasurer Nancy Fink,
Building Inspector Walter Aven and Recording Secretary Lisa Badiee. Clerk Ellis
announced a quorum present.
AGENDA
Supervisor Martin added a Request to Burn, Library Board Appointment and
Employee Policy to New Business.
CONSENT AGENDA
Clerk Ellis moved and Trustee Wright supported approving the November 6 minutes
with changes; approving the list of bills to be paid, with the exception of
Diamond International and Tom’s Transplants pending further review, payroll
report and bills paid; acknowledging the Treasurer’s report of financial
activity for November and accepting and placing on file the Building
Inspector’s report. Motion passed unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Gary Nix, 2344 Park Wood, spoke regarding the burning ordinance as applied to
subdivisions. He and other residents would like to be allowed small bonfires on
weekends in fire pits/containers. Supervisor Martin responded that the burning
ordinance has been  will be referred to the Planning Commission for review and
that several subdivision residents have agreed to be on a committee to assist.
Mark Way, 2356 Park Wood, asked if the decision would rest with NIESA or the
Township Board. Supervisor Martin responded that the final decision rests with
the Board. The Planning Commission will draft a revised ordinance, hold public
hearings and make recommendations.
Frans Wilbrink, 4701 Zimmer Rd., asked why trees had been planted at the bottom
of the sledding hill at the Township Community Park and whether the Township
has liability insurance. Treasurer Fink explained that the Parks Commission is
trying to designate areas for sledding paths and trails to avoid sliding
towards the parking lots. Supervisor Martin advised that the Township has
liability insurance.
Wilbrink questioned whether Pres Kool Body Shop on Grand River had permission
to drain onto the Siegel property, and if their building permits were in order.
Building Inspector Walter Aven responded that the Ingham County Drain
Commissioner has approved the drainage issue and all appropriate permits are on
file.
NEW BUSINESS
5795 Shoeman Road Site Plan Approval
Daniel Kraft, Planning Commission Chair, reported that the Commission
recommended approval of a proposal to construct a pole barn and pond at 5795
Shoeman Rd. Clerk Ellis moved and Trustee Wright supported approval of site
plan review for the pole barn and pond. Motion passed unanimously.
Request for Extension of Tentative Preliminary Plat – Hideaway Woods No. 5
In December 2000 the Board granted preliminary plat approval for a 10-lot
subdivision subject to certain conditions. A written request on behalf of the
proprietor for a one-year extension was received citing delays in connecting to
the City’s sewer system. The Planning Commission recommended Board approval.
Clerk Ellis moved and Trustee Wright supported a 12-month extension for site
plan approval with six conditions listed in the McKenna Associates letter dated
November 14, 2001. Motion passed unanimously.
Design Standards Clarification
The Planning Commission has been considering whether to adopt Township
ordinance design standards for future commercial development. After discussion
with McKenna it was decided that the first step in the process would be a
visual preference survey. The Board and Planning Commission would be presented
with various options for developing design standards. Some townships and
municipalities have voluntary design standards and use a formula to score
development, which then has bearing on recommendations for site plan approval.
Before going further with McKenna, the Planning Commission wants to know
whether the Board thinks that voluntary standards would work in the township or
prefers an ordinance. Design standards would be different in various zones of
the Township. Supervisor Martin stated that MSU students, while doing the Grand
River Corridor Study, had photographed all commercial buildings in the Township
as well as giving recommendations as to what designs they thought were most
compatible with the Township. The photos are on art ARC view discs and
available for Planning Commission review. The Commission is concerned about
enforcing voluntary standards. Clerk Ellis stated that if the Planning
Commission and Board feel design standards are important, they should be part
of an ordinance so there is a level playing field within the Township.
Treasurer Fink agreed. Supervisor Martin asked Kraft to pursue the issue at a
later specified date, stating that the standards should accommodate new
construction and improvements to existing buildings. Trustee Wright asked that
there be enough options to work with everyone. The Planning Commission already
has some leeway during site plan approval when an old building is being
refurbished as to how much they want the building to come into conformity.
Supervisor Martin will ask McKenna Associates for an estimate for design
standard work so that it can be put into the budget and will advise the
Planning Commission when to proceed with ordinance work.
Kraft requested Board direction regarding Planning Commission members directly
contacting McKenna with work to be done. Supervisor Martin stated that Kraft,
as Chair of the Planning Commission, should be the only one contacting McKenna.
Rosemary Phillip is the staff person to assist Kraft in getting research
information for the Planning Commission. Kraft stated that Phillip did some
excellent research for the Wetlands Ordinance. Kraft asked the Board for
direction regarding Township park signs. Supervisor Martin asked to put the
sign issue on hold. The Township burn ordinance is the Planning Commission’s
top priority as soon as the Wetlands Ordinance is finished. Supervisor Martin
will write a letter to Kraft addressing these issues.
Williamston Community Schools Tax Request
A letter dated November 20 was received from Williamston Community Schools
requesting the Township to collect summer school property taxes. Treasurer Fink
will contact the Treasury Department to ask if it is mandatory; if not, she
will send the school district a letter denying the request.
Complaints
1960 Mapleshade - Boxcar
Inspector Aven visited the VanRiper property at 1960 Mapleshade and was told
the boxcar is temporary storage for transporting snowmobiles. They also have a
dump truck parked too close to the road. Supervisor Martin will write a letter
to the VanRipers asking for a written response specifying a date when the
boxcar will be removed. She will pursue the dump truck issue with the
Constable. A written complaint needs to be filed.
63 Barry Road - Burning Violation/Cleanup
A permit was issued to Luke Landscaping for burning at 63 Barry Road. After the
landscaping company dumped debris to be burned, the fire got out of control and
burned the neighboring property. The fire department was called. The
landscaping company should not have been issued a burn permit, as it is not the
property owner. Supervisor Martin will contact the homeowner to find out if
Luke Landscaping had her permission to dump and burn there. The fire chief
wants the landscaping company to clean up the mess.
Gardiner Motor Home
Supervisor Martin informed the Board that Mr. Gardiner’s motor home has been
moved and is in compliance with the ordinance.
Clerk Ellis left the room at 8:55 and returned at 8:58.
580 Haslett Road – Burn and Demolish Request
A resident has asked permission to demolish and burn a house and several
outbuildings at 580 Haslett Road. A demolition company will supervise the burn
following rules from NIESA and the Township. Clerk Ellis suggested seeing proof
of liability insurance from the demo company and asking the Township to be
named as an insured. The Fire Chief asked the Township to notify neighbors
within a half-mile of the burn site. Board members raised concerns regarding
toxic materials, such as lead and asbestos that may be on site. Supervisor
Martin would like assurance that the buildings are free of asbestos. When the
burn is completed, debris should be removed, not covered. Inspector Aven stated
that a demolition permit is needed.
Library Board Appointment
Ray Challis contacted Supervisor Martin to resign his Library Board
appointment. Martin asked for Board support in appointing Jeff Bartrum for the
position. Treasurer Fink moved to appoint Jeff Bartrum for the Library Board;
Trustee Wright supported. Motion passed unanimously.
Employee Manual
An Employee Manual has been given to Debbie Smith, Rosemary Phillip and Sue
Hiner. Clerk Ellis suggested that the words “without notice” should be added
after “at any time” in Sections 1 and 12 of the Employee Policy. In the Funeral
Leave section, should wording be changed from “spouse” to “domestic partner”;
if so, how is that defined? Supervisor Martin will speak with Township Attorney
Vince Spagnuolo regarding these issues. Rosemary Phillip, in a memo to the
Board, asked for clarification on 3 items. Does item 3, regarding her listing
as an “employee”, change her status for the Aetna 457 program or have any tax
implications. Treasurer Fink will look into that. Item 7, regarding longevity
recognition, will be a Board workshop item. Item 16, regarding jury duty, does
include part time employees and there will be no need to make up lost hours. In
all cases, paid time off must be exhausted before any unpaid time off is taken.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Board Policies
For security reasons during regular open office hours the goal is always to
have two people in the office at all times. On Wednesday evenings, when the
secretary/receptionist’s regular work hours are until 7:30pm, the board member
covering the day must stay until 7:30pm or make arrangements for another
employee to remain in the office.
There will be a ledger for all employees, supervisor, treasurer and clerk to
sign in and out during their time spent at the Township office.
Lights at the entranceways will be left on all evening for security.
All staff will be recording all their workday activities.
At Township Board meetings all board members arrival times (if after the
meeting has started) and any exit times will be recorded in the minutes.
Township computers including the Internet service are to be used for township
business only.
Trustee Zaban moved and was supported by Trustee Wright to pass these Board
Policies. Four in favor; one opposed. Motion passed.
Sewer Capacity
The Board requests letters of intent from anyone needing sewer capacity. Once
capacity is available, they will be informed.
REPORTS
Budget
Supervisor Martin asked for input from Board members regarding next year’s
budget. Martin will get the budget for the Planning Commission from Rosemary
Phillip. A budget hearing will be held in February.
MEETING REVIEW
November minutes will be amended.
Treasurer Fink will contact the Park Committee and County as to what needs to
be done if accidents happen on the sledding hill. The Enterprise may be
contacted in the future to publish an article with illustrations and sledding
rules. Fink will contact the Treasury Department regarding Rosemary Phillip’s
218 agreement.
Supervisor Martin will pursue the boxcar issue by getting a written complaint
and involving the Constable. Martin will also follow up on the burn at 63 Barry
Road.
Trustee Zaban will talk with NIESA at their meeting on December 6 regarding the
demo and burn on Haslett Road.
Clerk Ellis will ensure that the Township’s liability insurance covers the
park.
Supervisor Martin will write a thank you letter to Ray Challis and a letter to
Jeff Bartrum regarding his Library Board appointment, as well as a to the
Planning Commission directing them to begin work on the burn ordinance as soon
as the wetlands ordinance is completed. Martin will advise Chris Doozan of
McKenna Associates that direction from the Planning Commission will come from
Dan Kraft only.
Supervisor Martin will meet with the Township attorney to review the Employee
Manual.
Clerk Ellis moved and Trustee Zaban supported adjournment. Motion passed
unanimously.
Meeting adjourned at 9:45 p.m.
________________________________      _____________________________
Sharon Alston Ellis, Clerk            Lisa Badiee, Recording Secretary
2002 Meeting Minutes
JANUARY 2, 2002
The regular meeting of the Williamstown Township Board of Trustees was called
to order at 7:30 p.m. Present were Supervisor Mickey Martin, Clerk Sharon
Ellis, Trustee Steve Zaban, Trustee Martin Wright, Treasurer Nancy Fink,
Building Inspector Walter Aven and Recording Secretary Lisa Badiee. Clerk Ellis
announced a quorum present.
AGENDA
Supervisor Martin added Board of Review Appointments and Annual Meeting to New
Business and Mitchell/Vanneter Roads to Unfinished Business.
CONSENT AGENDA
Clerk Ellis moved and Trustee Wright supported approving the December 4 minutes
with noted changes; approving the list of bills to be paid, payroll report and
bills paid; acknowledging the Treasurer’s report of financial activity for
December and accepting and placing on file the Building Inspector’s report;
passed.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Frans Wilbrink, 4701 Zimmer Road, again brought to the Board’s attention the
possible danger he sees for people sledding on the south hill at the Township
Park. He was advised that signs are planned to be posted in the next few days.
Also, wires supporting trees will be flagged. Clerk Ellis will contact the
Township insurance agent to discuss possible additional liability coverage.
NEW BUSINESS
Fire Ordinance Committee
In December the Board asked the Planning Commission to review the fire
ordinance and set up a review subcommittee. Melanie Ford of Woodview
subdivision has volunteered and a Pebblebrook representative is being sought.
Rosemary Phillip was appointed one of three Planning Commission members to be
on the committee. Supervisor Martin will contact other Planning Commission
members and speak with the City of Williamston about input. Martin will also
ask residents Don Owens, Gary Nix and Mark Way to serve, if needed. Trustee
Zaban will attend the next NEISA meeting and request an active fire fighter to
be on the committee.
Township Logo
The Planning Commission has requested that the Township have a logo. A request
for suggestions will be published in the February newsletter.
Library Board
Jeff Bartrem, Ed Noonan and JoAnn Hegedus addressed the Board regarding the
Williamston Library. Mr. Noonan presented a letter outlining four basic issues
of concern: need, size, location and funding. The present facility is in
critical condition and a temporary facility is being sought. Several city-owned
sites for a new building have been looked at, but none seems suitable. Mr.
Noonan contends that a one-half mill over 20 years spread over Williamstown
Township, City of Williamston and Wheatfield Township would be sufficient to
fund a new library. Clerk Ellis asked if there was a back-up plan if millage
fails and was told there is none. Mr. Noonan will ask the Capital Area District
Library for help in funding a campaign to raise money. Supervisor Martin asked
Mr. Bartrem to report to the Board on any progress. He will copy the Township
on pertinent e-mail.
Cemetery Commission – Tractor Request
Harold Powell, Cemetery Commission member, presented to the Board a request for
a new tractor with backhoe and front-end loader for use in digging graves.
Presently, the 40 to 50 graves per year are dug by hand by the sexton and his
assistant. The total tractor price is $17,581.98. Mr. Powell asked that the
township pay $11,721.32 and the City pay $5,860.66. He will attend the City
Council meeting on January 14 to request that portion. If the City commits to
its one-third payment, the Board agreed to consider the purchase for inclusion
in the upcoming budget.
Burkley Road School House
Township resident Larry Grabarczyk would like to donate a 100-year-old
schoolhouse to the Township. The Township would be responsible to move it and
clean up the spot where it stands now. Jeff Bartrem offered to inspect the
schoolhouse and report on its condition before the Board makes a decision about
accepting the donation.
Complaints
Written complaints were received regarding the number of cars parked at 4650
Jadestone and abandoned vehicles on a property on Haslett Road just west of
Shaftsburg Road. Supervisor Martin will refer the complaints to Constable
Dahlstrom.
Board of Review
Supervisor Martin thanked Harold Powell for his service on the Board of Review
and proposed appointing Gerald Eidt, Robert Tetzlaff and Franciscus Wilbrink to
the Board of Review. Trustee Zaban moved and Trustee Wright supported
appointment of Eidt, Tetzlaff and Wilbrink to the Board of Review; passed.
Annual Meeting
Board consensus is to continue the practice of not holding an annual meeting.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Employee Policy Manual
Changes to the Employee Policy Manual have been made per suggestions at the
December Board meeting. Clerk Ellis moved and Trustee Wright supported adopting
the Employee Policy Manual; passed.
Mitchell/Vanneter Roads
Clerk Ellis moved and Trustee Wright supported Township commitment to spending
a maximum amount of $254,800 to reconstruct the Mitchell/Vanneter Roads
intersection according to the Ingham County Road Commission worksheet dated 1-
9-01 and Bob Peterson’s outline at the Township Board’s workshop 11-29-01,
conditioned on Michigan Dept. of Transportation’s approval to designate
Mitchell and Vanneter Roads primary, county roads; passed.
REPORTS
NEISA
Trustee Zaban will attend the next meeting on January 3.
Parks
Treasurer Fink questioned a bill from Tom’s Transplants and sent it to
Christine Nillson for her review.
MEETING REVIEW
Community Park signs will be laminated and posted as well as flags being wired.
Clerk Ellis will contact the insurance agent regarding liability coverage for
the sledding hill.
Township logo solicitation request will be published in February’s newsletter.
Payroll report will be kept separate from bills to be paid report in Board
packet.
Clerk Ellis moved and Trustee Wright supported adjournment; passed.
Meeting adjourned at 9:50 p.m.
_____________________________         _____________________________
Sharon Alston Ellis, Clerk            Lisa Badiee, Recording Secretary
FEBRUARY 5, 2002
The regular meeting of the Williamstown Township Board of Trustees was called
to order at 7:30 p.m. Present were Supervisor Mickey Martin, Clerk Sharon
Ellis, Trustee Steve Zaban, Trustee Martin Wright, Treasurer Nancy Fink,
Building Inspector Walter Aven and Recording Secretary Lisa Badiee. Clerk Ellis
called the roll and announced a quorum present.
AGENDA
Supervisor Martin added Salary Resolutions to New Business and 580 Haslett Road
Property Demolition to Unfinished Business.
CONSENT AGENDA
Clerk Ellis moved and Trustee Wright supported approving the January 2 minutes
with noted changes; approving the December 20, 2001 special meeting minutes,
the list of bills to be paid, payroll report and bills paid; and accepting and
placing on file the Building Inspector’s report; passed.
There was no Treasurer’s report of financial activity for January.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Al LeBlanc, 4720 Jadestone, President of Pebblebrook Neighborhood Association,
informed the Board of a newsletter being published by the Association regarding
zoning ordinances. Clerk Ellis asked that the Township be put on their mailing
list.
NEW BUSINESS
PUBLIC HEARING - 2002-2003 Budget
Supervisor Martin opened the public hearing for the 2001-2002 budget; no public
comment was made.
Clerk Ellis moved and Trustee Wright supported closing the Public Hearing;
motion passed.
2002-03 Budget
Supervisor Martin gave an overview of the budget and Trustee Zaban reviewed
road allotment portion of the budget regarding Mitchell/Vanetter Roads. Frans
Wilbrink asked if money was allotted for a tractor for the cemetery; Supervisor
Martin responded that it was not.
Trustee Wright moved and Clerk supported adopting the budget as presented. A
roll call vote was taken.
YES:   Martin, Ellis, Fink, Wright, Zaban
NO:   None
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP
RESOLUTION TO ESTABLISH
TOWNSHIP OFFICER’S SALARY
At a regular meeting of the Township Board of Williamstown Township, Ingham
County, Michigan, held at the Township Hall in said Township on February 5,
2002, 7:40 p.m. EDT:
PRESENT: Supervisor Mickey Martin, Treasurer Nancy Fink, Clerk Sharon Ellis,
Trustee Martin Wright and Trustee Steven Zaban.
Clerk Ellis moved and Trustee Wright supported adopting salary resolutions as
written:
RESOLVED that this resolution is subject to MCLA 41.95(3). As of April 1, 2001,
the annual salary of the Township Supervisor shall be:   $21,000.
RESOLVED that this resolution is subject to MCLA 41.95(3). As of April 1, 2001,
the annual salary of the Township Clerk shall be:   $20,448.
RESOLVED that this resolution is subject to MCLA 41.95(3). As of April 1, 2001,
the annual salary of the Township Treasurer shall be: $20,448.
RESOLVED that this resolution is subject to MCLA 41.95(3). As of April 1, 2001,
the annual salary of the Township Trustee shall be: $4920.
RESOLVED that this resolution is subject to MCLA 41.95(3). As of April 1, 2001,
the annual salary of the Township Assessor shall be:    $21,000.
A roll call vote was taken:
YES:   Martin, Ellis, Fink, Wright, Zaban
NO:   None
Township Park – Parking and Improvements
MDOT Contractor Kamminga & Roodvoets, Inc. has asked the Township for use of
the township park as a staging area for Grand River Road construction projects.
In return, they will use approximately 40,000 cubic yards of fill to build ball
fields and new parking areas at the park. Supervisor Martin and Treasurer have
met with the contractor and with Les Linsemier of Fitzgerald Henne & Associates
to discuss the advantages to the Township. Work would occur over a period of
two years. Linsemier will provide a proposal and estimate to draw a site plan
that could be used with the contractor and for further development of the park.
A written agreement will be required from the contractor. A sign will be posted
on the park kiosk and an article put in the next newsletter to advise residents
of the plans. Supervisor Martin will contact the contractor and lawyer
regarding the agreement.
Fee Schedule
After reviewing fees and costs for the Township’s current MODIFICATIONS OR
EXTENSIONS OF ORIGINAL SUP/SITE PLAN, Supervisor Martin recommended that the
fee be set at $1,500 for commercial permits. Clerk Ellis moved and Trustee
Wright supported the increased fee; passed.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Complaints
423 E. Grand River: Constable Dahlstrom will provide Supervisor Martin with a
list of all violations; Martin will then match those with ordinance provisions
and send a letter to the property owner requiring all violations be corrected
within 10 days. Building Inspector Aven will investigate building code
violations.
2454 Haslett Road: Two vehicles have been removed.
1960 Mapleshade: Constable Dahlstrom has asked that the box car/storage
container be removed from the property; he will make another request.
63 Barry Road: Constable Dahlstrom spoke with the Fire Department; they have
not submitted a bill to the property owner, Mrs. Romwalter, who says she did
not understand that there would be burning, because they do not want her to be
penalized.
Burkley Road School House
Jeff Bartrem conducted an inspection of the schoolhouse being donated to the
Township by Larry Garbarczyk. Overall the structure is sound. Interior wall and
ceiling boards are in need of replacement. Garbarczyk will remove solar
collectors. The well should be sealed following guidelines from county and
state health departments with possible funding available from Ingham County
Conservation Office. Bartrem has arranged for volunteers to assist with
renovation. He has contacted moving contractors and will forward that
information on to the Township for review. Trustee Wright will speak with David
Ciolek regarding the possibility of disassembly and reassembly.
580 Haslett Road
Supervisor Martin spoke with Mr. Fedewa regarding demolition and burn at 580
Haslett Road, informed him that a demolition permit is needed from the Township
and a burning permit is required from NIESA, and asked specifically which
buildings were to be burned and when he would start. Inspector Aven noted that
cement and debris cannot be buried; it must be moved to a sanitary landfill.
Aven will locate the code and Supervisor Martin will fax it to Fedewa.
Treasurer Fink suggested a burn plan be formulated.
REPORTS
NIESA
Trustee Zaban distributed a written report to the Board and reported that
Ronald Wiegandt will represent NIESA for the burn ordinance revision.
Parks
Treasurer Fink is working on a grant proposal for the picnic pavilion complex.
A public hearing will be needed in March before the proposal can be submitted.
Fink also notified the Board that a Recreation Board might need to be formed.
Fire Ordinance
Volunteers for the fire ordinance revision are as follows: Melanie Ford
(Woodview Subdivision); Helen LaBlanc (Pebblebrook Subdivision); Ronald
Wiegandt (NIESA); Rosemary Philip, Ronald Cook and Gerald Eidt (Planning
Commission); and a representative from the City of Williamston. The first
meeting is scheduled for March 14. Freestanding fire pits will be considered.
Newsletter
The Township newsletter went out on February 6.
Board Workshop
Trustee Wright will be unable to attend the February 19 workshop. He will speak
with Supervisor Martin prior to that date if he has any concerns or comments.
Board of Review
Assessment notices went out in February. Board of Review meets the first week
of March.
Meeting Review
Clerk Ellis will confirm budget amount with the Ingham County Road Commission.
Supervisor Martin will contact Kamminga & Roodvoets as well as the Township
attorney regarding a written agreement for park use; will get bids for tree
removal along Mitchell/Vanetter Roads; will review the Snelson complaint and
send a letter to the home owner; will contact the Township attorney regarding
Bath junk court order; and will work on the demolition issue with Building
Inspector Aven, requesting an environmental report.
Trustee Wright will speak with Mr. Ciolek regarding the Burkley Road
Schoolhouse.
Treasurer Fink will give Clerk Ellis information for publication regarding
parks grant public hearing.
Trustee Zaban will speak with NIESA at their February 7 meeting regarding a
burn plan for 580 Haslett Road.
Clerk Ellis moved and Trustee Wright supported adjournment; passed.
Meeting adjourned at 9:26 p.m.
____________________________________      ________________________________
Sharon Alston Ellis, Clerk            Lisa Badiee, Recording Secretary
MARCH 5, 2002
The regular meeting of the Williamstown Township Board of Trustees was called
to order at 7:30 p.m. Present: Supervisor Mickey Martin, Trustee Steve Zaban,
Trustee Martin Wright, Treasurer Nancy Fink, Building Inspector Walter Aven and
Recording Secretary Lisa Badiee; absent: Clerk Ellis. Badiee called the roll
and advised a quorum present.
AGENDA
Supervisor Martin added 2002-03 meeting dates, janitorial services and
Constable Dahlstrom to New Business. Payroll was added to Reports.
CONSENT AGENDA
Trustee Wright moved and Trustee Zaban supported approving the February 5, 2002
minutes; approving the list of bills to be paid holding the McKenna bill for
further review, payroll report, Treasurer’s report and bills paid; and
accepting and placing on file the Building Inspector’s report; passed.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Frans Wilbrink, 4701 Zimmer Road, asked if the Board would seek a four-way stop
sign at Sherwood and Zimmer Roads and at Williamston and Sherwood Roads.
Supervisor Martin responded that a resident near Sherwood and Zimmer Roads did
not want a stop sign because of traffic back up. She advised him that the Board
would forward a citizen petition to the Ingham County Road Commission if one
were received.
NEW BUSINESS
Daniel Kraft, Planning Commission Chair, reported to the Board on the
following: 5730 Shoeman Road, Brookstone Subdivision, 510 E. Grand River, 223
Barry Road, and the proposed Wetlands Ordinance.
5730 Shoeman Road Site Plan Approval
Applicant Harlan Bioproducts was given a variance by the ZBA. The Planning
Commission recommended site plan approval.
Trustee Wright moved and Trustee Zaban supported approving the Planning
Commission recommendation for site plan with two conditions: Paving to be
completed in 2002; and Ingham County Road Commission approval of entrance and
exit; passed.
Brookstone Subdivision – Extension of Tentative Preliminary Plat Approval
The Planning Commission recommended a 12-month extension with nine conditions.
Carl McIntosh, 1145 Wild Cherry Lane, expressed his discouragement with sewer
capacity not being available after the previous Board allocated 27 sewer taps
under the 425 agreement with the City. Progress on sewer lines is on hold until
the City has the money to fix them.
Treasurer Fink moved and Trustee Wright supported a 12-month extension with the
following nine conditions for Brookstone Subdivision Tentative Preliminary Plat
Approval:    1)Approval shall be obtained to connect to the City of
Williamston’s sanitary sewer system. Because the availability and adequacy of
sanitary sewer service is such an essential element of the plat, if sanitary
sewer service is determined to be unavailable, the plat as proposed would not
be permitted, and submittal of a new plat design would be required. The new
plat design would require tentative preliminary plat, preliminary plat, and
final plat review and approval; 2)A “Letter of Map Amendment” or other
documentation must be obtained from the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) that officially amends the floodplain boundary so that all proposed lots
would be located outside the floodplain. If the floodplain boundary is not
amended, the plat as proposed would not be permitted, and submittal of a new
plat design required. The new plat design would require tentative preliminary
plat, final preliminary plat, and final plat approval; 3)Approval of the plat
by appropriate state, county and regional agencies, including approval of storm
water management measures by the Ingham County Drain Commissioner’s office and
receipt of any wetland or other required environmental permits from the MDEQ or
other agency; 4)Removal or relocation of the Kranz garage (adjacent parcel to
the east), or application and approval of a variance request shall be required
to address the front setback requirement along the proposed road (per item 1 of
McKenna Associates’ February 8, 2001 letter); 5)Satisfaction of street and
traffic requirements specified in the Ingham County Road Commission’s letter
dated February 5, 2001; 6)Inclusion of wetlands maintenance (Kranz Wildlife
Preserve) in Declaration of Restrictions (per item 7 of McKenna Associates’
February 8, 2001 letter); 7)Satisfaction of landscaping concerns (per item 8(b)
of McKenna Associates’ February 8, 2001 letter), including provision of the
number, spacing, and species of trees located in Landscape Easement “A”, which
contains the required greenbelt along Rowley Road; 8)Satisfaction of sidewalk
concerns (per item 11 of McKenna Associates’ February 8, 2001 letter),
including identifying who will be responsible for constructing sidewalks,
submittal of a performance guarantee, and establishment of a deadline for
constructing all sidewalks; 9)Revision of Declaration of Restrictions (per item
13 of McKenna Associates’ February 8, 2001 letter), and notation that the
Declaration of Restrictions must comply with all Township regulations and
ordinances; passed.
510 E. Grand River – Extension of Special Land Use Permit and Site Plan
Approval
The Planning Commission recommended a 12-month extension for applicant All
Terrain to finish their project.
Trustee Wright moved and Trustee Zaban supported a 12-month extension for Site
Plan; passed.
Trustee Wright moved and Trustee Zaban supported a 12-month extension for
Special Land Use Permit; passed.
223 Barry Road – Site Plan Approval
The Planning Commission voted unanimously for site plan approval with six
conditions. All but one condition have been met, review of storm water
management by the Drain Commissioner. ZBA has granted applicant VanCamp a
variance. Mr. VanCamp thanked Dan Kraft, Rosemary Philip and the Board.
Trustee Wright moved and Trustee Zaban supported Site Plan Approval for
construction of a Pole Barn Riding Arena and Stable conditioned on Drain
Commissioner approval; passed.
Wetlands Ordinance
The Planning Commission recommended approval of the Wetlands Ordinance with the
following revisions: 1) Page 4-5, Section 4.6 last sentence of the first
paragraph to read “…following conditions exist at the site…”; 2) Page 5-3 c
(iii) “…public hearing, if required, and…”; 3) Page 5-3 d(i) “…filing of a
request…”; 4) Page 7-1, middle of paragraph one to read “… Dollars ($500.00)
per day per separate offense, or….”. Supervisor Martin thanked Dan Kraft and
stated that she had heard many positive comments his work on, and knowledge of,
the ordinance. The ordinance will go into effect seven days after publication
and a notice will be sent to Township residents.
Trustee Wright moved and Treasurer Fink supported approval of Wetlands
Protection Ordinance with minor changes. Roll call vote:
      Supervisor Martin      Yes
      Treasurer Fink         Yes
      Trustee Wright      Yes
      Trustee Zaban         Yes;
passed.
Shoeman Road – Increased Surveillance Request
Mary Sutberry, 5950 Shoeman Road, has requested increased surveillance after a
bad accident at the corner of Shoeman and Shoesmith Roads. Supervisor Martin
will send a letter from the Board to the Ingham County Sheriff requesting
increased surveillance.
Budget
Supervisor Martin reported that the Zoning Board of Appeals is over budget and
asked for a $500 increase.
Trustee Zaban moved and Trustee Wright supported increasing the 2001-02 ZBA
budget by $500.00; passed.
Meeting Dates
Board of Trustee meeting dates for 2002-2003 were set: April 2, April 30, June
4, July 2, August 13, September 13, October 1, November 12, December 3, January
7, February 4 and March 4, all at 7:30 p.m. in the Township Hall.
Trustee Zaban moved and Treasurer Fink supported meeting schedule; passed.
Janitorial Services
Julie Merritt resigned mid-February. Supervisor Martin will propose a contract
to Deborah Smith who has done the cleaning since Merritt resigned. Otherwise,
someone else will be found to take over janitorial services.
Constable Dahlstrom Payment
Constable Howard Dahlstrom submitted a letter to the Board regarding complaints
he handled during 2001, estimating the amount due to him to be $800 and
requesting the amount be donated to Shirley Graham’s memorial or the Township
Park. The Board agreed that Dahlstrom receive a check in the amount of $800.
Trustee Wright moved and Treasurer Fink supported approval of $800. payment for
Dahlstrom’s services in 2001; passed.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Complaints
423 E. Grand River: Supervisor Martin wrote a letter to the property owner who
in turn will begin eviction proceedings.
1960 Mapleshade: Constable Dahlstrom has been in touch with Mr. VanRiper who
has agreed to move the box car/storage container.
6975 Foster: Court proceedings have begun with an April 4 court date.
714 Gulick: A written complaint was received regarding barking dogs at Caraway
Kennels. Constable Dahlstrom will inspect to see how many animals are being
boarded. Inspector Aven will inspect to see if any new construction has been
done.
Township Logo
A request for a Township logo was printed in the February newsletter; only one
response was received. Supervisor Martin will send a letter to specific
Township residents asking for a submission.
Burkley Road School House
Trustee Wright spoke with David Ciolek and gave him a copy of Jeff Bartrem’s
report. Ciolek agreed that it is a worthwhile project but the building does not
need to be dismantled. Ciolek estimated that a new foundation, moving and
restoration should be in the neighborhood of $25,000 and offered to look at
bids from house moving companies. Supervisor Martin will ask the engineer
working on the Township park project to integrate a site into the plans.
Necessary grading and old foundation removal to be done by Kamminga &
Roodvoets, Inc.
Township Park – Parking and Improvements
A first draft of a contract was submitted to Kamminga & Roodvoets. Under
Article II: 2.1(B) the contractor clarified that the soccer fields will be
raised, graded and seeded but will not be regulation fields; 2.2(A) access to
the park shall be from 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. Trustee Wright suggested the
contractor have a separate, temporary entrance; Supervisor Martin will follow
up.
REPORTS
NIESA
Trustee Zaban will attend a workshop meeting to review a millage increase
proposal to be put on the primary ballot in August. Supervisor Martin asked
Zaban to reiterate at the workshop that the Township will not pull out of
NIESA.
Fire Ordinance Ad Hoc Committee
First meeting will be held on March 14.
Payroll Checks
Treasurer Fink distributed to the Board a memo explaining that she would not
sign payroll checks because she had not produced nor reviewed them and thought
that the Deputy Treasurer had prepared them. Deputy Clerk Badiee advised that
she herself had prepared them.
Meeting Review
Supervisor Martin will: 1) prepare a letter to the Ingham County Sherriff for
surveillance on Shoeman Road; 2) amend budget; 3) forward the Caraway Kennel
complaint to Constable Dahlstrom; 4) send letters requesting logo submission;
5) contact Roodvoets & Kamminga regarding Township park.
Trustee Zaban and Supervisor Martin will attend the Wheatfield Township open
house.
Recording Secretary Badiee will post and publish meeting dates and wetlands
ordinance.
Trustee Zaban moved and Trustee Wright supported adjournment; passed.
Meeting adjourned at 10:00 p.m.
_____________________________________
Lisa Badiee, Recording Secretary
APRIL 2, 2002
The regular meeting of the Williamstown Township Board of Trustees was called
to order at 7:30 p.m. Present: Supervisor Mickey Martin, Clerk Sharon Ellis,
Trustee Steve Zaban, Trustee Martin Wright, Treasurer Nancy Fink, Building
Inspector Walter Aven and Recording Secretary Lisa Badiee. Clerk Ellis called
the roll and announced a quorum present.
AGENDA
Supervisor Martin added Secretary Vacancy to the Agenda.
CONSENT AGENDA
Clerk Ellis moved and Trustee Wright supported approving the March 6, 2002
minutes with corrections; approving the list of bills to be paid; accepting and
placing the payroll, Treasurer’s, bills paid, and Building Inspector’s reports
on file; passed.
NEW BUSINESS
Secretary Vacancy
Deborah Smith resigned her position as Secretary on March 28. Supervisor Martin
will prepare a job description and advertise the vacancy. Nancy Beckwith will
fill-in temporarily beginning on April 1.
Spaulding Drain Resolution
Ingham County Drain Commissioner Pat Lindemann addressed the Board regarding
the following Resolution:
STATE OF MICHIGAN COUNTY OF INGHAM
TOWNSHIP OF WILLIAMSTON
RESOLUTION
   WHEREAS, the Spaulding Intercounty Drainage Board has advised the
Williamstown Township Board of Trustees that, pursuant to Section 196 of the
Michigan Drain Code (MCL 280.196; MSA 11.196), an inspection has been made of
the Spaulding Intercounty Drain and it has been determined, as a result of the
inspection, that certain maintenance must be performed upon the Drain; and,
   WHEREAS, the Spaulding Intercounty Drainage Board has the authority to
expend Two Thousand Five Hundred and no/100 ($2,500.00) Dollars per mile in any
one (1) year for the maintenance of the drain, and where it is estimated that
expenditures in excess of Two Thousand Five Hundred and no/100 ($2,500.00)
Dollars per mile are necessary, those amounts may not be expended until
approved by Resolution of the governing body of each township, city and village
affected by more than twenty (20%) percent of the cost; and,
   WHEREAS, the Spaulding Intercounty Drainage Board has estimates that the
cost for the maintenance of the Spaulding Intercounty Drain will be
approximately Twenty Thousand ($20,000.00) Dollars, which constitutes Fifteen
Thousand ($15,000.00) Dollars in excess of the authorized Two Thousand Five
Hundred and no/100 ($2,500.00) Dollars per mile.
   NOW, THEREFORE, IT IS HEREBY RESOLVED by the Williamstown Township Board of
Trustees, that pursuant to Section 196 of the Drain Code, Spaulding Intercounty
Drainage Board is authorized to expend money for the maintenance and repair of
the Spaulding Intercounty Drain in excess of Two Thousand Five Hundred and no/
100 ($2,500.00) Dollars per mile and, to the extent that the drain fund for the
Drain contains insufficient funds for the payment of costs incurred for the
maintenance or repair of the Drain, then the Spaulding Intercounty Drainage
Board is authorized to levy a special assessment, as allowed by law.
   RESOLUTION approved this 2nd day of April,2002 by the Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees, governing body of the Williamstown Township.
Mr. Lindemann anticipates the dollar amount not to exceed $20,000 after having
accepted a bid of $9,200 for the work. He stated that the drain has not been
cleaned since some time in the 1920’s and, after work is completed, should be
in good working order for 40 to 50 years. Once a contractor is hired, work
should be completed in five to six weeks. The ICRC will oversee the entire
project. His office is applying for a grant from the Corps of Engineers for
$100,000 to $200,000 for wetlands preservation. Mr. Lindemann stated that many
trees will be removed and when work is done the site will be reseeded with
wildflower and grasses.
Clerk Ellis moved and Trustee Zaban supported adopting the resolution; roll
call vote:
Supervisor Martin: yes
Clerk Ellis: yes
Treasurer Fink: yes
Trustee Wright: yes
Trustee Zaban: yes
Resolution adopted.
Clerk Resignation
Clerk Ellis distributed a letter to Board members on March 19 resigning as
Township Clerk effective May 1, 2002. Supervisor Martin asked that Clerk Ellis
extend the effective date to May 8, 2002; Clerk Ellis agreed.
Trustee Wright moved and Trustee Zaban supported accepting Clerk Ellis’
resignation effective May 8, 2002; passed.
Clerk Appointment
Susan Hiner, Assistant to Supervisor Martin, submitted a letter of interest to
the Board regarding the Clerk position.
Trustee Wright moved and Trustee Zaban supported appointing Susan Hiner as
Township Clerk, effective May 8, 2002; passed.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Complaint: 714 Gulick Rd., Haslett – Caraway Kennels
Building Inspector Aven inspected the property on March 7 and reported no work
being done that required a building permit. Constable Dahlstrom made two trips
to the kennels, finding no one home. Supervisor Martin spoke with the owner
twice regarding noise and will move forward regarding the nuisance ordinance.
Complaint: 423 E. Grand River
Constable Dahlstrom visited the site and reported to Supervisor Martin that 90
percent of the junk had been removed and only one unlicensed vehicle remains on
the property. Resident Duke Snelson has until April 15 to finish clean up.
Burkley Road Schoolhouse
Supervisor Martin has been in contact with Jeff Bartrem who is working on plans
for moving the schoolhouse.
Township Park – Parking and Improvements – Agreement
The Township is waiting for a contract from the contractor.
Road Improvements
An agreement between the Ingham County Road Commission and the Township for
improvements to Mitchell and Vanneter Roads has been reached. Once improvements
are finished, these two roads will become County roads. An estimated total cost
of improvements is $337,438.00. The Township will be responsible for an
estimated amount of $254,800.00.
Clerk Ellis moved and Trustee Wright supported accepting the Agreement for
Local Road Improvement of Mitchell Road from Williamston Road to Vanneter Road
and Vanneter Road from Mitchell Road to Rowley Road. A roll call vote was
taken:
   Supervisor Martin:   Yes
   Clerk Ellis:      Yes
   Treasurer Fink:   Yes
   Trustee Wright:   Yes
   Trustee Zaban:   Yes
REPORTS
NEISA
Trustee Zaban reported that wordage for a ¼ mil increase is being discussed. He
also gave to the Board a copy of the current NEISA budget.
Parks
A meeting is scheduled for April 10.
Fire Ordinance
A meeting is scheduled for April 17.
Other
A joint township meeting with the ICRC will be held on April 11. Supervisor
Martin, Treasurer Fink and Susan Hiner will attend.
New janitors have been hired. Laurie Bentley and Wendy Hitchcock will be
cleaning the Township hall every Thursday.
A joint meeting with the City of Williamston regarding 425 agreements will be
held on May 20 or 22. The school board will be invited.
REVIEW
Caraway Kennels will be discussed at the next Board meeting.
Clerk Ellis will return a signed copy of the Resolution to Ingham County.
Clerk Ellis will return a signed copy of the Agreement for road improvements to
the Ingham County Road Commission.
Supervisor Martin will notify the City and school board of the joint meeting
date.
Clerk Ellis moved and Trustee Wright supported adjournment; passed.
Meeting adjourned at 9:00 p.m.
__________________________________      ________________________________
Sharon Ellis, Clerk               Lisa Badiee, Recording Secretary
APRIL 30, 2002
The regular meeting of the Williamstown Township Board of Trustees was called
to order at 7:35 p.m. Present: Supervisor Mickey Martin, Clerk Sharon Ellis,
Trustee Steve Zaban, Trustee Martin Wright, Treasurer Nancy Fink, Building
Inspector Walter Aven and Recording Secretary Lisa Badiee. Clerk Ellis called
the roll and announced a quorum present.
CONSENT AGENDA
Clerk Ellis moved and Trustee Wright supported approving the March 27, 2002
Special Meeting Minutes and the April 2, 2002 minutes with corrections;
approving the list of bills to be paid with the exception of the Millennium
bill and a refund check for Kim Kildea; accepting and placing the payroll
report, Treasurer’s report, bills paid report, and Building Inspector’s reports
on file; passed.
NEW BUSINESS
Joint Meeting
A joint meeting between Williamstown Township and the City of Williamston will
be held on May 22 at the Township Hall.
Clerk Appointment
At the April 2, 2002 Board meeting, Susan Hiner was appointed as Clerk.
However, since appointment of a new Clerk cannot be done more than 30 days
prior to the resignation date of the current Clerk, Hiner was appointed again.
Trustee Wright moved and Trustee Zaban supported appointing Susan Hiner as
Township Clerk effective May 8, 2002; passed.
Complaints
Three anonymous blight ordinance complaints were received on April 30. The
current Township policy is that only signed, written complaints are addressed.
9550 Deer Trail – A written complaint was received April 16 regarding piles of
construction materials in violation of the Blight Ordinance. Supervisor Martin
did a drive-by inspection and will refer it to Constable Dahlstrom.
4135 Beeman Road – A written complaint was received April 23 regarding trash on
the property, a motor home being occupied with electrical extensions running
from the house, a concern about the home being up to code due to extensive
remodeling and a large tree that fell in the yard due to a storm. Building
Inspector Aven spoke with the owner, Stanley Force, informing him of code
violation and asking for a date when the trailer will be vacated. Mr. Force
responded that he would send a letter to the Township with that information.
1054 E. Sherwood Rd.
A written complaint was received regarding someone living in a barn on this
property. Building Inspector Aven visited the site and sent a letter informing
the owners of code violation. Aven also cited construction being done without a
building permit. No response has yet been received from the owner. Constable
Dahlstrom will be contacted for follow-up.
Resolution Phase II Storm Water Program
SECOND RESOLUTION FOR PHASE II STORM WATER PERMIT PROGRAM
A RESOLUTION TO APPROVE THE EXPENDITURE FOR WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP’S PORTION OF
THE PREPARATION OF THE WATERSHED MANAGEMENT PLAN FOR THE RED CEDAR RIVER
WATERSHED AS PART OF THE GREATER LANSING AREA REGIONAL NPDES PHASE II STORM
WATER PROGRAM.
   WHEREAS, The United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is
requiring nine communities in the greater Lansing area to obtain a National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Phase II (NPDES II) permit by March
2003; and
   WHEREAS, nine communities consisting of the City of Lansing, City of East
Lansing, Meridian Charter Township, Lansing Charter Township, Delta Charter
Township, Delhi Charter Township, Bath Charter Township, DeWitt Charter
Township and Williamstown Township have previously established the Greater
Lansing Regional NPDES Phase II Storm Water Regulations Committee; and
   WHEREAS, the Committee has prepared, reviewed, and adopted a Step 1 Permit
Strategy Development Report outlining its recommended program; and
   WHEREAS, the governmental resolutions establishing the Committee require
that each community’s governing body approve any storm water and watershed
management plan and also any funding strategies before implementation; and
   WHEREAS, the Williamstown township Board of Trustees, by Resolution, adopted
on October 2, 2001, previously approved the recommended program as presented in
the report titled “Greater Lansing Regional Committee on Phase II Nonpoint
Source Pollution Prevention, Step 1, Permit Strategy Development”; and
   WHEREAS, the Williamstown Township Board of Trustees, by Resolution, adopted
on October 2, 2001, previously authorized the Greater Lansing Area Regional
NPDES Phase II Storm Water Regulations Committee to proceed to implement the
proposed program; and
   WHEREAS, the Williamstown Township Board of Trustees previously authorized
an expenditure not exceeding $6000 for the preparation of the voluntary permit
application including Outfall Mapping, Illicit Discharge Elimination Plan, and
Public Education Plan.
   NOW THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED, that the Williamstown Township Board of
Trustees authorizes expenditure not to exceed $3,440 for their portion of the
preparation of the watershed management plans for the Red Cedar River
Watershed, including outfall mapping.
   BE IT FINALLY RESOLVED, that the participating community’s governing bodies
must approve the final Voluntary Permit before submission to the State of
Michigan.
Trustee Wright moved and Clerk Ellis supported adopting the resolution; roll
call vote:
Supervisor Martin: yes
Clerk Ellis: yes
Treasurer Fink: yes
Trustee Wright: yes
Trustee Zaban: yes
Resolution adopted.
Building Security
Supervisor Martin spoke to the Board regarding a conversation with the Sheriff
in which he spoke about recent Township break-ins and suggested a security
alarm for the Township Hall office. Trustee Wright will look into the cost of a
security system. Extra perimeter lighting was suggested as well as leaving an
interior office light on.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Complaints
6975 Foster Road – Mr. Bath received a $100 fine and has until May 15th to
finish clean-up.
1960 Mapleshade – Truck and boxcar container should be gone by May 5, 2002.
714 Gulick Road – Caraway Kennels owner has spoken with Supervisor Martin and
is making an effort to solve the noise problem.
423 E. Grand River – All cars and trucks have current paper work. Building
Inspector Aven made an inspection. Mr. Snelson will finish with yard work as
soon as it dries out
Burkley Road Schoolhouse
Jeff Bartrem addressed the Board with an evaluation of costs to move and
renovate the schoolhouse. Williams House Moving gave an estimate of $4,000 to
$5,000 minimum to move the schoolhouse to the Township Park. All Terrain
excavating will donate the equipment and labor for footing trench excavation as
well as top soil removal and sand fill. Beck Concrete will donate a portion of
the footing and slab concrete. MPC Lumber will donate framing, sheathing and
siding material for renovation once the structure is in place. Mr. Bartrem
volunteered to manage the project and provide carpentry labor. Leo Sheets and
Ed Brown volunteered to provide additional carpentry and general labor. An
estimate for replacing windows has not yet been provided. Clerk Ellis offered
to donate old windows that may suit the building. Mr. Bartrem will present a
full list of materials needed for inside and outside renovation to MPC to
obtain a final commitment for donated materials.
REPORTS
NIESA
Trustee Zaban gave a copy of NIESA’s budget to Supervisor Martin and told the
Board an open house will be held at the fire hall on May 25 at 12:00 to show
the public the new ambulance and plans for fire hall expansion and renovation.
Trustee Zaban would like to see a sub-station at the Township Hall.
Fire Ordinance
The Township burn ordinance is being revised. Residents of Pebblebrook
Subdivision do not want campfires. Supervisor Martin will speak with Al
LeBlanc, Pebblebrook resident, to try to define “campfire” to give to the fire
chief.
Other
Secretary position has been posted. Applications are being accepted until May
1. Supervisor Martin, Treasurer Fink and Clerk Hiner will review applications
received.
The Board is still waiting for a site map from Bob Peterson of the Ingham
County Road Commission regarding road improvements on Mitchell and Vanneter
Roads.
MEETING REVIEW
Supervisor Martin will follow up on complaints received.
Clerk Ellis will swear Susan Hiner in as the new Clerk.
Clerk Ellis moved and Trustee Wright supported adjournment; passed.
Meeting adjourned at 9:50 p.m.
________________________________
Lisa Badiee, Recording Secretary
JUNE 4, 2002
The regular meeting of the Williamstown Township Board of Trustees was called
to order at 7:38 p.m. Present: Supervisor Mickey Martin, Clerk Susan Hiner,
Trustee Steve Zaban, Trustee Martin Wright, Treasurer Nancy Fink, Building
Inspector Walter Aven and Recording Secretary Lisa Badiee. Clerk Hiner
announced a quorum present.
CONSENT AGENDA
Treasurer Fink moved and Trustee Wright supported approving the April 30, 2002
minutes with corrections; approving the list of bills to be paid; accepting and
placing the payroll report, Treasurer’s report, bills paid report, and Building
Inspector’s reports on file; passed.
NEW BUSINESS
Additional Trustees on Ballot
The township attorney is reviewing ballot language for electing additional
Township trustees.
Complaints
1054 E. Sherwood – Supervisor Martin will send a letter to Mr. Ciolek outlining
zoning violations.
135 Beeman Road – A letter has not yet been received from Stanley Force stating
when the trailer on his property will be vacated.
960 Mapleshade – Property is still not in compliance; the owner has applied for
a building permit to construct a pole barn for storage.
Supervisor Martin responded to a comment from the public that the Township does
not enforce subdivision covenants.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Library Resolution
Jeff Bartrem, 3813 Burkley Rd., representing the Williamston Community Library
Foundation, presented to the Board a resolution passed by the City of
Williamston recognizing the Foundation as planners for a new library in
Williamston and requesting the Township to adopt a similar resolution.
Treasurer Fink drafted a resolution to be reviewed by the Township attorney and
gave a copy to Mr. Bartrem. The Foundation’s goal is to raise funds for
building and furnishing a new library. Supervisor Martin asked Mr. Bartrem to
supply the Board with information on what the Capital Area District Library
will supply.
Wetlands Ordinance
In a memo to the Board dated June 4, Daniel Kraft, Planning Commission
Chairman, outlined alternatives for minimizing duplicate application fees and
permits. The Planning Commission would like to allow the DEQ to perform a
wetlands review first; the Township’s wetland consultant would then review the
DEQ’s determination. If the Township disagreed with the permit issued by the
DEQ, it may then become a legal matter. Supervisor Martin will speak with the
Township attorney and give Kraft an answer before the next Planning Commission
meeting. Kraft would like the Township to maintain jurisdiction after DEQ and
Township permits are issued.
Design Standards
In a memo to the Board dated June 4, Daniel Kraft, Planning Commission
Chairman, outlined the Planning Commission’s discussion of implementing a
commercial design standards ordinance for the Grand River corridor. Kraft asked
for Board approval to go forward with a workshop and getting cost estimates
from Chris Doozan of McKenna Associates. Kraft met with an MSU student who
would like to do independent study regarding design standard projects.
Supervisor Martin gave the go ahead for a workshop.
At the May 21, 2002 Planning Commission meeting there was a public hearing for
MPC Cashway Lumber. Supervisor Martin asked Kraft what was being done about
traffic back-up on Grand River in front of MPC. Kraft reported that MPC will
move the west fence to the front edge of the building for easier access and the
east fence will be moved back two feet to make room for a sidewalk.
REPORTS
NIESA
Trustee Zaban attended NEISA’s open house.
Parks
Trustee Wright reported that concrete crushing equipment had been blocking the
park entrance. Wright reminded the contractor that equipment parking was on the
east side of the park and orange fencing should be in place. Several trees have
been lost though not due to the contractor. Treasurer Fink will attend the
upcoming park meeting.
Other
Supervisor Martin reported concerns by Township residents regarding speed limit
on Mitchell Road near school. The school and Township will equally share the
expense of installing new flashing lights and speed limit signs.
Treasurer Fink presented the board with an overview of the Township investment
record and account balances.
An estimate for new lights in the Township Hall’s parking lot was received from
Thee Electric. Trustee Wright will get another estimate. Dan Kraft will review
the site plan.
Trustee Zaban moved and Trustee Wright supported adjournment; passed.
Meeting adjourned at 9:25 p.m.
_________________________________      ______________________________
Susan Hiner, Clerk               Lisa Badiee, Recording Secretary
JULY 2, 2002
The regular meeting of the Williamstown Township Board of Trustees was called
to order at 7:30 p.m. Present: Supervisor Mickey Martin, Clerk Susan Hiner,
Trustee Steve Zaban, Trustee Martin Wright, Building Inspector Walter Aven and
Recording Secretary Lisa Badiee. Treasurer Nancy Fink was absent. Clerk Hiner
announced a quorum present.
CONSENT AGENDA
Trustee Wright moved and Trustee Zaban supported approving the June 4, 2002
minutes and the June 18, 2002 special meeting minutes; approving the list of
bills to be paid; approving payroll; accepting and placing on file the
Treasurer’s report, and Building Inspector’s reports, with a correction to the
Building Inspector’s report; passed.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Frans Wilbrink, 4701 Zimmer Road, asked what the Board could do to get a 4-way
stop sign at the Sherwood and Zimmer Roads intersection. Supervisor Martin will
write a letter to the Ingham County Road Commission but advised Mr. Wilbrink
that a petition from the neighbors would carry more weight. Mr. Wilbrink asked
the Board who would be liable if fill dirt being brought into the Township Park
is contaminated. Supervisor Martin explained that the construction company
would be liable and that there is a million dollar performance bond in effect.
Trustee Wright stated that MDOT is testing the soil periodically. Mr. Wilbrink
also asked when the drinking fountain would be installed outside the Township
hall. Supervisor Martin has spoken weekly to the contractor to get the job
done. The foundation is poured. A dedication is planned for the first of
August.
Dan Kraft, 4049 Beeman Road, commented on the quality of paving being done in
the Township. Supervisor Martin responded that temporary patching has been done
and the roads are soon to be resurfaced.
NEW BUSINESS
Audit – Abraham & Gaffney, P.C.
Aaron Stevens of Abraham & Gaffney thanked the Township Board and staff for
their help during the audit. Mr. Stevens summarized the audit and stated that
the Township is in sound financial condition with a general fund balance of
$827,989.00. With regards to the Cemetery Board, there was found to be no
authority for its existence. A&G recommended the Township take control of
cemetery activities and the Cemetery Board become an advisory committee.
MPC Cashway Lumber – Site Plan and Special Use Permit
Dan Kraft, Planning Commission Chair, recommended Board approval of the MPC
site plan and special use permit stating that there was no public opposition at
the public hearing held on May 21, 2002. A Certificate of Occupancy permit will
be issued when fees are paid by MPC. The west half of the lumberyard fence has
been moved back and the adjusted site plan makes room for a sidewalk between
Grand River and the property. Mr. Kraft thanked MPC representatives for their
cooperation.
Trustee Wright moved and Trustee Zaban supported approval of MPC Cashway Lumber
Special Use Permit with Site Plan approval; passed.
Trustee Zaban moved and Trustee Wright supported a motion for MPC Cashway
Lumber Site Plan approval and Certificate of Occupancy when fees are paid;
passed. 
Employee Policy
Trustee Wright moved and Trustee Zaban supported amending the Employee Policy
to pay hourly employees every two weeks instead of bi-monthly; passed.
Railroad Resolution
A letter from the Michigan Railroad Association dated June 11, 2002
recommending adoption of a zoning ordinance regarding lots along railroad
rights-of-way or property. Supervisor Martin recommended review by the Planning
Commission.
Building Use
Supervisor Martin presented the Board with three possible options for
additional room at the Township hall for offices and storage space. Option one
would be to redesign office space, leaving the hall rental side as is; option
two would redesign using the entire building, utilizing the hall rental space
for a permanent board meeting area and another small meeting area; option 3
would be an entire redesign and addition to the building. Trustee Wright
suggested getting cost estimates for options 2 and 3. The Board unanimously
agreed that something needs to be done and that option one would only be a
temporary fix.
JULY 5, 2002
Trustee Zaban moved and Trustee Wright supported closing the Township office on
July 5, 2002; passed.
Complaints
1054 Sherwood Road
A letter of complaint was received from neighbors surrounding the Ciolek
property. The Constable will visit the barn where they say a man is living.
4527 Petoskey
A letter of complaint dated June 3, 2002 was received from Nick and Shawn
Cannarile, 4513 Petoskey, regarding tenants renting the house at 4527 Petoskey.
Supervisor Martin has been in contact with the Township attorney regarding
ordinance violation. Constable Dahlstrom will verify who is living at the
property. Supervisor Martin will send a letter to the owner giving ten days to
abate the violation.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Library Resolution
RESOLUTION BY THE WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP BOARD
TO AUTHORIZE THE WILLIAMSTON COMMUNITY LIBRARY FOUNDATION TO REPRESENT
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP IN THE PLANNING AND CONSTRUCTION OF NEW LIBRARY IN THE
CITY OF WILLIAMSTON
   At a regularly scheduled meeting of the Township Board of the Township of
Williamstown, Ingham County Michigan, held in the Board Room of the Township at
4990 N. Zimmer Road, Williamston, MI 48895-9609, on July 2, 2002 at 7:30 p.m.
there were:
      PRESENT:   Supervisor Mickey Martin
            Clerk Susan Hiner
            Trustee Steve Zaban
            Trustee Martin Wright
      ABSENT:   Treasurer Nancy Fink
   At said meeting of the Township Board, the following Resolution was offered
by Trustee Wright and supported by Trustee Zaban.
   WHEREAS, the Williamston Community Library Foundation has been incorporated
as a public foundation and it is the stated intent of that foundation to work
toward construction of a new library in the City of Williamston, and
   WHEREAS, in furtherance of that intent, the Williamston Community Library
Foundation has retained a consultant to perform a needs assessment and is in
the process of acquiring an option to purchase real property in the City of
Williamston on which to build a new library, and
   WHEREAS, the Williamston Community Library Foundation has presented a
written proposal to the Williamstown Township Board, requesting authorization
to represent Williamstown Township in planning the purchase of property; in
planning the construction of a new library; and including an outline of its
program and funding strategies; and
   WHEREAS, the Williamstown Township Board desires to authorize the Committee
to act in the interest of Williamstown Township and desires that the
Williamstown Township Board approve any plan to purchase and/or construct a
library and any funding strategy plan before implementation.
   THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED that the Williamstown Township Board authorizes
the Williamston Community Library Foundation to represent its interest in
planning to purchase property and/or to construct a library in accordance with
the following terms and conditions:
1.   that any and all plans, progress and reports during the course of the
Williamston Community Library Foundation’s evaluation of the library project
shall be communicated to the Williamstown Township Board;
2.   that the Williamstown Township Board must approve any plan, before
implementation, that involves the expenditure of funds by the Williamston
Community Library Foundation other than those already raised by the Foundation
and held in the Williamston Community Library building trust fund account on
the date that this Resolution herein is passed by the Williamstown Township
Board;
3.   that the Williamstown Township Board must approve the final plan, before
implementation, for the purchase or property and/or for the construction of the
library.
VOTE ON THE FOREGOING RESOLUTION AS FOLLOWS:
Yes:   Supervisor Martin
   Clerk Hiner
   Trustee Zaban
   Trustee Wright
No:   None
CERTIFICATION
I, the undersigned, duly qualified and Clerk of the Township of Williamstown,
Ingham County, Michigan, do hereby certify that the foregoing is a true and
complete copy of a Resolution adopted by the Williamstown Township Board at a
Regular Meeting held on July 2, 2002.
___________________________
Sue Hiner, Clerk
Township of Williamstown
Dated: ________________________
Wetlands
Supervisor Martin discussed with the Township attorney dual permits between the
DEQ and Township and found them to be permissible. The attorney will put in
wording to waive Township fees so as not to charge double fees. Supervisor
Martin also spoke with two independent consultants regarding DEQ reviews on a
limited basis and was told that would depend on who at the DEQ does the review.
Dan Kraft will attain Planning Commission consensus and ask McKenna &
Associated how to amend the existing ordinance.
Design Standards
Dan Kraft, Planning Commission Chair, asked for Board approval for a workshop
with McKenna Associates to establish design standards for commercial buildings
along Grand River Ave. Supervisor Martin stated that MDOT is conducting an
access management study and plan for Grand River from Meridian Township to
Webberville and suggested the Planning Commission wait for MDOT’s zoning
recommendation for access and setback. Kraft agreed to wait and focus for the
time being on building design issues.
REPORTS
NIESA
A ban on burning has been issued until further notice. A sign has been posted
by the doors at the Township hall.
Parks
Concrete crushing equipment has been removed. Soil is being brought in for the
soccer fields. Orange fencing has been put up around equipment parking area.
Tailgates for trucks hauling debris are being kept shut and the road is being
swept.
Fire Ordinance
The Fire Ordinance Committee has give a final draft of the ordinance to the
Planning Commission and it will be discussed at their July 16 meeting.
Residents of the Pebblebrook neighborhood will attend the meeting. A formal
public hearing is anticipated for August.
Clerk Hiner moved and Trustee Zaban supported a motion to go to closed session;
passed. Board went into closed session at 10:00 p.m.
Meeting Review
Supervisor Martin will draft a letter to the ICRC regarding a 4-way stop sign
at Sherwood and Zimmer Roads. Board Workshop will be on July 23 instead of July
16. Supervisor Martin will speak to the Cemetery Board at a meeting on July 23.
Clerk Hiner will sign and send out the Library Resolution.
Trustee Zaban moved and Trustee Wright supported adjournment at 10:25 p.m.
________________________________      ____________________________
Susan Hiner, Clerk               Lisa Badiee, Recording Secretary
AUGUST 13, 2002
The regular meeting of the Williamstown Township Board of Trustees was called
to order at 7:40 p.m. Present: Supervisor Mickey Martin, Treasurer Nancy Fink,
Clerk Susan Hiner, Trustee Steve Zaban, Trustee Martin Wright, Building
Inspector Walter Aven and Recording Secretary Lisa Badiee. Supervisor Martin
added minutes of the July 10 and July 22, 2002 Election Commission Meeting to
the Consent Agenda and PA116 Resolution and Complaints to New Business. Clerk
Hiner announced a quorum present.
CONSENT AGENDA
Clerk Hiner moved and Trustee Wright supported approving the July 2, 2002
minutes, with corrections, and the July 10 and July 22, 2002 Election
Commission Meetings minutes; approving the list of bills to be paid; approving
payroll; accepting and placing on file the Treasurer’s report and Building
Inspector’s reports. Motion passed.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Lisa Whitman, a homeowner in the Pebblebrook Subdivision, addressed the Board
regarding renters at 4527 Petoskey. Supervisor Martin responded that a
registered letter had been sent to the property owner, Mr. Van Havel, notifying
him of an ordinance violation. Martin also spoke with the tenants who informed
her they would be out of the house by the upcoming weekend. Whitman stated that
Mr. Van Havel is looking for other tenants. Martin informed her that if Van
Havel rented to anyone other than a single family, court proceedings would
follow.
NEW BUSINESS
Crossroads United Methodist Church
Dan Kraft, Planning Commission Chairman, addressed the Board seeking approval
for Site Plan approval and Special Land Use Permit for Crossroads Church.
Trustee Wright moved and Trustee Zaban supported Site Plan Approval for
Crossroads United Methodist Church. Motion passed.
Trustee Wright moved and Clerk Hiner supported Special Land Use Permit for
Crossroads United Methodist Church. Motion passed.
Cemetery
The Township Board met with the Cemetery Board and Ken Zichi, Mayor of the City
of Williamston, on the status of cemetery management. Due to Department of
Treasury changes at the State level in accounting coming in 2005, Township
auditors red-flagged the Townships method of financing the Cemetery Board.
Since the Township owns the cemeteries they must be listed as Township assets
and funding of them must be handled through Township bank accounts. Harold
Powell stated that a wrought iron fence would be put in the front of Foote
Cemetery. Treasurer Fink asked why the fence at the back of Foote Cemetery has
not been repaired or replaced since a tree fell on it in spring of 2001. Mr.
Powell said he will look at the damage.
ZBA Appointment
Hector Luna moved out of the Township, leaving an opening on the Zoning Board
of Appeals. Supervisor Martin suggested Al LeBlanc fill out Mr. Luna’s term.
Trustee Wright moved and Treasurer Fink supported a motion to appoint Al
LeBlanc to the Zoning Board of Appeals. Motion passed.
Complaints
A letter of complaint dated August 6, 2002 from Pat Crossley regarding three
pine trees that were transplanted at 2247 White Pine. The trees were originally
on a site plan to provide privacy screening for existing residents. Supervisor
Martin offered to speak with the property owner, Mr. Slagh. Building Inspector
Aven will make a site visit to see if a shed on Mr. Slagh’s lot is in violation
of zoning setbacks. Supervisor Martin will speak with the Township attorney to
see if the site plan can be enforced.
PA116 Resolution
RESOLUTION FOR A PARTIAL TERMINATION
   At a regular meeting of the Williamstown Township Board, Ingham County,
Michigan, held at the Township Hall of said Township on the 13th day of August,
2002 at 8:25 p.m. Eastern Standard Time.
   PRESENT: Mickey Martin, Nancy Fink, Susan Hiner, Martin Wright and Steven
Zaban.
   ABSENT: None
The following Resolution was offered by Trustee Martin Wright and seconded by
Treasurer Nancy Fink:
 
   WHEREAS, on August 13, 2002 the Township Board received a request from
Edward Cremer for approval to have a certain parcel released from Agreement
number 33-7126 which was executed in accordance with the provisions of PA 116
of 1974, commonly known as the Farmland and Open Space Preservation Act; and
   WHEREAS, the Township Board has reviewed this request and determined that
the structures located on the parcel were present prior to the original
execution of said Agreement; and
   WHEREAS, the parcel proposed for release from the Agreement is five acres in
size; and
   WHEREAS, the Township Board finds that the request for release of the
particular parcel is acceptable,
NOW THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED BY THE WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP BOARD AS FOLLOWS:
(1)   That the Township Board hereby approves the request to release the
following described piece of property for the PA 116 Agreement
(2)   That the Township Board hereby certifies that the structures located on
the certain piece of property were present prior to the original execution of
said PA 116 Agreement.
(3)   That the Township Clerk is hereby directed to transmit certified and
sealed copies of this resolution to the person making the request and to the
Farmland Unit of the Michigan Department of Agriculture.
ADOPTED:   YEAS:   Mickey Martin, Susan Hiner, Nancy Fink, Martin Wright,
SteveZaban
   NAYS: None
State of Michigan   )
         ) ss
County of Ingham   )
   I, the undersigned, the duly qualified and acting Township Clerk for
Williamstown Township, Ingham County, Michigan, DO HEREBY CERTIFY that the
foregoing is a true and completed copy of certain proceedings taken by the
Township Board of said Township at a regular meeting held on the 13th day of
August, 2002.
                  
                  Susan Hiner
                  Township Clerk
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Mitchell and Vanneter Roads
Road improvements have begun. Trustee Zaban moved and Trustee Wright supported
a motion for Clerk Hiner to draft a letter to the City of Williamston, copied
to the Ingham County Sheriff, requesting City police to help enforce the speed
limit. Motion passed.
REPORTS
NIESA
Trustee Zaban reported that the NIESA millage passed 2 to 1.
Parks
Concrete crushing equipment has been moved back into the east side of the
fencing in the park.
Building Use/Expansion
Clerk Hiner presented a proposal to the Board from Swanson Design Studios
outlining architectural services.
Trustee Wright moved and Clerk Hiner supported a motion to enter into an
agreement with Swanson Design Studios to assist the Township in developing a
Master Plan for the Township offices; motion passed.
Other
Clerk Hiner will amend the Election Workers portion of the Budget to allow for
one extra person in each precinct for the November election.
The dedication of the fountain in Shirley Graham’s memory went very well. The
Enterprise will do a write-up.
Board workshop meeting is scheduled on August 20 at 5:00 p.m.
MEETING REVIEW
Clerk Hiner will complete the PA116 Resolution; write a letter to the City,
with a copy to the Sheriff, regarding enforcing the speed limit on Mitchell/
Vanneter Roads; accept proposal from Swanson Design Studios; swear in Al
LeBlanc for the ZBA.
Supervisor Martin will contact the Township attorney regarding the removal of
trees from 2247 White Pine; find out when the Cemetery Board can meet with the
Township Board.
Trustee Zaban moved and Trustee Wright supported a motion to adjourn; passed.
Meeting adjourned at 9:15 p.m.
_______________________________      ___________________________
Susan Hiner, Clerk               Lisa Badiee, Recording Secretary
SEPTEMBER 3, 2002
The regular meeting of the Williamstown Township Board of Trustees was called
to order at 7:30 p.m. Present: Supervisor Mickey Martin, Clerk Susan Hiner,
Trustee Steve Zaban, Trustee Martin Wright, Building Inspector Walter Aven,
Attorney Vince Spagnoulo and Recording Secretary Lisa Badiee. Treasurer Fink
arrived at 7:35 p.m. Supervisor Martin added to New Business a Board meeting
date change for November.
CONSENT AGENDA
Trustee Zaban moved and Trustee Wright supported approving the August 13, 2002
minutes and the August 20, 2002 special meeting minutes; approving the list of
bills to be paid with the exception of Pitney Bowes; approving payroll;
accepting and placing on file the Building Inspector’s report. Motion passed.
NEW BUSINESS
Fire Ordinance
The Planning Commission, together with McKenna Associates, Inc., presented the
board a sixth draft of an Ordinance to Regulate Open Burning and Establish Fire
Safety Regulations. Dan Kraft, Planning Commission Chair, gave an overview of
the proposed ordinance. Two unresolved issues were brought forward: 1) The
International Fire Code should be adopted by the Township as it is referred to
in the Michigan Building Code, which is the Building Code the Township adopted;
and 2) Concern that the standards for incinerators were outdated and should not
even be permitted in the Township. A public hearing was held on August 20, 2002
with extensive public input, both in favor and opposed to open burning. Under
the proposed regulation, residents would have the opportunity to petition for
more restrictions on a subdivision-by-subdivision basis. Peter Cohl,
Pebblebrook resident, asked the Board to consider: 1) Does the right to burn
supersede the right to breathe clean air? 2) The length of burning time allowed
being sunrise to 9 p.m.; and 3) Each homeowner should have a right to sign a
petition, not just one vote per household. Dr. Gary Gillespie, Pebblebrook
resident, stated that the by-products of burning, i.e. smoke, is detrimental to
the elderly, people with chronic heart and lung conditions, pregnant women and
their fetuses and the very young. Mike Allan, Ingham County Health Department,
stated that ordinance writing is up to the Township and asked that restrictions
not be lessened. Trustee Wright stated that the ordinance has become more
restrictive in regard to leaf and trash burning. George Durak, 116 Feldspar,
presented the Board with a letter dated September 3, 2002 expressing his
concern with the proposed Ordinance. Melanie Ford, Woodview subdivision,
drafting committee member, was asked by Supervisor Martin to put in writing the
intent of the committee. The Board agreed that clarification was needed
regarding NIESA issuing burn permits. Supervisor Martin will contact NIESA
regarding that issue.
Treasurer Fink moved and Clerk Hiner supported tabling the vote on the new fire
ordinance and keeping the matter open for discussion at the October Board
meeting; passed.
Zoning Board of Appeals Appointment
Treasurer Fink moved and Trustee Wright supported renewing Dale Fulton’s
appointment to the Zoning Board of Appeals; passed.
Planning Commission Appointment
Trustee Wright moved and Treasurer Fink supported reappointing Rosemary Philip,
Gerald Eidt and Harold Powell to the Planning Commission; passed.
Cable Commission Appointment
Trustee Wright moved and Clerk Hiner supported reappointing Ivonne Key to the
Cable Commission; passed.
Board Policy Revisions
Adopted December 4, 2001 – Strike “There will be a ledger for all employees,
supervisor, treasurer and clerk to sign in and out during their time spent at
the Township Office”; revise “All staff will be recording all designated
workday activities”. Adopted June 3, 2001 – Revise “Bills must be in by close
of day on the Monday Friday before the meeting”.
Trustee Zaban moved and Trustee Wright supported the Board Policy revisions;
passed.
Building Code Resolution
TOWNSHIP OF WILLIAMSTOWN
BUILDING CODE
STATE CODE
ORDINANCE #41
An ordinance to designate an enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility
of the Township of Williamstown located in Ingham County, under the provisions
of the State Construction Code Act, 1972 P.A. 230.
The Township of Williamstown ordains:
Section 1. AGENCY DESIGNATED Pursuant to the provisions of the Michigan
Building Code, in accordance with Section 8b(6) of 1972 PA 230, the Building
Code Official of the Township of Williamstown is hereby designated as the
enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility of the Township of
Williamstown under 1972 PA 230, State of Michigan. The Township of Williamstown
assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of said Act
throughout its corporate limits.
Section 2. REPEALS All ordinances inconsistent with the provisions of this
ordinance are hereby repealed.
Section 3. MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION Williamstown Township will continue to
enforce building code violations through the use of municipal civil
infractions, as provided by the Williamstown Township code.
Section 4. PUBLICATIONS This ordinance shall be effective after legal
publication and in accordance with provisions of the Act governing same.
Adopted this 13th day of August 2002.
This Ordinance duly adopted on August 13, 2002 at a regular meeting of the
Board of Trustees and will become effective August 13, 2002.
Date: ___________________________
Signed: __________________________
    Susan Hiner, Clerk
    Williamstown Township
A roll call vote was taken:
      Supervisor Martin   Yes
      Treasurer Fink   Yes
      Clerk Hiner      Yes
      Trustee Zaban   Yes
      Trustee Wright   Yes
Resolution passed.
Meeting Date Change
Clerk Hiner asked that the November 12 Board meeting be rescheduled to October
29 due to time restraints in preparing Board packets after the election on
November 5.
Trustee Wright moved and Clerk Hiner supported changing the November 12, 2002
Board Meeting date to October 29, 2002; passed.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Complaints
2247 White Pine
Supervisor Martin spoke with Mr. Slagh regarding transplanting of trees on his
property. Mr. Slagh, who is a landscape architect, stated that the trees were
ill-planted and growing into each other and that he has planted 60 to 100 trees
on the back of his lot. Supervisor Martin will walk his lot on Friday,
September 6 and do further investigation. Because the trees are not in the deed
restriction, it is not enforceable by the Township. Vincent Spagnuolo, Township
Attorney, stated that there is no legal document to make Mr. Slagh put the
trees back. Mr. Spagnuolo asked Mr. Crossley if he had spoken to Mr. Slagh and
he responded that he has not. Supervisor Martin stated that in the future, such
items would be put on deeds and common areas. Mr. Spagnuolo suggested that Mr.
Crossley meet Supervisor Martin at the property on Friday.
1054 E. Sherwood
Ciolek – Hearing Request
Public hearing began at 9:05 p.m.
Supervisor Martin explained that this would be an informal hearing and read the
following in to the record:
Building Inspector Walter Aven letter of 4/23/02:  A call was received at the
Williamstown Township office that there appeared someone was living in the barn
on your property at 1054 E. Sherwood Road. The Williamstown Township Zoning
Ordinance does not allow two principal dwellings on one property description.
It does appear that there is some construction going on at the barn without a
Building Permit. This is also a violation of the Township Ordinance and the
Building Code. This is notice that these violations shall be promptly complied
to. If you have any questions, please call.  
David Ciolek letter to Building Inspector Walter Aven of 5/10/02:  This letter
is in response to your letter of April 23rd and your concern about the barn
located on the property at 1054 E. Sherwood Road. I hope this letter can clear
up this matter. I use the barn for my television production program about old
barns that I am developing. The barn does include a nonfunctioning stove,
cupboards, dishwasher, wood burning stove and other props. The structure is
whole and complete, and so the only work that goes on here is minor maintenance
and prop installations. Please also note that the barn has no heating system,
no kitchen plumbing and no separate electrical meter. Occasionally my daughters
will spend the night in the barn, just for the fun of it. I also spend long
hours in the barn. My young daughters do like to pretend that this barn is a
huge playhouse. I hope this clears up any misunderstandings in this matter,
call me if you have any further question
Neighbors of David Ciolek letter of 6/18/02: Many issues have recently surfaced
concerning the second dwelling and construction taking place at the barn at
1054 Sherwood Road. The homeowner, Mr. Ciolek has been renovating his barn into
an apartment for over the last 2-3 years. He has installed service to the barn
for water, electric, septic sewer and possibly gas heat. No building permits
have been displayed and we question whether or not they were ever issued. We
also question the permission to have two separate dwellings on one parcel of
land. All of this construction has come about since he separated from and
divorced Mrs. Ciolek. It appears that he did not want to vacate the property
and decided to build his own home within the barn. Since he does have a joint
custody agreement, his daughters spend their time with him there in the barn.
It is rumored that he has replied to you about the barn being a prop for his
developing television show. Nothing could be further from the truth or simply
more hilarious. He has lived in this barn/apartment/home with his children,
girlfriend and self. It is most definitely a home with all utilities and
nothing else. We hesitate to provide our names at this time because Mr. Ciolek
is quite unpredictable and we fear a response of vengeful nature. However, we
do request that this matter be addressed by the Township. Thank you for your
attention to this situation. Simply signed, Neighbors surrounding Ciolek
parcel. (Mr. Ross asked who sent the letter and Supervisor Martin responded
that it was sent anonymously.)
DIVORCE DECREE REMOVED FROM MINUTES ON 4/18/06 AND REPUBLISHED
Supervisor Martin produced a copy of a septic permit, given to her by Bruce
Gruner of the Ingham County Health Department, that Mr. Ciolek requested from
that Department. He was given the permit not knowing the Township did not allow
that type of use. The permit is attached to these Board minutes.
Supervisor Martin read into the record the following violations of the Township
Zoning Ordinance:
1.   Section 2.06 (11): Home occupations may be permitted in an accessory
building subject to special land use approval.
2.   Section 2.09A(2): Number of Principal Uses per Lot. Only one principal
building shall be placed on a lot of record or parcel in single-family
residential districts. In a single family site condominium project, only one
principal building shall be placed on each condominium lot, as defined in
Article 1.00.
3.   Section 27.07A(1)a: Permit Required. A building permit or other
appropriate permit shall be required as follows: Prior to the erection,
alteration, repair, renovation, demolition or removal of any building or
structure.
Constable Howard Dahlstrom stated that he spoke with Nancy Ciolek and she did
not want to be involved in the process of removing him from the premises for
fear of repercussions. Mr. Dahlstrom suggested she get a personal protection
order against Mr. Ciolek. Mr. Dahlstrom visited the site, attempting to contact
someone in the barn. A registration search on a red pickup truck parked outside
the barn showed it to be registered to Mr. Ciolek at the Sherwood Road address.
The truck was there at 11 p.m. and still remained at 6 a.m. the next morning.
He is a registered voter at that address and with the Secretary of State. Paul
Ross, Mr. Ciolek’s attorney, was present at the meeting and asked for a short
break in which to speak with Mr. Ciolek in private. Mr. Spagnuolo stressed that
the purpose of the hearing was to resolve the issue and to present factual
evidence in a fair and impartial manner. He then gave the Board copies of a
letter dated September 3, 2002 prepared for presentation at the meeting. Mr.
Ross stated that the Michigan Right to Farm Act protected Mr. Ciolek due to his
production and sale of branch water and a barn renovation production company,
and the Township was therefore precluded from enforcing any ordinance,
regulation or resolution. He also stated that the barn was not being used for a
residence and that in the past 30 days Mr. Ciolek had spent only 2 nights
there. Mr. Spagnuolo and Mr. Ross will speak further on the issue. Mr.
Spagnuolo will pursue the matter in court as quickly as possible.
Hearing closed at 9:35 p.m.
Brian Morley, attorney for Mrs. Ciolek, addressed the Board and stated that she
did not want to make waves, would like to sell the property and that it was a
“blatant lie” that Mr. Ciolek does not live in the barn. Mr. Ross Morley asked
for a copy of the written material Mr. Ross presented.
Mr. Spagnuolo asked for a break at 9:40p.m. Meeting resumed at 9:45 p.m.
Speed Enforcement – Mitchell and Vanneter
City of Williamston cannot enforce the speed limit; the Sheriff is in charge of
that. Blinking lights will be installed soon. Crosswalk lines are being
painted. Clerk Hiner will request a speed limit tracker from the Ingham County
Road Commission.
REPORTS
NIESA
Trustee Zaban will find out if the Township has a contract with NIESA and if so
will get a copy for the Board and Township attorney. He will attend the NIESA
meeting on September 5 and inquire how permits are given to Township residents.
Parks
Trustee Wright left a message with the contractor regarding grading and
seeding. Supervisor Martin will follow up.
Building Use
Tim Howell spent time taking measurements at the Township hall and will contact
Clerk Hiner when he has proposals ready.
Cemetery
Clerk Hiner did a deed search at the county level and was advised to look at
State records.
Sign-In Sheet
Trustee Wright moved and Clerk Hiner supported a policy of a sign in sheet
stating name, address and phone number for all in attendance at Township
meetings; passed.
Review
Supervisor Martin will prepare letters for appointments to the ZBA, Cable
Commission and Planning Commission. She will meet with Mr. Slagh on September
6.
Clerk Hiner will publish the October 29 Board meeting date; sign the Building
Code Resolution; and make copies of the old and proposed burning ordinance for
the next Board meeting.
Trustee Wright moved and Trustee Zaban supported adjournment; passed.
Meeting adjourned at 10:15 p.m.
___________________________      ______________________________
Susan Hiner, Clerk            Lisa Badiee, Recording Secretary
OCTOBER 1, 2002
PRESENT: Supervisor Mickey Martin, Treasurer Nancy Fink, Clerk Susan Hiner,
Trustee Steve Zaban, Trustee Martin Wright, Building Inspector Walter Aven, and
Recording Secretary Lori Pincumbe.
ABSENT: None
CALL TO ORDER
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order at 7:30 p.m. Ms. Martin
provided an overview of the agenda with no changes being recommended by the
board members.
CONSENT AGENDA
Trustee Wright moved and Clerk Hiner supported approving the September 3, 2002
Regular Meeting minutes with one typographical correction and the September 27,
2002 Special Meeting minutes; approving the list of bills to be paid; approving
payroll; accepting and placing on file the Building Inspector’s report. Motion
passed.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS - None
NEW BUSINESS
Moore Rezoning-Recommendation for Rezoning Approval from RR to R-1-S
Dan Kraft, Planning Commission Chair, reported that the Moore Rezoning request
had been presented for public hearing at the August Planning Commission meeting
and that there had been little or no opposition. Mr. Kraft said that McKenna
Associates had also reviewed the request and recommended acceptance, noting
that the property is already surrounded by other R-1-S properties. Mr. Kraft
reported that based on the recommendation from McKenna and the lack of
opposition from surrounding residents, the Planning Commission members approved
of the rezoning request.
Supervisor Martin asked whether the owner was aware that the barn must be
removed before the parcel can be split. Mr. Kraft responded that the owner was
aware and that the plan is to take the barn down and rebuild a house similar to
the other houses in the subdivision.
Trustee Martin made a motion supported by Trustee Zaban to approve the rezoning
application to change the R. Leslie Moore property (4050 Vanneter Road) from RR
to R-1-S. Motion passed unanimously.
Revisions to Zoning, Wetlands and Land Division Ordinances
Dan Kraft, Planning Commission Chair, explained that the Planning Commission
collects information throughout the year from its members, citizen comments,
Township staff input, state mandates, etc… and then makes an annual
recommendation for revisions to each of these Township ordinances.
Mr. Kraft identified two substantive issues, beyond the nature of
clarification, that were addressed this year. The first change was made because
the State has required all townships to modify their ordinance to allow for
clustering by December 1, 2002. Mr. Kraft stated that the Planning Commission’s
goal was to recommend changes to the open space preservation option in the
Township Zoning Ordinance that would align Township policies with State
mandates. The second substantive change is an amendment to the Wetland
Protection Ordinance that eliminates unnecessary double review by the Township
and the State. The remaining changes proposed are in the nature of
clarification or are typographical corrections.
Mr. Kraft reported that a public hearing on these recommendations was held
September 17, 2002 with very little input. One citizen attended as an observer
only. There was no comment for or against so the Planning Commission moved to
approve the recommended revisions.
Supervisor Martin asked Mr. Kraft two questions on the open space preservation
option. First, Ms. Martin noted that R1 is now included in the option and that
the minimum lot size has changed significantly. For instance, the minimum lot
size for RR is now stated at 40,500 sq. ft.. The Township’s current document
states a minimum lot size for RR of 32,750 sq. ft with a maximum of 40,500 sq.
ft. She asked Mr. Kraft if this change was made because the State minimum lot
sizes had changed. Dan was not sure why the change had occurred but believed
that it was a problem in the drafting of the document at McKenna Associates and
that he did not believe there was any mandate at the state level requiring the
change. Supervisor Martin recommended that the Township return the document to
the original minimum lot size dimensions of 32,750 sq. ft. Mr. Kraft agreed
that this would enhance the clustering option. Mr. Kraft suggested that maximum
lot size criteria be eliminated to allow the option of putting fewer homes on a
parcel.
Supervisor Martin questioned why a statement in the existing document that
allows only 25% of a property be dedicated to recreation facilities had been
eliminated in the revised document. Mr. Kraft responded that the Planning
Commission had not specifically discussed this item and it was unknown why
McKenna Associates had removed the statement. Supervisor Martin requested that
the statement be returned to the document and Mr. Kraft and the other board
members had no objections.
Supervisor Martin stated that in the revisions to the miscellaneous section of
the Zoning Ordinance, the revised document states that horses may be pastured
to the property line (Section 8.02.CC.3c). She said the Township ordinance also
states that electric fences (typically used to fence horses) cannot be located
on the property line. Mr. Kraft recommended that a statement be added to
Section 8.02 that refers the reader to Section 6.02.B.3 (which says that
electric fences must be set back 18 inches from all property lines).
Supervisor Martin also recommended a typographical correction to change
“regulations” to “regulation” on Page 4.
Supervisor Martin requested that the Planning Commission readdress Section
26.02 regarding minimum lot area for irregularly shaped lots to include
resulting lots that are over 10 acres in size. Currently, the Township cannot
regulate using width to depth on parcels over 10 acres and this has become a
recurring problem. Supervisor Martin requested that this section be eliminated
from the proposed revision document tonight and the topic returned to the
Planning Commission for additional consideration to include lots greater than
10 acres.
Supervisor Martin stated that she felt the Wetlands recommendations were a fine
compromise. She noted that for parcels over 5 acres, it is clear that the
Township should use the DEQ application form. Ms. Martin asked if this
application form should also be used for parcels 5 acres and less (i.e. parcels
that only the Township has jurisdiction over). Mr. Kraft said that the
application form had not been specifically discussed. Supervisor Martin added
that if the Township needs to prepare its own application, the Planning
Commission would need to provide recommendations for content. Mr. Kraft
recommended that McKenna Associates be asked to provide input about similar
documents used by other municipalities and, with consideration of the DEQ
application used for parcels over 5 acres, the Township adopt the best
application format for use by the Township for parcels under 5 acres.
Supervisor Martin agreed and recommended that the Planning Commission readdress
this item.
Supervisor Martin commented that 2nd revision listed on Page 1, Subsection 2.03
will be a point of contention for some citizens from an administrative
standpoint. This item states, “where the total of all accessory buildings is
4,000 sq. ft. or greater, site plan review and approval shall be required.” She
said that means that a homeowner that wants to put a 200 sq. ft. shed on his
property that already has 4000 sq. ft. of buildings in place, will have to have
a whole site plan review performed. Trustee Wright said that this item had been
discussed and that the Planning Commission decided that the line had to be
drawn somewhere. (This does not apply to Ag-commercial zones).
Supervisor Martin asked for a motion to approve revisions to the Zoning,
Wetlands and Land Division Ordinances with changes discussed. Trustee Zaban
moved to approve the Planning Commission revisions with the deletions and
corrections made and Clerk Hiner supported the motion. Motion passed
unanimously.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Complaints
2247 White Pine
Crossley
Supervisor Martin reported that she had done a site visit of the property in
question on Friday, September 6, 2002. As reported, two trees had been moved
and the Slagh house and shed are now visible. Ms. Martin determined that
relocating the two trees was because their growth was being stunted by nearby
trees and that the trees were not moved by Mr. Slagh to intentionally destroy
the screening. Mr. Slagh is planning to put something back there. Mrs. Crossley
said that she did not want a pine tree replanted that would block her view of
the existing cherry tree. Mr. Slagh has also planted approximately 100 trees on
the back of his lot that will eventually replace the screen. Ms. Martin stated
that the Township has gone as far as reasonable with this issue. Members of the
board agreed.
1054 E. Sherwood
Ciolek
Supervisor Martin reported that the Ciolek house has been put up for sale by
owner. The agreement with the Township is that it will remain for sale by owner
for one month only and then a realtor will take over. Both ex-spouses as
“tenants in common” currently own the house. Ms. Martin stated that this issue
is continuing to move forward.
Fire Ordinance
Supervisor Martin reported that a 7th draft of the Fire Ordinance was now
complete. She commented her surprise that more people hadn’t attended tonight’s
meeting regarding this issue.
Before discussing the details of the revised draft, Ms. Martin noted that the
board had received a letter dated September 30, 2002 prepared by citizen
Melanie Ford. That letter had been reviewed and Ms. Ford agreed that her
concerns had been addressed.
Supervisor Martin reported that citizen George Durak had also submitted a
letter and she highlighted Mr. Durak’s concerns for the record. Mr. Durak’s
letter stated that he had procedural concerns because he was not brought in at
the beginning stages of the revision. Ms. Martin stated that the first time the
committee met was March 14, 2002 and that she had spoken with Mr. Durak on
April 24, 2002. At that point he had only missed the first meeting. Based on
her conversation with Mr. Durak, Ms. Martin sent a memo to Rosemary Philip,
Chairman of the Fire Ordinance Committee, informing her of his desire to
participate in the revision process. The committee’s next meeting was held on
May 1, 2002 and Mr. Durak was contacted. He indicated that he would be unable
to attend but that he may send someone in his place (this did not happen). The
next meeting was held on May 14, 2002, which Mr. Durak attended and in June a
recommendation was made to the Planning Commission. Mr. Durak has been at every
meeting since that time. Supervisor Martin does not understand why Mr. Durak
feels that he was not included in the early stages of the ordinance revision.
Mr. Durak’s letter also asked about the specifics of burning household trash in
the petition and whether the petition could be applied to the current ordinance
at this time. Supervisor Martin said that it wasn’t the Board’s request at the
time and the Board felt the entire ordinance needed to be brought up to date.
He also stated concern about the petition and the ordinance. Supervisor Martin
said that she believes both these and all of Mr. Durak’s other questions have
been answered.
Supervisor Martin overviewed the 7th draft of the Fire Ordinance. She stated
that there are no changes from the previous draft until the section on the
Pebblebrook petition. Through consultation with the attorney and Chris Doozan,
it was determined that the township was giving regulatory decision making power
to the public, which hasn’t been done with any other ordinances. Typically, the
public is allowed to come forward and request the board to review an ordinance.
The 7th revision allows Pebblebrook and all Township citizens to petition the
Township board in an advisory capacity. If the board determines the petition
items need review, the issue will be sent to the Planning Commission for
consideration. However, bringing a petition to the board does not automatically
make a change to the ordinance. Treasurer Fink asked how the board was going to
accept petitions and Supervisor Martin said the attorney recommended that the
Township board make its own policy on how it will accept petitions and that the
procedure should not be put into an ordinance.
The next change was made on Page 7 regarding industrial fires. The revision
states that “… any burning on a commercial or industrial property shall be
subject to the inspection by the Township building official. It will have to
meet the requirements of the International Fire Code and the Michigan Building
Code.” The revision does not include specifics about stack size, etc… and
instead refers to compliance with these two codes.
Supervisor Martin said that the other change made in the 7th draft affected the
burning of household trash. The previous ordinance eliminated burning household
trash in RR, RE, Ag-Small Farm zones and only allowed burning household trash
in areas zoned AG-Commercial. The 7th draft returns burning of household trash
to areas zoned RE and Ag-Small Farm with notes that “burning of household trash
is not permitted on parcels less than 5 acres in area.” It was recommended that
the Township inform the public at this time that restrictions on burning are
only going to increase from this point forward. The public should expect the
burning of all household trash to be eliminated in the near future. Supervisor
Martin stated that it was the thought of the Township board that without having
this issue presented at public hearing, the elimination of all household trash
burning would not be appropriate. The noxious odor provision allows a mechanism
to stop burning if there is a complaint.
Citizen Rud Hoag (2100 Sherwood Rd.) said that he agrees with the decision to
eliminate household trash burning. He believes that household trash is best
taken care of in landfills and that even a 5 or 10 acre parcel size doesn’t
prevent smoke from becoming a nuisance to neighboring property owners. He said
that this summer there wasn’t very many nights when he didn’t get inundated
with smoke from someone burning in a burn barrel. He stated that it doesn’t
make sense that in this day in age the Township even allows burn barrels.
Supervisor Martin clarified that preventing burning of household trash in burn
barrels does not eliminate burn barrels altogether. Homeowners can still burn
non-household trash material (yard waste for example) as clarified on Page 7 of
the Fire Ordinance which states burn barrels are allowed. Treasurer Fink said
that the board has equated burning household trash in a burn barrel with burn
barrels during discussions in the past but technically they are not equivalent.
Supervisor Martin asked if Mr. Hoag’s issue was with the smell of smoke. Mr.
Hoag said that it is difficult for a citizen to file a complaint about a
noxious odor because the source cannot always be identified.
Citizen Melanie Ford asked if a timeframe has been established to eliminate
burn barrels in the Township. Supervisor Martin said that the plan is to
eliminate burn barrels within 1-2 years. She said the Township is reluctant to
make that change immediately because the issue has not been discussed
adequately at any public hearing. She said there are a lot of people using burn
barrels so administratively this decision needs to be given due process.
Trustee Zaban recommended that pages 10 and 11 of the Fire Ordinance be
included in the next newsletter regardless of cost along with an explanation of
the zoning codes (RR, R1, etc… ). Supervisor Martin said these two pages are
already included and that perhaps the zoning map should be included in the
newsletter again as well. She added that the newsletter could inform citizens
that their assessment and tax notices identify their zone designation. Board
members generally agreed that notifying the public in the newsletter of the
direction the Township is moving regarding burning would be helpful. Mr. Hoag
said the public needs to be aware that complaints will continue to be filed.
Treasurer Fink suggested that Mr. Hoag write an article for the newsletter
stating his reasons why this is an ordinance he believes needs to be made more
restrictive. Supervisor Martin said that this month’s newsletter is already
near completion and that information may need to be included in the next one
instead.
Dan Kraft complimented the board, the planning commission, and the citizens who
provided input for all the work that went into preparing the Fire Ordinance. It
was a six month process and the document went through 7 revisions. He stated
that he thinks the 7th draft is an excellent compromise.
Supervisor Martin noted one more change to the document on Page 11, Table 1,
Note 1 which needs to state “…and on lots created by land division that are
adjoined on one side or are commonly considered a part of an RR zoned
subdivision or condominium.” This change had been previously agreed upon and
inadvertently omitted.
Treasurer Fink mentioned that the Township and/or NIESA may get citizen calls
about campfires even though the ordinance does not require permits for
campfires that meet the size criteria. She suggested that the Township be
prepared to revise the document again due to this issue.
Trustee Wright made a motion with support from Clerk Hiner to adopt Ordinance
Number 41-Ordinance to Regulate Open Burning, 7th Draft, dated September 18,
2002 with one change to Page 11, Table 1, Note 1.
A roll call vote was taken:
Trustee Zaban   Yes
Trustee Wright   Yes
Treasurer Fink   Yes
Supervisor Martin   Yes
Clerk Hiner      Yes
Resolution passed unanimously.
Cemetery
Supervisor Martin reported that the Township is proceeding with bringing the
cemeteries under its supervision. Trustee Wright and Supervisor Martin will be
meeting with the cemetery staff this week. Nancy will be meeting with Mr. Fate
on Wednesday or Friday to transfer all of the financial records. The goal is to
have everything transferred in house by January 1, 2003. Citizen Mr. Hoag asked
what prompted this decision and Supervisor Martin stated that the decision was
made based on state regulations and recommendations by the auditors when they
discovered the Township owned the properties. The Cemetery Board will continue
in an advisory capacity (similar to the Planning Commission). Treasurer Fink
added that the Township has to meet strict rules governing money handling.
PUBLIC COMMENT
(Supervisor Martin invited public comment out of sequence citizens arriving
after the Public Comment portion at the beginning of the meeting).
Citizen Nick Cannarile (4513 Petoskey Drive) asked if there was any more
information available about the rental situation at the Van Havel property.
Supervisor Martin reported that Mr. Van Havel had been notified that renting to
a non-single family renter was in violation of Township ordinance. Mr. Van
Havel’s attorney had sent a letter to the Township stating that the renters had
moved out, that the Van Havel’s were now in compliance and that no further
action was needed (to which Supervisor Martin agreed).
Mr. Cannarile stated that his neighborhood association had also received a
letter from the Van Havel’s attorney that threatened to sue the association for
a year’s lost rent. He asked if the Township had received a similar letter and
Supervisor Martin reported that it had not.
Mr. Cannarile then reported that new renters now appear to be moving back in
and he asked if there was anything the township could do to make sure that
Mr.Van Havel is renting in accordance with the Township’s ordinance. Mr.
Cannarile is concerned that renters will move in that are not a single family
as required, but will say that they are to avoid noncompliance. Supervisor
Martin reported that the Township attorney has suggested that vehicle license
plates and voter registration addresses of the renters can be researched to
confirm that renters are, in fact, a single family as required.
Supervisor Martin posed the question of whether it is time for Williamstown
Township to establish a renter’s ordinance and Mr. Cannarile responded that
members of the Pebblebrook subdivision community would be interested in
participating in such a process from the beginning.
Mr. Cannarile asked if there was anything else the Township could do to relieve
to relieve Mr. Van Havel’s neighbors from policing his rental situation based
on his past practices. Supervisor Martin said that she could ask the Township
attorney at her next monthly meeting.
Supervisor Martin asked Planning Commission Chair Dan Kraft whether it was time
for the Township to consider a Renters Ordinance and he stated that, in his
opinion, there are already enough restrictions on private property and that
these issues should be addressed on a case by case basis.
Treasurer Fink suggested that members of the board visit and look over the
property in question and that Constable Dahlstrom be notified to track license
plates as necessary. Supervisor Martin reiterated that she would speak with the
constable and the Township attorney about what options exist. Supervisor Martin
commented that she felt bad for the students that had moved out of the rental
property because they had been put into the middle of a very difficult
situation.
REPORTS
NIESA
Trustee Zaban reported that there was not much happening at this time. He said
the total proposed budget for NIESA is close to 600,000 and provided a
finalized copy budget to Supervisor Martin.
Parks
Trustee Wright reported that there was no new activity. Supervisor Martin
reported that she had contacted Mr. Larry Grabarczyk about the schoolhouse to
inform him that the Township would be unable to move the building until 2003
when the site will be prepared. He said he doesn’t want to wait and asked if it
was possible to move it to a temporary location on the property. Supervisor
Martin and Jeff Bartrem researched the situation but determined it would be
difficult because, due to the building’s age, there needs to be a decent
foundation under it or it won’t last. Mr. Bartrem said it would also be
difficult to ask volunteers to move the building twice. Supervisor Martin said
she will call Mr. Grabarczyk back and confirm that the Township will not be
able to move the schoolhouse until 2003.
Building Use and Expansion
Clerk Hiner reported that she, along with Supervisor Martin and Tim Howell, met
with Swanson Design Studios last week and received proposals for the Township
Building Expansion ranging from $35,000 to $1 million. Clerk Hiner reported
that after reviewing the proposals they recommended elements from Proposals A
and C. These include:
· Expansion of the meeting area to include a permanent meeting room and space
for hall rental
· Additional storage space to allow for off-site storage to return to the
Township offices
· Expanded office space to include office rooms for the three officers and a
private conference
· Remodeling the two bathroom areas to make them handicap accessible
· Repairing the parking lot and adding parking lot lighting
Clerk Hiner reported that they will meet with Swanson Design again on October
15, 2002 at 4 p.m. to review a revised design. She said the estimated cost for
modifications would be in the range of $250-300,000. The revised plan should
address the needs for 20 years of Township growth. The plan will not include
the addition of a fire building (which may be a future recommendation by NIESA)
because of the estimated $300,000 increase in costs.
Citizen Rud. Hoag asked the status of the park on Grand River. Trustee Wright
said that there will be some additional grading and seeding to create an open
playground area the size of two soccer fields. Next summer an open baseball
field will be created and the sledding hills will be improved. He said that the
M-43 improvement is a 2-year project and that the Township has signed an
agreement with MDOT for the use of the park space as a staging area. The
contractor will reuse the crushed material accumulating on the property. At the
end of the project, MDOT has agreed to improve the park entrance and will put a
layer of crushed asphalt on the existing and new parking areas. Treasurer Fink
said that a drawing is now being prepared to present to the American Legion
with a request for their assistance on additional development of the park
Other
Trustee Zaban reported that he will be unable attend the next Fire Board
meeting and the Building Expansion meeting on October 15, 2002.
Supervisor Martin reported that she and Clerk Hiner had conducted an employee
review with Office Manager Terry Smith. She reported that the review went well,
that Ms. Smith seems to enjoy her position and the she is doing a good job. A
job description has been prepared outlining tasks and priorities for the
position, which will be distributed by Clerk Hiner to the board members.
Supervisor Martin recommended a pay increase for Ms. Smith from $12.00 to
$13.00.
Supervisor Martin moved and Trustee Wright supported adjournment; passed.
Meeting adjourned at 9:28 p.m.
_________________________________      ______________________________
Susan L. Hiner               Lori A. Pincumbe
Clerk                     Recording Secretary
OCTOBER 29, 2002
PRESENT: Supervisor Mickey Martin, Treasurer Nancy Fink, Clerk Susan Hiner,
Trustee Steve Zaban, Trustee Martin Wright, Building Inspector Walter Aven, and
Recording Secretary Lori Pincumbe.
ABSENT: None
CALL TO ORDER
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order at 7:30pm. Supervisor
Martin provided an overview of the meeting agenda and made a request for any
changes. Treasurer Fink requested that the bank resolutions requesting
signatory cards be added to the agenda. Supervisor Martin said that this issue
could be discussed as New Business. No other additions or corrections to the
agenda were made at this time.
CONSENT AGENDA
Trustee Wright moved and Clerk Hiner supported approving the October 1, 2002
Regular Meeting Minutes (with one typographical correction); approving the list
of bills paid and to be paid; approving payroll; and accepting and placing on
file the Treasurer’s Report and the Building Inspector’s Report. Motion passed
unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Citizen Katie Lo stated that she missed seeing a “Message from the Supervisor”
in the most recent newsletter. Supervisor Martin said that she was limited for
space last month and put the Road Improvement piece in its place. She said she
plans to have it return next month. Supervisor Martin said she prefers to send
more newsletters with less information to keep the document a user-friendly
size. She also said she hopes to start profiling local commercial businesses in
the newsletter. Treasurer Fink suggested that we could start including a want-
ad section in the newsletter as a service to the community. Supervisor Martin
stated that the Township always welcomes comments and feedback about the
newsletter.
Citizen Franz Wilbrink mentioned that he had spoken with Shirley Graham’s
mother and that she would like some additional copies of the newsletter that
included the poem written by Shirley’s son. Supervisor Martin said we will be
happy to send them to her.
Trustee Zaban asked that the minutes reflect that the Township Cable Commission
had received a letter dated October 23, 2002 from Millennium Cable stating that
Township rates will be increased 18%. This same letter was included in all
subscriber invoices. Treasurer Fink complained to Trustee Zaban (Cable
Commission Chairman) that she had not been able to get through to Millennium
during a recent outage.
NEW BUSINESS
Uniform Traffic Code Resolution
Supervisor Martin reported that the Township Board must adopt the new Uniform
Traffic Code Resolution included in the board package. Trustee Zaban moved that
we adopt the new Traffic Code Resolution and Treasurer Fink supported.
Supervisor Martin asked Clerk Hiner to add a sequential number to each
resolution for record keeping purposes. Clerk Hiner said that a summary of the
board meeting would be published in the Williamston Enterprise on the week of
November 6, 2002 so Supervisor Martin said the ordinance shall become effective
on November 12, 2002.
Roll Call Vote:
Trustee Steve Zaban    Yes
Trustee Martin Wright    Yes
Treasurer Nancy Fink    Yes
Supervisor Mickey Martin    Yes
Clerk Susan Hiner       Yes
Motion passed unanimously.
Use of Computerized Data Base as a Tax Roll Resolution
Supervisor Martin presented a Resolution for the Use of Computerized Data Base
as a Tax Roll. Supervisor Martin provided board members with the background
information showing that this resolution was actually required as part of an
act passed in 1990 and should have been done previously by all townships using
this method. The State of Michigan recently notified townships that they needed
to have passed a resolution declaring that they were using a computerized
database for tax roll purposes. Trustee Wright moved to approve the resolution
supported by Clerk Hiner.
Roll Call Vote:
Trustee Steve Zaban    Yes
Trustee Martin Wright    Yes
Treasurer Nancy Fink    Yes
Supervisor Mickey Martin    Yes
Clerk Susan Hiner       Yes
Motion passed unanimously.
Payroll of the Election Inspectors
Supervisor Martin reported that Clerk Hiner was requesting that the board
approve the payroll out of order for the election inspectors that will be
working at the upcoming election on Tuesday, November 5, 2002. The board agreed
that working an election constitutes a long day of hard work and that it would
be appropriate to reimburse them quickly. Trustee Wright stated that he has
read that finding competent people willing to work elections is becoming
increasingly difficult so retaining our inspectors is important.
Trustee Wright moved to pay election workers out of sequence and Treasurer Fink
supported the motion. Motion passed unanimously.
Election Status
Supervisor Martin asked if the election process was going well. Clerk Hiner
said that the process is on schedule and has gone very well with the exception
of enduring some frustrating problems with the Qualified Voter File software
that have occurred at the county level. The Township already has a 14% voter
turnout with returned Absentee Ballots alone so we anticipate the turnout for
this general election to be high.
Bank Account Resolutions
Treasurer Fink reported that certain banks holding Williamstown Township
accounts have requested that the Board approve bank resolution statements.
Supervisor Martin made a motion that the Board adopts any bank resolutions that
Clerk Hiner and Treasurer Fink determine are appropriate to sign. Trustee Zaban
seconded the motion. Motion passed unanimously.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Complaints
Ciolek Property
1054 E. Sherwood
Supervisor Martin reported that all documents have been filed and the case is
at a standstill right now. Reports are that Mr. Ciolek has moved to a different
location but still works out of the barn. Supervisor Martin stated that the
Township will continue to pursue this case but we will try to do so without
incurring any more legal fees. Trustee Wright asked when the deadline expires
for the home to be sold as “For Sale by Owner.” Supervisor Martin reported that
this provision expires in the beginning of November.
Templeton Property
1435 Epley Road
Supervisor Martin stated that she has a copy of the plans for the road that
Mr.Templeton plans to put across his property. A major portion of the
construction has already taken place. Inspector Walt Aven has put a stop work
order on any work within 10 feet of the property line. The Road Commission has
put a stop work order on anything that connects to Epley Road. The Road
Commission has written a letter to Mr. Templeton stating that they will not
assess any road unless it has been approved, and that their approval will be
only secondary to Township approval. Mr. Templeton needs an approved site plan.
He met with Supervisor Martin last week. She informed him that because the road
went from one end of his property to the other it constituted a split, which
would require rezoning. He said that he would alter his plan so that he would
not divide the property. At this point he has filled out an application for
site plan approval but has not paid the fee. Supervisor Martin said he may come
to the next Planning Commission meeting on an informal basis for advice. He has
not stopped work. His neighbors have filed a suit against Mr. Templeton because
his work came onto their property and destroyed a number of trees.
Sumbal Property
707 Haslett Rd
Supervisor Martin reported that a complaint was investigated at 707 Haslett
Road. The home is zoned single family but currently has two renters living in
an apartment converted from an attached garage.
Van Riper Property
1960 Maple Shade Drive
Trustee Wright asked about the pole/storage barn being constructed at this
property. Supervisor Martin reported that the owner plans to build a pole barn.
This is not authorized by his subdivision covenant but the Township doesn’t
enforce subdivision covenants. According to Township rules, he can build a 1500
sq ft pole barn as long as it is located in the back yard.
Hofmann Property
4405 Beeman Road
Supervisor Martin asked Inspector Aven what was happening on Beeman Road at the
Hofmann property. He stated that it appears that they are moving a lot of dirt.
Inspector Aven said he would look into it.
Van Havel Property
4527 Petoskey Drive
Citizen Katie Lo asked about the renter complaint at the Van Havel property in
the Pebblebrook subdivision. She asked if the new people that moved into the
rental house are a single family as required by zoning rules. Supervisor Martin
said that it has been made clear to the owner that this is a requirement and
that the report to the Township is that a single family is renting the space.
Cemetery
Supervisor Martin reported that the transfer of the cemetery administration to
the Township office is moving forward. Treasurer Fink has been meeting with the
accountants and Supervisor Martin and Trustee have been meeting with the
cemetery workers. The Township will now administrate the financial accounts in-
house for the two Township cemeteries (Summit Cemetery on Beeman Road and Foote
Cemetery on Sherwood Road). The Township currently has control of the day-to-
day accounts and the investment accounts. The future of the investments
accounts will depend on advice from the Township’s accounting consultants. The
Township will probably make a change to existing policies to discontinue
offering perpetual care. We do not currently have a list of the people who have
made contributions to a perpetual care fund but Treasurer Fink stated she feels
obligated to fulfill the desires of the people who contributed to this fund.
But, she stated, the Township must also be sure to meet standard accounting
practice requirements. Trustee Wright asked at what point she expected the
Township’s accountants to decide to conduct an audit. Treasurer Fink said that
the cemetery management is being transferred to the Township office on a piece-
by-piece basis and that the accountants are aware of our progress. Supervisor
Martin said that a Board workshop will be held on November 19, 2002 to
establish a plan for managing the cemeteries, including a decision on whether
to expand the cemetery board.
REPORTS
NIESA
Trustee Zaban presented a copy of the NIESA budget.
Parks
Trustee Wright reported that work is being done to get the park cleaned up.
November first is typically the end of the season for maintenance but it may be
altered this year because the season has been so cold. Grass has been planted
but there has not been enough sun and it has not been warm enough for the seeds
to germinate. Treasurer Fink asked if any dirt has been added to the sliding
hill. Trustee Wright said that the contractor (K&R) may have added a small
amount of material to the hill but the bulk of the increase to the hill will be
done next summer. Trustee Wright said if they have to seed again in the spring
they may charge us again. Supervisor Martin asked if the Township could ask K&R
to put fencing up as soon as possible to keep the snowmobiles off the hill this
winter. Supervisor Martin said that if they can’t do it we should hire someone
right away to put up the fence. Trustee Wright said that he would contact K&R.
Treasurer Fink reviewed the minutes from the last Park Meeting. The next park
meeting will be held at the park so that the committee can assess the condition
of the park. A burn is planned for next spring. Ron Wygant has been voluntarily
mowing portions of the park through the summer. The Park Committee is planning
to schedule a final mow of the season (the trails will be short-mowed and the
prairie portion long-mowed).
Supervisor Martin asked whether Jerry Fulcher still plans to apply for a grant
to seed the soccer fields at the park and Treasurer Fink said that it is still
a possibility. Citizen Franz Wilbrink asked whether the Township was pursuing
any other grants to develop the park. Treasurer Fink reported that, based on
the Township’s experience with the grant process to date, the Committee’s plan
is to see how far the Township can go using our own funding sources without a
grant. When it becomes necessary to seek grant assistance, the Township will be
in a better position for grant approval if we have a track record of trying to
get things down with our own resources first. Treasurer Fink suggested that
with land management and proper grading, the Township could probably proceed
with a skating rink plan with only a minor investment. She said an ice rink
area could be flooded with very little effort and this will probably be the
next development step.
Building Use/Expansion
Supervisor Martin reported that the Township is currently reviewing proposals
to expand the building. Tim Howell from Swanson Design Studios will meet at our
office again on November 6, 2002. Citizen Katie Lo asked if the plans for the
proposed space were available for review and Supervisor Martin told her that
they are available in the office. Supervisor Martin added that the proposed
improvements should take care of the Township’s building needs for the next 20-
30 years.
Other
Library
Supervisor Martin reported that the Township received a letter of notification
from the Williamston Library Foundation regarding a meeting being held on
November 13, 2002 at 7 p.m. in the City Hall to discuss the proposed library
expansion. Trustee Wright said he would plan to attend. The proposal suggests
the community needs a 15,000 sq ft library. Supervisor Martin requested that
each board member give their comments on the proposal to Trustee Wright so that
he could attend the meeting informed of the Board’s position. Clerk Hiner said
that she felt the Williamston Library Foundation should present the proposal to
a wider cross-section of the population to determine how much funding the
community will be willing to support. She added that she and her family love
the library and believes the existing library is wholly inadequate. Clerk Hiner
said that the proposal appeared to reflect the “cadillac” of options and did
not see in the proposal information about what the community was willing to
support. Supervisor Martin added that she also didn’t think the proposal
identified the specific reasons to justify why a community of 9,000 needs the
amount of space proposed (a space larger than Haslett and Okemos). Trustee
Wright asked what the City of Williamston is expecting from the Township.
Supervisor Martin said that the Township is being asked to pay a full 1/3 of
the cost to build and maintain the facility.
Supervisor Martin summarized that it is the consensus of the Board that the
Williamston Library Foundation should get more input from the public before
proceeding with any plans and that the Foundation needs to present the Township
with formalized funding options before we can consider their proposal fully.
Treasurer Fink reiterated that the Township needs a funding proposal. Clerk
Hiner said she felt there was definitely support in the community for a new
library but she wasn’t sure if there was support for something this large.
Supervisor Fink said that she wants to see the City avoid offering a proposal
to the people, only to have it voted down, and then repeatedly offering a pared
down version of the proposal until it passes. Trustee Wright asked the term
status of the individuals on the committee representing the Township on this
issue and when they come up for reappointment. Supervisor Martin said she would
bring that information to the Board workshop on November 19, 2002.
Trustee Zaban stated he wants to avoid another situation like NIESA. In this
relationship, Williamstown Township provides 46% ($171,778) of the funding for
NIESA but reaps the fewest benefits of all the participants (Wheatfield
Township contributes $47,000, City of Williamston contributes 84,000, Leroy
Township (including the Village of Webberville) contributes $75,000, and Locke
Township contributes $45,000. Supervisor Martin said that, even after this
level of contribution, Williamstown Township residents still pay the highest
homeowners insurance premiums because we don’t have fire protection coverage
stationed within the Township. Trustee Zaban said that he feels Williamstown
Township should have a fire truck stationed at the Township office. He added
that everything moves very slowly with NIESA. Trustee Zaban and Treasurer Fink
both reiterated that they want to prevent a similar situation recurring with
the library expansion where Williamstown Township pays the bulk of the expense,
but realizes the least benefit.
Zoning Enforcement Officer
Trustee Zaban stated that it appears that the Clerk and Supervisor are spending
considerable time responding to citizen complaints (renter problems, property
clutter, etc…). He asked if the Township has reached a point in time where we
should consider hiring a Zoning Enforcement Officer. Supervisor Martin
responded that zoning enforcement responsibilities are currently assigned to
Constable Dahlstrom, who is still employed elsewhere full time. She said that
Constable Dahlstrom has stated that he has approximately 81 working days to
retirement. After that time, he will be able to commit to work one day a week
for the Township to enforce zoning violations. Supervisor Martin said that once
Howard is able to commit this time, her involvement will be minimal. She said
she will still need to handle the administrative end because she is the one
knowledgeable of the zoning requirements and will be the person to appear in
court if necessary. Supervisor Martin said that if Constable Dahlstrom decides
he cannot commit the necessary time to the Township after he retires (sometime
in April), then she would agree the Township should consider adding a Zoning
Enforcement Officer. Trustee Zaban suggested that this person would not have to
be a deputy. Supervisor Martin stated that Constable Dahlstrom is our elected
constable and he will be given first right of refusal for this position.
Updated McKenna Contract
Supervisor Martin reviewed the updated contract with McKenna Associates that
provides for a representative from McKenna Associates to work in the
Williamstown Township office one day a week. She stated that Chris Doozen will
work from our office one day a month and Jim Breuckman will be here the
remaining three days. (Mr. Doozen is the Vice President of McKenna Associates
and Mr. Breuckman is an associate engineer who currently attends the Planning
Commission meetings). Supervisor Martin said that this situation will be very
useful to the Township because now the Supervisor will no longer be both the
first person a developer sees when he submits a site plan and the last person
they see after the Township Board approves or disapproves their proposal. The
Township will also now have a consistent schedule for reviewing planning
documents and developers will know the office hours that site plans can be
reviewed. The contract with McKenna further states that, when their
representatives are not working on Williamstown Township planning issues while
they are in our office, they will not charge the Township for their time (they
will work on other McKenna projects). Supervisor Martin said she would like to
move forward with this change in their contract as soon as possible. Trustee
Wright stated that this contract modification makes good sense for the
Township. The Board agreed. Supervisor Martin stated that the Board does not
need to vote on this issue because it is a contract change only.
MEETING REVIEW
There will be a Board Workshop on November 19, 2002, and a Building Expansion
meeting on November 6, 2002 at 4 pm. The General Election takes place on
November 5, 2002. Treasurer Fink and Clerk Hiner will complete the bank
resolutions. Clerk Hiner will forward relevant newsletter copies to Mrs.
Foster. Trustee Wright and Trustee Zaban will attend the Williamston Library
meeting on November 13, 2002.
Supervisor Martin reported to the Board that Harold Powell is in the hospital
again. He has been in for some time due to several complications. She will
continue to keep in close contact with him and his family.
Trustee Zaban asked if its time to send a letter to NIESA expressing the
Township’s concerns. Supervisor Martin said she would put a mock letter
together to present at the upcoming Board workshop.
There were no additional comments.
Adjournment
Trustee Zaban made a motion to adjourn supported by Trustee Wright. Meeting
adjourned at 8:57 p.m.
_________________________________      ______________________________
Susan L. Hiner               Lori A. Pincumbe
Clerk                     Recording Secretary
DECEMBER 3, 2002
PRESENT: Supervisor Mickey Martin, Treasurer Nancy Fink, Clerk Susan Hiner,
Trustee Steve Zaban, Trustee Martin Wright, Building Inspector Walter Aven, and
Recording Secretary Lori Pincumbe.
ABSENT: None
CALL TO ORDER
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order at 7:30 p.m. Supervisor
Martin provided an overview of the meeting agenda and the topics of Budget and
ZBA Appointment were added to New Business. There were no other additions or
corrections to the agenda.
CONSENT AGENDA
Trustee Wright moved to approve the October 29, 2002 Regular Board Meeting
Minutes; approve the list of bills paid and to be paid; approve payroll; and
accept and place on file the Treasurer’s Report and the Building Inspector’s
Report. Motion supported by Trustee Zaban. Motion passed unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment on non-agenda Township issues. No
public comments were offered.
NEW BUSINESS
(The New Business agenda was discussed out of order until Mr. Kraft’s
arrival.) 
PC Appointment Recommendation
Supervisor Martin reported that Harold Powell had resigned from the Planning
Commission due to health reasons. She made a recommendation to appoint Maurice
Veenstra to fulfill Mr. Powell’s term through 2005. She stated that Mr.
Veenstra is an Ag-Commercial property owner in the Township, a faction that
needs representation on the Commission. Mr. Veenstra has written a letter
stating that he is willing to join the Commission. No other candidates for Mr.
Powell’s position have approached the Township. Trustee Wright made a motion to
approve appointing Maurice Veenstra to complete Mr. Powell’s Planning
Commission term. Motion supported by Trustee Zaban. Motion passed unanimously.
Board Resolution to Harold Powell
Supervisor Martin presented a resolution that the Board present Mr. Harold
Powell with a certificate recognizing his dedication and service to the
Township. The Board agreed with presenting this recognition and added their
signatures.
Dexter Legal Description
Supervisor Martin stated that this item has been included on the agenda to keep
Board members informed of the status of this issue. Mr. Dexter believes that
the written legal description of the Township Hall property is incorrect and
encroaches on his property. He claims that the Township property description
was surveyed from an incorrect point in the center of Germany Road many years
ago and that the error has never been corrected. Mr. Dexter’s surveyor agrees
that an error has been made. Supervisor Martin reported that she has advised
Mr. Dexter to have his surveyor prepare a chronological description of the past
deed surveys and identify where the error occurred. Trustee Wright stated that
the Board should hold discussion on this issue until the Township has received
this documentation. Treasurer Fink asked if Mr. Dexter could wait until Ingham
County makes the correction as part of their ongoing review process. Supervisor
Martin stated that Mr. Dexter wants to move the process quickly because his
mortgage company will not allow him to refinance until the issue is resolved.
1458 E. Grand River SUP and Site Plan-Williamston Foods, PC Recommendation
Board Final Action
Site Plan
Planning Commission Chair Dan Kraft reported that the Planning Commission had
reviewed the site plan and made some requests for revision. The Township has
received a revised site plan from Williamston Foods, a memo dated 11/26/02 from
Jim Breuckman (McKenna Associates), and a letter dated 11/26/02 from Duane
Shore (Space Architecture) addressing the Planning Commissions concerns.
Supervisor Martin reported that Mr. Breukman had reviewed these resubmitted
documents and believed that Williamston Foods had made the necessary
corrections to the site plan with the exception of addressing the lighting
issues. However, the Williamston Foods’ letter dated 11/26/02 does address
these lighting issues. Mr. Breukman recommended that, since the addition being
requested was small, the Board approve Williamston Foods request but require
the information provided in their 11/26/02 letter be included as part of the
approval. Mr. Kraft stated that it should be noted on the plan that no new HVAC
units were planned. The applicant confirmed that two exhaust fans will be
installed but no new HVAC units will be installed. Supervisor Martin asked if
this addition to the site plan was a condition for approval and Mr. Kraft
responded that it was not.
Supervisor Martin summarized that Williamston Foods wants to add a new oven
area to their operation so that they can increase their business and create new
jobs. She asked if the applicant had any more information to add. The applicant
asked to clarify Item 4 on the McKenna memo dated 11/26/02. The memo states
that “one light fixture will be removed and the new addition will be equipped
with its own lighting.” He said the description should read that “the lights
that exist will be maintained and that the addition will have three new
fixtures.” Supervisor Martin told the applicant that Mr. Breuckman had also
recognized this correction during his review of the revised site plan and
concurred.
Supervisor Martin summarized that it appeared that all the Planning Commission
conditions had been met except for the lighting. She added that Williamston
Foods has provided a memo to address this item which states that all existing
lighting will remain as is and that three new lights will be added as indicated
on the revised plans. She called for a motion to approve the site plan with no
conditions. Trustee Wright asked that Williamston Foods Memo dated 11/26/02 be
included with the site plan and Mr. Kraft agreed. No further discussion was
offered. Trustee Wright made a motion supported by Trustee Zaban to accept the
Williamston Foods Site Plan with 11/26/02 memo included. Motion passed
unanimously.
Special Use Permit
Mr. Kraft reported that the Planning Commission recommended approval of a
Special Use Permit subject to Board approval of the Site Plan. Clerk Hiner made
a motion supported by Trustee Wright to approve the Special Use Permit for
Williamston Foods. There was no further discussion. Motion passed unanimously.
1040 E. Grand River Rezoning Request From RE to B-2 – Young Kim, PC
Recommendation, Board Final Action
Mr. Kraft reported that the Planning Commission had held a long discussion
regarding this rezoning request and their decision had been very difficult. He
stated that during their discussions, the Commissioners were split 3-3 on their
decision (with two members remaining silent). Mr. Kraft reported that he
believed that there were two main reasons the Planning Commission had
difficulty deciding on this rezoning.
First, the property is located at the very first intersection west of our town
square (Zimmer and Grand River) and next to some existing B-2 properties. This
means approval would extend the B-2 zoned areas to the intersection. Some
commissioners were willing to expand our B-2 zones beyond what is stated in the
Township Master Plan and future land use map (which states that this type of
development should occur at our town center). Other commissioners were not
willing to deviate from the master plan.
The second problem that the Commission struggled with was that the applicant
had suggested he wanted to also put in a retail shop at this location. The
comments at the public hearing were generally in favor of a greenhouse.
However, at least one citizen asked that the Planning Commission please be
cautious of other uses that could occur under a B-2 zone designation if the
property was sold.
Mr. Kraft stated that, although all the commissioners were generally
comfortable with the proposed use of the property as a greenhouse with a small
retail shop, the Planning Commission cannot consider a use when making its
decision. He said that when the Planning Commission stripped away the use issue
and reviewed the request strictly as a rezoning from RE (where a greenhouse
would be allowed) to a B-2 (where a retail business would be allowed) the
decision about whether it would be inconsistent with the Township Future Land
Use Map and Master Plan and how it would impact the health, safety and welfare
of the surrounding neighborhood, became more clear to many commissioners. The
resulting final vote was 7-1 recommending that the Planning Commission deny
this rezoning request.
Treasurer Fink stated that she thinks it is too bad that the Township’s Planned
Development (PD) zone description did not show more flexibility. If the minimum
size issue could be adjusted, then the proposed use would not have to be
considered in the decision. Unfortunately, this property doesn’t meet the
current requirements for Planned Development zoning.
Supervisor Martin said that she was initially surprised by the Planning
Commission’s decision. She stated that she agrees that putting in a greenhouse
is not objectionable but she also realizes that rezoning the property to B-
2 opens the possibility of objectionable businesses coming in that don’t mix
well with residential areas. She agreed with Treasurer Fink that a PD zoning
would allow more flexible requirements. She also reported that a neighbor who
is zoned Ag-Small Farm had contacted her with concern about what rezoning to B-
2 could allow to operate on this parcel in the future. Supervisor Martin asked
if the Planning Commission had discussed the use of the P D zoning. Mr. Kraft
reported it had not been discussed.
Trustee Wright stated that he feels that the property is perfect for commercial
use.
Trustee Zaban reminded the Board of a previous incident where a rezoning had
been allowed for a specific use and the owner turned around and sold the
property immediately.
Mr. Kraft said that there are already plenty of other commercial properties
along that strip that could accommodate this use. Trustee Wright said there is
only one parcel currently available that is zoned B-2.
Trustee Wright said he feels the Township is hindering possible commercial
development with this decision. He stated that this property is so close to B-
2 parcels on either side that he doesn’t see a problem with rezoning it.
Trustee Wright added that he recognized that neighbors had concerns about what
else could go onto this property in the future but he said there are special
use permits that will give the Township control over this issue if the zoning
is changed.
Mr. Kraft said that the Planning Commission wants to seriously avoid creating a
“strip”.
Supervisor Martin invited the applicant to address the Board. Mr. Todd
Chamberlain, attorney for Mr. Kim, spoke on behalf of the applicant. He stated
that the parcel in question is currently zoned for use as a rural estate.
Because the parcel is slightly in excess of 5 acres, the owner is allowed to
build one house on the property. He stated that this type of development is
probably never going to happen looking at the other current uses along Grand
River Avenue. He said that this property is a prime case for the Township to
reconsider reasonable uses of the property. Mr. Chamberlain said that Mr. Kim
has stated his intended use. He said that he understands that the Planning
Commission does not bind its decision to a use, but argued that the Board will
be able to use special use permits to control future use. He stated that there
is already property zoned B-2 located nearby. He said that Mr. Kim is asking
for an impractically used residential property to be rezoned to something
similar to the character of the other current uses in the area. He stated that
at the public hearing in October, everyone that offered an opinion was
generally in favor of the property being used for a greenhouse. He also said
that there is a benefit to the health and welfare to the community because, if
the property is rezoned, MDOT and ICDC will have jurisdiction. He requested
that the Board part from the Planning Commission’s decision. He added that the
concern the Township has bout future use is the same one they will have when
the surrounding B-2 properties, like Concrete Concepts, are sold.
Treasurer Fink asked if the applicant plans to reside on the property and Mr.
Chamberlain responded that he did not.
Supervisor Martin stated that she respects the Planning Commission process and
she has no intention of overriding their decision. If she were to do anything
this evening it would be to ask the Planning Commission to reconsider the
following:
1)   The Planning Commission has recommended denying the rezoning based on it
resulting in too much of a strip of B-2 properties. She said she understands
their point but asked if we should deny B-2 zoning when the property across the
street and the property next to this property is already zoned B-2. She asked
they please review the Master Plan for just that area.
2)   She stated that the Commission is also concerned about the uses that were
available in the B-2 zone beyond the scope of the proposed greenhouse. She said
she would ask that, at the next Planning Commission meeting, the commissioners
go through every use included in a B-2 zone and make sure that they are all
compatible. If they decide all the uses are not compatible, the Planning
Commission may need to create a new zone or redistribute the uses for the
development of non-obtrusive or less obtrusive commercial enterprises so that
properties could be developed without creating a strip development.
3)   She verified with Mr. Kraft that the description of a nursery in an RE
zone specifically allows, “ growing and raising of commercial plants” rather
than “growing and selling”. She asked if it would be appropriate to modify the
description for a nursery. She said the Planning Commission did something
similar to this. She said that it had been a long process but the Planning
Commission worked through to modify the description of a zone to allow the
development of the Pres Kool property. She asked that they please look at this
option.
Supervisor Martin reiterated that she is not willing to override the Planning
Commission’s decision, especially without giving them an opportunity to look at
the uses in the B-2, B-1, RE and PD districts again. She also noted that
including commercial sales in the description would increase traffic.
Trustee Wright said that there are already other uses allowed in an RE zone
that could potentially increase traffic. He said that, with our current
descriptions, a big operation like the one that Terry Hanks Chevrolet operates
would be allowed if the RE parcel size were large enough. He reminded the Board
that any increased traffic would be on Grand River Ave., not smaller roads like
Sherwood or Zimmer.
Clerk Hiner said that from her experience, increased traffic from a retail
business will definitely impact residents on Glaser Road.
Trustee Wright said that maybe in order to make this request work, the Township
approach the solution in a different way. He said that Supervisor Martin’s
example of the process used with Pres Kool was a good one. The Pres Kool
property was another case where the Planning Commission felt that a proposed
request was a good use of property even though it did not fit under the current
zoning.
Treasurer Fink said that she is concerned about setting a precedent of going
against the Master Plan, but also feels that this is an appropriate parcel for
the type of business Mr. Kim has proposed. She said she thinks it sounds like
the Planning Commission doesn’t have any problem with a greenhouse business but
that they didn’t want to set precedence for deviating from the Master Plan. She
said that the Planning Commission should consider looking at the underlying
problem that may exist with the zoning criteria or the Master Plan that
prevents a business that they all agree is satisfactory from being allowed.
John Jester (Mr. Kim’s consultant from Landmark Technologies) stated that he
had brought a mounted copy of the drawing of the property for anybody that was
unfamiliar. He stated that traffic issues had been considered when the site
plan was developed. He also said that he met with the Township planner in
August and drawn the plan in a manner that it would still be appropriate if
zoning was changed.
Trustee Wright said that the traffic issue is something that could be addressed
in a Special Use Permit. Treasurer Fink responded that the Township does not
contract zone so we cannot consider the use because the owner is not tied to
that plan. Once the property is rezoned, the owner could decide to build a
strip mall instead of a greenhouse and the Township would have no control.
Trustee Zaban asked Supervisor Martin if it was her position that the Board
send this issue back to the Planning Commission. She said that that would be
one of her recommendations. He asked what the Board’s other options were. She
stated that the Board could: 1) vote to approve the Planning Commission’s
recommendations and deny the rezoning, 2) decide not to agree with the Planning
Commission’s recommendation and approve the rezoning or, 3) table its
discussion and request that the Planning Commission reconsider the application.
Supervisor Martin said that she agrees with the Planning Commission that this
rezoning doesn’t agree with the Township Master Plan but she also agrees with
Trustee Wright that a greenhouse is an appropriate use of the property.
Trustee Zaban asked Mr. Kraft how the Planning Commission would respond if the
issue was sent back for reconsideration. Mr. Kraft said that he wasn’t sure. He
said the Commission had already reviewed uses under B2 extensively and their
biggest problem arose when considering the special use allowances. Mr. Kraft
asked if it is an option for the applicant to request a Special Use Permit for
an RE zone and then be granted a use variance. Supervisor Martin said the ZBA
cannot grant a use variance. She said the Planning Commission can recommend
changing the ordinance to allow this request as a special use under an RE zone.
Treasurer Fink added that there are several business that can be considered
potentially more obnoxious than a greenhouse that are currently allowed as
special use under RE zoning including commercial stables, commercial kennels,
and an oil and gas processing facility.
Citizen Wilbrink asked if there was a description of how the applicant’s
nursery was going to operate available for comparison to the description of a
nursery in the ordinance. Supervisor Martin said the Commission might consider
redefining the nursery description in RE.
Trustee Wright said the applicant could consider purchasing the adjacent B-
2 parcel (Concrete Concepts) to operate the retail portion of their business.
Citizen Katie Lo suggested the Board table their decision and ask the Planning
Commission to re-evaluate the request.
Todd Chamberlain requested, if it is the opinion of the Board to send the
request back to the Planning Commission for further consideration, that the
pending application be considered tabled instead of denied before
reconsideration. This will avoid some legal issues that arise once a rezoning
issue has been formally denied.
Trustee Wright made a motion that the Board table the discussion of rezoning
this parcel and send the application back to the Planning Commission for
reconsideration. The motion was supported by Trustee Zaban. Supervisor Martin
asked for discussion. Trustee Zaban suggested that the Board give the Planning
Commission an outline of the Board’s reasons for sending the request back to
them. Treasurer Fink agreed. Supervisor Martin stated that she didn’t know how
long an issue could be tabled but would check with the attorney. Mr. Kraft said
that the applicant can request the Board/Planning Commission expedite a
decision if they believe it has been tabled for too long. Supervisor Martin
added that it is not going to be an easy task for the Planning Commission to go
through this. If they do decide to change the ordinance, then another public
hearing will be required so will be an involved process. There was no further
discussion. Supervisor Martin requested a roll call vote on the motion to table
the Board’s discussion and send the request back to the Planning Commission.
Roll Call Vote:
Trustee Steve Zaban      Yes         
Trustee Martin Wright   Yes
Treasurer Nancy Fink   Yes
Supervisor Mickey Martin   Yes
Clerk Susan Hiner      Yes
Supervisor Martin read the following Board requests into the minutes for the
Planning Commission to consider:
1)   The Board would like the Planning Commission to review the uses listed in
the zoning ordinance for a B-2 district and determine if they feel it is
appropriate to combine all the uses together or decide if another district
could be created to accommodate less offensive uses.
2)   The Board would also like the Planning Commission to look at the RE
Special Uses regarding nurseries and to specifically look at whether the
description for nurseries could be modified to allow for retail sales to some
extent.
3)   The Board would like the Planning Commission to explore the Planned
Development (PD) zoning option to see if it would be an appropriate rezoning
for this type of use on this parcel. The minimum size criteria in the PD zone
is also an important topic to consider.
4)   The Board would like the Planning Commission to look at the Master Plan
overall regarding commercial development and determine if they feel it should
be modified or left in place as it is. She added that to rezone this property,
the Township would first have to amend the Master Plan. Mr. Kraft concurred.
Treasurer Fink said that it appears to her that the simplest solution would be
to look at the definition of a nursery in the RE district. If retail sales
could be allowed to some degree under the definition of a greenhouse, then
rezoning would not be required. There are a lot of other businesses that are
already included in RE of a similar character. She added that all the other
items Supervisor Martin has listed should also be reviewed.
Supervisor Martin asked Mr. Kraft for his opinion. He said that if there is a
way to accommodate this use within the RE zone, that would be ideal because the
Township can avoid the problems that could arise if the property is rezoned to
B-2 which allows so many other uses. He said that this way, if the greenhouse
isn’t profitable, the Township will not need to be concerned about resale of
the property.
Library Board Appointment
Supervisor Martin reported that Ed Noonan’s appointment has come up for
renewal. She said that, after speaking with Mr. Noonan and two others involved
in the library process, she recommends that Mr. Noonan be reappointed. Trustee
Wright said that he doesn’t think the Township will find anyone who will work
harder on the Library Board. Trustee Zaban moved to reappoint Mr. Noonan for
another three-year term supported by Trustee Wright. Motion passed unanimously.
457 Plan Update
Supervisor Martin reported that this issue had been discussed at the Board
Workshop. The Township is required to make this update. She reported that it
will cost $700-800 in legal fees and she recommended the Township hire Foster
Swift to prepare the update since they had prepared the original plan. Vince
Spagnoulo, the Township attorney, will review the update once it is completed.
ZBA Appointment
Supervisor Martin reported that Jerry Fields is moving from the area. Dali
Giese has sent a letter of interest in being appointed to the ZBA to fulfill
Mr. Field’s term through September 2003. Supervisor Martin reported that she
worked very hard in the past on the 425 agreements with the City annexation
issue. Commissioner Kraft said that he would accept Supervisor Martin’s
recommendation. Trustee Zaban made a motion to appoint Dali Geise to the ZBA
Board to fulfil Mr. Fields term through 2003. Motion supported by Trustee
Wright. Motion passed unanimously.
Budget
Supervisor Martin reported that she will be moving budget money from
“Contingency” to three different budget areas for the following reasons:
1)   $1600 must be moved to “Election Costs” due to the unanticipated cost to
mail new Voter ID cards after district resizing due to census results,
2)   $1200 must be moved to “Office Manager Salary” to accommodate redefining
this job description to full-time (with corresponding pay increase),
3)    $500 must be moved to “Audit Fees” due to the increased IRS costs from
2000 which were reviewed this year.
Trustee Wright recommended that the “Audit” fee budget be increased at this
time in case of an additional audit during the transfer of the cemetery
bookeeping. Supervisor Martin agreed and recommended the “Audit Fee” budget be
increased by $1000 instead of $500. No further discussion. Trustee Wright moved
that we amend the budget for the three items described supported by Trustee
Zaban. Motion passed unanimously.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Complaints
Ciolek Property
1054 E. Sherwood
Supervisor Martin reported that the Ciolek property has not been put up for
sale through a realtor as required by his agreement with the Township. She
asked the Board how they wanted to proceed. Trustee Wright said that he felt
the Township needed to pursue this issue because Mr. Ciolek is not motivated to
sell the property. Trustee Wright stated that potential buyers need to be made
aware that the barn must be returned to its original condition to meet zoning
requirements and that all the modifications made to the barn were done without
building permits. Supervisor Martin said she would ask the Township attorney
(Vince Spagnoulo) to prepare a letter to Mr. Ciolek.
Sumbal Property
707 Haslett Rd
Supervisor Martin reported that the house at this property has been partitioned
to provide separate quarters for renters. The owner was cited in writing
because this is not allowed in their residential zone. Mrs. Sumbal has
requested that the Township allow the renters to stay until the end of their
lease which will expire in 6 months. Trustee Wright asked if the Township is
allowed to delay the process for this long. Supervisor Martin stated that the
Township has the authority to set the time table, but the agreement with the
owner and renters would need to be well documented and include a provision
saying that the renters must move out as scheduled or there will be a penalty.
Trustee Wright stated that it would take about 4-6 months to take the process
through the courts so he would be willing to agree to this solution. Supervisor
Martin stated that her prior experience is that the court process will delay a
solution even further. She said that the proposed option allows the Township to
avoid attorney fees. Trustee Zaban recommended that Supervisor Martin write a
letter requesting the homeowner come in with a copy of her lease and the names
of the renters to discuss the criteria to be agreed on. Inspector Aven added
that the fire code does not allow for a duplex on this property.
Templeton Property
1435 Epley Road
Supervisor Martin reported that Mr. Templeton had met with Jim Breuckman to
discuss his property issues. She said that Mr. Breuckman went over the
development rights ordinance writes with him and wrote a memo to Mr. Templeton
clarifying the items they discussed.
Mr. Kraft asked if a copy of Mr. Templeton’s agreement with his neighbors was
available in the office. Supervisor Martin said there is no agreement. She said
that there is an easement on the property for use by the Ingham County Road
Commission (if they choose to accept it) but that Mr. Templeton has no right to
the easement. Mr. Kraft said that Mr. Templeton had suggested to the Planning
Commission that there were two documents, one regarding the easement and a
second one that was an agreement with his neighbor that they had both signed.
Cemetery
Supervisor Martin reported that the Township is still moving forward with
transferring cemetery administration to the Township office. She reported that
she and Trustee Wright are continuing to collect information from other
townships about how they manage similar properties.
REPORTS
NIESA
Trustee Zaban reported that he had delivered the letter prepared by the
Township Board during their last workshop and that it has been placed on the
agenda for the NIESA meeting this Thursday. He stated that NIESA and EMS calls
have increased by nearly 100 from last year.
Parks
Trustee Wright reported that he is waiting for a return call from Mr. Kreider
to answer status questions. Treasurer Fink reported that Constable Dahlstrom
has posted “No Hunting” signs around the property. The “Keep Out” signs need to
go up once the correct stakes are found. Trustees Zaban and Wright said they
could help with that issue. Supervisor Martin asked whether sledding was going
to be allowed this winter due to the construction. She said that she has
already received a call from a citizen with this question. Treasurer Fink said
she would confirm with the Park Committee.
Building Use/Expansion
Supervisor Martin reported that the Township continues to move forward and
should have some construction cost figures on Wednesday after meeting with
Swanson Design.
Citizen Katie Lo asked if the building expansion would be done with out a bond
issue. Supervisor Martin responded that the Township has the funds for the
expansion without need for a bond.
Other
Revenue Sharing
Supervisor Martin summarized the revenue sharing information provided in the
Board information packet for 2001/2002 and 2002/2003.
Election
Clerk Hiner reported that the November 5, 2002 election process went very well
and that Williamstown had a 72% voter turnout. Clerk Hiner stated she believes
our turnout was about 20% higher than other precincts.
MEETING REVIEW
The Planning Commission will revisit the Kim rezoning request. Supervisor
Martin will send Mr. Powell the Recognition Certificate. Clerk Hiner will write
acceptance letters to Maurice Veenstra (Planning Commission), Dali Giese (ZBA)
and Ed Noonan (Library Board). There will be a Board Workshop on December 19,
2002 and a Building Expansion meeting on December 5, 2002. There will be a
Board of Review Meeting on December 10, 2002 at 7:30 p.m. to clarify clerical
and other mistakes on assessments. Supervisor Martin will authorize the
attorney to proceed with the 457 Retirement Plan and to prepare a letter to
Mrs. Sumbal.
Adjournment
Trustee Wright made a motion to adjourn supported by Clerk Hiner. Meeting
adjourned at 9:45 p.m.
_________________________________      ______________________________
Susan L. Hiner               Lori A. Pincumbe
Clerk                     Recording Secretary
2003 Meeting Minutes
JANUARY 7, 2003
PRESENT: Supervisor Mickey Martin, Treasurer Nancy Fink, Clerk Susan Hiner,
Trustee Steve Zaban, Trustee Martin Wright, Building Inspector Walter Aven,
Township Attorney Vince Spagnoulo and Recording Secretary Lori Pincumbe.
ABSENT: None
CALL TO ORDER
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order at 7:30 p.m. She provided
an overview of the meeting agenda and made a request for any changes.
Supervisor Martin asked that the agenda language be corrected to read “Hideaway
Woods Tentative Preliminary Plat Extension.” She also added the topics “Rentals
in the Township” to Complaints and “Request from Williamston Greenhouse
Proprietors” to New Business. No other additions or corrections to the agenda
were made at this time.
CONSENT AGENDA
Supervisor Martin made a request for any additions or corrections to the
consent agenda. No changes were made. Clerk Hiner moved to: 1) approve the 12/
3/02 Regular Meeting Minutes; approve the 12/17/02 & 12/26/02 Special Meeting
Minutes; 3) approve the list of bills paid and to be paid; 4) approve payroll;
and 5) accept and place on file the Treasurer’s Report and the Building
Inspector’s Report. Motion supported by Trustee Zaban. Motion passed
unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Citizen Al Leblanc (President, Pebblebrook Subdivision Association) thanked the
Board for the most recent newsletter and wished all a Happy New Year. Citizen
Franz Wilbrink identified a typographical correction on the office postings for
the Board Workshop Schedule. The posting should read “Board Workshop Meetings
will be held on the 3rd Tuesday of the Month.” Mr. Wilbrink asked Supervisor
Martin if there was any truth to the rumor that the Township and the City of
Williamston were negotiating a joint venture to build a wastewater treatment
plant. Supervisor Martin responded that the rumor was false and that this was
the first she had heard of such a thing. Mr. Wilbrink also asked if there was
any truth to the rumor that the Township was reconsidering Charter. Supervisor
Martin said that this rumor was also false and there had been no discussion of
this topic.
NEW BUSINESS
Poverty Guidelines Resolution
Supervisor Martin reported that the federal guidelines identifying poverty
income levels had been recently adjusted and, therefore, the Board must now
pass a resolution to adopt the revised criteria into Williamstown Township’s
ordinance. She explained that the poverty guidelines allow property tax relief
to citizens that meet specific financial criteria. She added that this
provision has always existed and that actual income levels are typically
adjusted annually at the federal level to meet changes in economic conditions.
Trustee Wright, supported by Clerk Hiner, moved to adopt by resolution all new
federal income level poverty guidelines into the Williamstown Township
Ordinance.
Roll Call Vote:
Trustee Steve Zaban    Yes
Trustee Martin Wright    Yes
Treasurer Nancy Fink    Yes
Supervisor Mickey Martin    Yes
Clerk Susan Hiner       Yes
Motion passed unanimously.
Hideaway Woods Tentative Preliminary Plat Extension
Mr. Kraft stated that this tentative plat was originally approved in the fall
of 2000 with six (6) conditions. First, there was a question about the city
sewer capacity at this location because you cannot have lots of this size
without sewer hook-ups. The applicant received some leverage on December 10,
2002 when the Honorable Judge William E. Collette granted ten (10) residential
equivalent units (REUs) of wastewater treatment capacity from the City of
Williamston’s wastewater treatment system. Attorney Spagnoulo stated that this
order is not final because there has only been a partial judgment.
Mr. Kraft reported that the Planning Commission has recommended approval of a
12-month extension with conditions 1,3,4,5 and 6 remaining attached (condition
2 of the original approval has been met and does not need to be carried
forward).
Mr. Kraft reported that during discussion at the Planning Commission meeting,
there was a question about how the sewer line will cross adjoining properties.
He added that he did not feel a clear answer was provided. He said that the
Planning Commission also decided not to make a decision on the cul-de-sac
arrangement until the final changes to the plat were made.
Supervisor Martin called for questions from the Board (none) and asked the
applicant if there was any information he would like to add. Carl McIntosh,
representing the applicant, stated that he was comfortable with the Planning
Commission’s decision.
Supervisor Martin stated that she had met with the City of Williamston. The
City said that they feel they have capacity at the plant for the additional
sewer but do not have capacity in their sewer lines near this location. They
have previously experienced backups in this area (2001) and have had to
discharge to the river because of insufficient line capacity. The City said
that when this applicant submits an actual request for sewer hookup, the City
will forward the request to the DEQ with notation that they have had backup
problems.
During their meeting with Supervisor Martin, the City also described previous
problems on Linn Rd. with the sewer extension at Forest of Nottingham
Condominiums. Because the sewer line had been installed before the road, the
City incurred unnecessary costs when installing the road. The City wants to
avoid this situation from happening again by requiring the design for this plat
to include a roadway even if it never is built. If the developer decides to go
forward without a roadway to get to the 10 taps, the City also wanted the
developer to be aware that they would incur a cost for the City reviewing all
the plans again. Supervisor Martin summarized that the City wanted the Township
to be aware that the developer must satisfy several more steps before they
would be eligible for sewer hookup.
Supervisor Martin provided clarification about jurisdiction for these
properties (because they are located in the 425 area). The City will collect
property taxes for the proposed ten (10) properties. In return, owners will
receive water, sewer, leaf pickup, and police coverage. The Township will have
jurisdiction over the properties for issues pertaining to voting, building
inspection, assessing and enforcement of ordinances.
Citizen Al LeBlanc asked where Hideaway Woods was located. Supervisor Martin
responded that it is the development located across from Williamston High
School.
Trustee Zaban made a recommendation, supported by Trustee Wright, that the
Board support the decision of the Planning Commission to allow for a 1-year
extension of the tentative preliminary plat submitted for Hideaway Woods with
conditions 1,3,4,5 and 6 remaining attached (condition 2 eliminated for having
been met). Motion passed unanimously.
Annual Meeting Date
Supervisor Martin recommended that an annual meeting date be scheduled prior to
the end of the 2002/2003 fiscal year. Trustee Zaban made a motion that the
Board conduct an annual meeting prior to the March 4, 2003 Regular Board
Meeting to begin at 7 p.m. Motion supported by Trustee Wright. Motion passed
unanimously.
Williamston Greenhouse
Supervisor Martin read a letter into the minutes from Najah and Camille El-
Haddad, proprietors of Williamston Greenhouse. Mr. and Mrs. El-Haddad submitted
the letter to request grant assistance to help enhance their curb appeal on
Grand River now that the road construction in front of their business is
complete. The letter stated that their business has suffered financially
because of the extended construction activity.
Supervisor Martin invited the El-Haddads to address to the Board. Camille El-
Haddad reiterated that the summer road construction had hurt their business.
She said that this impact on their business was magnified further because they
are simultaneously faced with higher gas bills and a suffering economy. She
said that they would very much like to continue doing business in the Township
and would appreciate any assistance the Township can offer to help them
continue. She said that other businesses along the Grand River corridor are
currently enhancing their façade now that road construction is complete. She
said that Williamston Greenhouse had also planned to put up a new sign and
improve the appearance of their building exterior once the construction was
complete. She said she had not originally considered approaching the Township
Board but was urged to do so by customers who told her that businesses located
within the City limits were receiving a $6,000 grant to upgrade their
appearances. Her customers thought there might be a similar grant available for
Township businesses. Supervisor Martin stated that the City has a Downtown
Development Association that is likely handling those requests but that there
is no such entity in the Township.
Supervisor Martin suggested that the Township could do some research with the
State of Michigan to see if any grants are available. She asked Mrs. El-Haddad
if they had searched for grants on their own. Mrs. El-Haddad said that they had
not. Treasurer Fink recommended that Mrs. El-Haddad come into the Township
office and that she could assist her with an internet search for grant
possibilities.
Supervisor Martin asked if the owners carried any business interruption
insurance. Mrs. El-Haddad said that she did not believe her policy included
that provision. Attorney Spagnoulo recommended that she contact her agent
because she may have coverage. Treasurer Fink suggested that the El-Haddad’s
also investigate the possibility for a property tax exemption for 2003 (it’s
too late to apply for exemption in 2002) and added that guidelines are
available in the Township office. Supervisor Martin added that she plans to
include an explanation of the Property Tax Exemption process in the next
newsletter.
Supervisor Martin summarized that, to her knowledge, the Township had never
provided grant assistance to a Township business in the past and that it may
not be legal for the Township to assist a business using taxpayer money without
some type of matching support from the State. However, she added, the Township
office is willing to do whatever can be done to help.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
1040 E. Grand River Rezoning Request RE to B-2 – Young Kim, Tabled 12/3/02
Planning Commission Chairman Dan Kraft provided background information for this
request. He stated that the Planning Commission had previously recommended
denying the request because, although the current zoning for the parcel in
question allows for use as a greenhouse, it does not allow for a retail sales
operation. At the December Township Board Meeting, the Planning Commission was
requested to re-evaluate their decision because it appeared that everyone
involved was comfortable with the proposed use but that they were prevented
from allowing the request because they were bound by zoning requirements that
may need to be amended. The Township Board had offered several options for the
Planning Commission to consider.
Mr. Kraft stated that the Planning Commission had reviewed each of the options
suggested by the Township Board and decided that it was most reasonable to
amend the description of the RE zone (the existing zone for this parcel) so
that a greenhouse retail operation could be allowed. The Planning Commission
felt that this was only a slight modification to the description and that the
wording could limit this new provision to the Grand River corridor only. The
Township Planner (Chris Doozen) agreed that this was the best option. This
recommendation will require that a public hearing be held.
Supervisor Martin asked if there were any comments from the applicant. Todd
Chamberlain, attorney representing the applicant for the zoning request, stated
that he appreciated the Board and the Planning Commission’s attention to this
matter. He summarized that he felt the process is moving on a path that will
accommodate the property owner’s needs and, at the same time, incorporate the
concerns of the Planning Commission and the Board. He said that he had learned
of the Planning Commission’s recommendation earlier in the afternoon and had
not had the opportunity to discuss the information fully with Mr. Kim. However,
he stated that his client (Young Kim) is very much interested in having this
process proceed as quickly as possible. He said he understands this to mean
that Mr. Kim needs to file an application for an ordinance change and to do so
expeditiously. Mr. Chamberlain asked that his rezoning request be again tabled
while Mr. Kim’s application is being processed through all the requisite public
hearing steps since the process is moving toward a satisfactory resolution for
both sides.
Supervisor Martin asked Mr. Spagnoulo what the legal requirements were for
repeatedly tabling a request without action by the Board. Mr. Spagnoulo stated
that he presumed Mr. Chamberlain’s concern is based on the fact that if a
request is denied, the applicant has specific timetables to meet in order to
appeal a denial with the Circuit Court. Mr. Chamberlain concurred but said his
applicant had no interest in filing an appeal since the process is moving in a
satisfactory direction. If the Board formerly declines the request, the
applicant must file with the Circuit Court within a 30-day appellate period.
Mr. Spagnoulo asked Supervisor Martin what concerns the Board had with
repeatedly tabling the issue while Mr. Kim’s application moves through the
public hearing process. Supervisor Martin said that the Board had never
repeatedly tabled an issue in her experience and so her only concern was
whether it was legally permitted to do so. Mr. Spagnoulo said that it looks
like there is a way to solve this issue in a manner satisfactory to both the
applicant and the Township but understands that Mr. Kim wants to protect his
right of appeal. He reminded the Board that, after a 6-7 month application
process, there is still a possibility that Mr. Kim’s application to amend the
zoning ordinance to include an RE exception by special use permit may not pass.
If this happens, Mr. Kim will likely ask the Board to vote to accept or deny
his request. Mr. Spagnoulo said that one option, short of litigation, was that
the Township could agree with the property owner to waive the argument of 30
days. Mr. Spagnoulo suggested that the Board table the issue at this meeting
and allow Mr. Chamberlain and him to meet to find an agreeable solution to
address these legal timetable issues. Mr. Chamberlain concurred.
Supervisor Martin asked if there were questions from any other Board Members.
No questions were asked.
Trustee Wright made a motion supported by Trustee Zaban to table the Young Kim
zoning issue again to the February 4, 2002 Board Meeting so that the Township
attorney and Mr. Chamberlain can work out the timetable details. Motion passed
unanimously.
Supervisor Martin stated that Mr. Kim must next file an application requesting
a text amendment to the ordinance. She reiterated that text amendment requests
are reviewed as a whole by the Township one time each year in October.
Applications to be discussed at the January Planning Commission meeting were
due by January 7, 2003. But, she said that if Mr. Kim returns an application to
the Township office by 4 p.m. on January 9, 2003, the Planning Commission has
agreed to include it on this month’s agenda (applications need to be received
with sufficient time for distribution and review by the Township’s planning
consultants). Supervisor Martin provided Mr. Chamberlain a copy of the
application.
Building Use/Expansion
Mr. Howell (Project Manager-Swanson Design) presented the final design proposal
for the remodel/expansion of the Township office building. Supervisor Martin
provided an overview for the reasons the Board had originally decided to
upgrade the building. She said that the building was built more than 30 years
ago. It had functioned very well during its existence but the building was now
out of date and requires a lot of work to be done in order to make it function
properly. For example, the parking lot pavement and lighting need to be
replaced, the bathrooms and entrance/exit doors need to be made handicapped
accessible, etc... She said there are also many areas where the building no
longer meets building code requirements. She stated that these existing
conditions seem inappropriate for a government facility. She added that the
office space has also become increasingly inadequate. She said that the
proposed re-design incorporates the Township’s projected needs for the next 20
years.
Mr. Howell began his presentation by stating that he had been meeting with the
Township since September 2002 and felt he had a good understanding of the
issues faced by the Township. He summarized that the major issues are: 1) the
office space is crowded and inefficient, 2) there is a lack of meeting space,
3) there is a lack of long term storage space in the building and off-site
storage is currently required to accommodate the Township’s storage needs, 4)
the building has no obvious entrance identity, 5) the exterior of the building
is dated, 6) the heating and cooling systems are inefficient and uneven
throughout the building, 7) the electrical supplies are inadequate to
accommodate the computers and other high tech equipment that has been added to
the office in recent years, and 8) the parking lot condition and lighting is
inadequate.
He stated that the Township started with four (4) options for redesign ranging
from a minor remodeling to replace the existing building with a completely new
building. Over the past four months, the project was narrowed to tonight’s
proposal that includes remodeling the current building and putting a small
addition on the front and back of the building. Supervisor Martin added that
Swanson Design was also responsible for the recent Wheatfield Township hall
redesign where many of the same concerns existed.  
Mr. Howell presented a drawing of the proposed floor plan. He described each of
the new proposed building uses (see attached drawings). He highlighted: 1) the
new front and back entrances, 2) new file storage space, 3) new office space
including enclosed space for appropriate offices, 4) fire rated storage space,
5) a new conference room, 6) remodeled restrooms to meet code 7) remodeled and
extended kitchen area, and 8) rental space/meeting space that can be flexibly
adjusted in size.
Next he summarized the site modifications included in the proposal: 1) the
entire parking lot will be pulled up and re-paved and parking capacity will be
enlarged from 50 to 70 spaces, 2) the exterior of the main entry will be
updated to match the new addition, 3) exterior stucco will be added to tie the
building together, 4) the exterior sloped soffet will be removed, 5) the upper
windows in the banquet area will be removed and windows will be placed along
the west wall to improve banquet room lighting, 6) the street sign will be
relocated to a more visible position and 7) new solid (non-glass) double wide
doors will be added to the back entrance.
Supervisor Martin called for questions from the audience. Mr. Spagnoulo asked
if, by making this modification to the building, the Township was no longer
“grandfathered” and now must comply with all handicap rules. Mr. Howell
responded that the Township would now need to comply. Supervisor Martin added
that the Township has several residents that require assistance to use the
current building. Supervisor Martin stated that the plan is for the Township
offices to move to the current banquet hall space on the south side of the
building during the renovation and then move back once the north half of the
building is completed.
Citizen Dexter asked how many square feet would be added to the building and
what the cost per square foot would be. Mr. Howell responded that the two
additions to the front and back of the building total approximately 1000 sq.
ft. The remodel of the remaining building will also add approx. 400 sq. ft. of
useable space. He said that Swanson Design had done an in depth cost estimate
at the request of the Township. As a result, they had calculated an estimated
subtotal cost of $376,659. By adding a 10% contingency they calculated a total
cost $459,825 for non-mandatory tasks. He added that this number does not
include the mandatory parking lot lighting/repaving, roof repair, phone system
and security system upgrades which will have to be done whether the renovation
takes place or not. These mandatory improvement costs will total $88,486.
Therefore, the total cost for essential and remodel improvements is $548,311.
Attorney Spagnoulo asked what tasks were included in the $70,000 site
improvement and maintenance upgrade cost. Mr. Howell responded that this cost
includes taking up and repaving the parking lot and adding adequate lighting.
He added that site drainage will not change.
Citizen Dexter stated that the proposal seemed like a lot of money for 1000
additional square feet of building. Treasurer Fink responded that this project
cannot be looked at simply on the number of square feet being added because the
Township will be gaining much more than 1000 sq feet. She clarified for Mr.
Dexter that this cost covers remodeling the entire building to upgrade many
non-compliance, inadequate and inefficient work areas. She said the Township is
gaining a more modern and useable building.
Trustee Zaban added that in the 15 years he has been involved with the Township
there has been no money spent on the building with the exception of about $300
in landscaping and the cost of a roof repair. He said there should have been
more money spent on the building previously and that the parking lot should
have been done a long time ago. Mr. Howell made a comparison to other relevant
projects based on his firm’s previous experience and determined that the
Township’s estimate was about $20/sq. ft. below the cost of similar projects.
Supervisor Martin reiterated that there are several problems with the building
that absolutely must be repaired including the electrical system (the current
system cannot handle the computer networking needs of the office) and the phone
system (the current phone system is wholly inadequate).
Trustee Zaban added that his biggest concern with the building has always been
security. The lighting in the parking lot is inadequate (the proposed upgrade
includes 6 more lights outside). There will be one main entry instead of two.
There will be an alarm system and better security on the doors (which will have
improved locking mechanisms). Supervisor Martin stated that the Township has
been advised by the Ingham County Sheriff’s Department to have a building alarm
system-especially due to the computer hardware on-site. She added that many
Township citizens will also be using this space as a rental hall. The current
rental fee is only $60 which is an incredible bargain. With upgrades, the
Township will be able to legitimately charge more for space rental.
Citizen Al LeBlanc asked if the entire roof must be replaced during the
remodel. Supervisor Martin said that the roof was re-shingled 2 years ago (the
plan had been to wait for the renovation but couldn’t because of serious leak
problems). Attorney Spagnoulo said that from his perspective (he works with
several Townships) our existing office is not extravagant. Supervisor Martin
asked Mr. Howell to compare the renovation costs without any additions to the
costs to doing a complete remodel (an option considered at one of the early
proposal stages). He said that that option had an estimated cost of $58,000
without including the mandatory changes to the parking area, etc… He estimated
that just remodeling half the building would cost about $300,000.
Citizen Katie Lo asked if the cost of tearing up the parking lot included
hauling the material away. Mr. Howell responded that it did. She asked what the
Building Inspector thought of this proposal. Mr. Aven responded that he thinks
the remodel is long overdue-especially when you have a government building that
is not handicap accessible. He added that it appears to be an excellent cost
proposal for all that will be accomplished. Attorney Spagnoulo asked if there
was concern about having the new additions match the existing building. Mr.
Howell said his firm has a lot of experience addressing this type of problem
and have had good success in the past. Al LeBlanc asked how the heating and
cooling system will be affected by the remodel. Mr. Howell said that the
existing heating and cooling system will remain. He pointed out on the site
drawing where new heat systems will be added. Treasurer Fink added that a zone
heating system is more appropriate for this type of building because there are
spaces that aren’t used at different times.
Supervisor Martin asked for additional questions from the audience or the
Board.
Franz Wilbrink asked how the Township planned to pay for the renovation.
Supervisor Martin said that the Township has been setting aside funds for the
project in the same manner that has been done previously for the Township Park
and the road construction on Mitchell and Vanneter Roads. She added that the
Township’s accountant feels that the renovation can be accomplished without
jeopardizing the Township’s reserve. There will be no need for tax increases.
Katie Lo asked if the new renovation design will eliminate the need for off-
site storage. Clerk Hiner responded that off-site storage would no longer be
necessary and the renovation should accommodate storage for a projected 15
years.
Trustee Wright said that the Board had looked at a number of options and that
the proposal presented tonight gives the Township the most for our investment.
He added that his primary concern was that the proposal incorporate projected
Township needs for the next 20 years. He said that he felt that Swanson had
provided a reasonable cost estimate. Trustee Wright said that by taking a
middle of the road approach, the Township is getting the most for its money. He
said he realizes that it’s a lot of money but he believes the Township needs to
provide an adequate building for its staff and its citizens. He added that the
Board put a lot of consideration into avoiding driving up the costs.
Mr. Howell said that when Swanson prepares an estimate, their goal is to be
within 10% and err on the high side. He said that if the bids come in too high,
the Township has three (3) options: 1) the project can be cancelled, 2) the
Township can decide to pay the higher price or 3) we can re-evaluate the
options within the project and eliminate tasks to bring the project within
budget.
Trustee Wright said that he believes that the costs presented by Swanson are
conservatively on the high side. He said that he’s very comfortable with the
proposal that has been developed. Walt Aven said that it is a good time to
request bids because of the economy and because it is winter so construction
work is slow. He added that money in savings isn’t earning interest. Trustee
Wright added that there are a lot of contractors looking for work.
Supervisor Martin requested a motion on whether to proceed. Trustee Wright made
a motion for the Township to move forward with the building expansion project
as proposed. Clerk Hiner supported the motion. Supervisor Martin called for a
roll call vote.
Roll Call Vote:
Trustee Steve Zaban      Yes
Trustee Martin Wright   Yes
Treasurer Nancy Fink   Yes
Supervisor Mickey Martin   Yes
Clerk Susan Hiner      Yes
Trustee Wright asked if the administrative changes taking place this year with
the cemetery management would result in a cost savings for the Township.
Supervisor Martin said that it cannot be determined yet but it is expected that
there will be some savings. Trustee Zaban suggested that this savings could
help to defray renovation costs. Supervisor Martin said that all spending at
the Township will continue to be watched very closely.
Mr. Howell reported that he had already collected proposals for the soil
borings and survey that must be performed. He said that soil borings have been
proposed for $1,063 by PSI and Leedy Survey Group had submitted a site survey
proposal of $2500 if the project area is surveyed and $3500 to survey the
entire site up to the wooded area. Trustee Wright asked if this survey could be
performed in a manner to resolve the Dexter property line issue currently being
evaluated by the Township. Supervisor Martin agreed that this might be an
option. Mr. Howell stated that Leedy Survey Group and PSI will invoice the
Township directly. Supervisor Martin asked for a copy of the bids. Mr. Howell
stated he would fax them the following day. Mr. Dexter asked when the survey
would occur and Mr. Howell responded it would occur within the next couple of
weeks. Clerk Hiner added that she would call Wheatfield Township to ask them
about handling hall rental requests.
Mr. Howell presented a schedule for meetings and collecting bids. He projected
that work would begin sometime after April. He will request that the bids
include a completion date. Supervisor Martin said that it looks like a good
schedule. She added that meetings with Township Board members are best held
after 5 p.m.. Mr. Howell said that he would mail the contract on Thursday of
this week. He said they use the AIA standard contract format. Mr. Howell said
that he will be bringing color selections to the next meeting and asked if the
Township had any strong opinions about color. The Board suggested he bring a
range of color choices.
Dexter Legal Description
Supervisor Martin summarized that Mr. Dexter has approached the Township
because the legal description of his property is not matching up with any
survey of the property. He needs to resolve this discrepancy quickly because he
wants to re-mortgage the property. Mr. Dexter believes that the Township
property overlaps his property by 19 ft. and that the problem appears to be
caused by a survey monument error. Mr. Dexter has submitted an explanation of
the problem prepared by KEBS Surveying on his behalf.
Supervisor Martin said that the Township attorney has reviewed the KEBS letter
and made three recommendations to the Township: 1) an independent survey can be
done by a third party firm to confirm the information presented by KEBS, 2) the
Township can look at the problem practically and accept the memo from KEBS as
fact or 3) the Township and Mr. Dexter can wait for Ingham County surveyors to
re-monument the survey point in question. Trustee Wright asked whether the
county has a schedule that could be accelerated to complete this re-monumenting
as soon as possible. He said it was his opinion that if the County cannot re-
monument soon, then the Township should get it done by a third party.
Mr. Dexter said that the property has been surveyed four (4) times and each
time they come up with a different answer. Until the county redoes the monument
it won’t come out accurate. Vince Spagnoulo said that the Kebs letter uses the
term “may be in question” which is a little loose, making it difficult to make
a decision based on the letter alone. Mr. Dexter stated that if the 19 feet in
question does belong to the Township, then he will no longer be in conformance
with road frontage rules. Supervisor Martin said that the property would be
“grandfathered” in that instance. Mr. Dexter said that when the Township
purchased 41 feet in 1994, the error in the survey should have been discovered.
Attorney Spagnoulo said that he has worked with similar situations. He told Mr.
Dexter that it is appropriate for him to go to his refinancing company, tell
them the situation, and tell them the Township has agreed that when the issue
is resolved it will quit claim any deed over to Mr. Dexter if necessary. Mr.
Spagnoulo said that the Township is able to make that type of promise. That way
Mr. Dexter can get approval by his title insurance company. Mr. Dexter
responded that he didn’t think his title insurance company would agree and
asked if the Township could prepare a letter. Mr. Spagnoulo said that Mr.
Dexter should contact the title company, ask what they need from the Township
and then the Township will do what is right once the correct survey is made.
Treasurer Fink asked if the Township could request the County re-monument this
location ahead of schedule. Clerk Hiner said that she will contact Bob Foltz
tomorrow at the Ingham County Tax Mapping office to inform him of this issue
and request that this location be re-monumented immediately. She will also
forward him copy of the letter describing the history of the problem prepared
by KEBS. Mr. Dexter said there is a proper locatable monument. White Surveying
used the intersection but he should have used the monument 62 feet south.
Vincent Spagnoulo told Mr. Dexter that he could have his representative from
the title insurance company (Bill McGowen, Michigan Banker’s Title) contact him
to clarify the criteria needed. Supervisor Martin said the Township will do
whatever is the correct thing to do.
Cemetery
Supervisor Martin reported that the Special Meeting to discuss the cemetery had
been held last month. She said that she had also met with Betty Honey who
represents the City on the Cemetery Board and Ms. Honey had stated she was very
happy that the Township will be running the cemetery correctly. Supervisor
Martin said that Betty Honey will remain on the Board and will be presenting
the new cemetery protocols to the City Board next Monday. Ms. Honey asked that
the information regarding the fulltime maintenance man be revised to show that
he will work part time as a cemetery employee and part time for the Township as
a maintenance man so that it will be clear that the City is paying for the
cemetery portion of these costs only.
Supervisor Martin summarized that, under the new administrative structure, all
money will run through the Township, all checks will be written by the
Township, and all investments will be made in the Township’s name and in
accordance with specific state statutes governing Township investments. She
said that Treasurer Fink is in the process of making these corrections. Trustee
Wright asked if the Township now has all of the cemetery records. Clerk Hiner
said that she believes that we do.
Supervisor Martin said that the next task is to prepare a job description for
the new general maintenance/caretaker position. This person will work with the
sexton as well as take care of all the Township properties including the park.
Supervisor Martin said that she has spoken with Gerald Gorton who currently
works as the helper at the cemetery and he has stated that he would like to
continue. He currently makes $12 per hour but goes on unemployment through the
winter. She added that Mr. Gorton has requested an increase from $12 to $15 per
hour. Trustee Wright said that he thinks the new position is a lot more
involved than what Mr. Gorton has been previously doing. Trustee Wright said
that he feels the Township should advertise the position and hire the person
most qualified. He said that Mr. Gorton is welcome to apply for the new
position and his experience will be considered. We are looking for a person
that can perform the cemetery duties as well as maintain the building and
grounds. Supervisor Martin said that this was a reasonable option. She added
that she is not comfortable with increasing Mr. Gorton’s wage to $15 at this
time. Treasurer Fink asked if the Township is obliged to rehire Mr. Gorton when
his unemployment ends. Attorney Spagnoulo said that he will review this
situation in more detail and advise the Township of the proper personnel
procedures.
Franz Wilbrink asked if the new position would be full time. Supervisor Martin
said that it would and that the job description would include snow removal,
lawn mowing, and building maintenance.
Supervisor Martin said that the job description needs to be completed and then
the position could be advertised. The ad will state that hourly wage will be
based on experience. Supervisor Martin said that she will meet with Vince
Spagnoulo to clarify all of the issues. Trustee Wright added that the Township
needs to formerly appoint people to the Cemetery Board with terms. Supervisor
Martin said that Harold Powell currently represents the Township, Betty Honey
currently represents the City, and Wayne Fate holds the At-Large Board
position.
Trustee Wright made a motion that Clerk Susan Hiner be appointed to the
Cemetery Board as a Township Board representative. Trustee Zaban supported the
motion. Motion passed unanimously.
Complaints
Cotter
4377 Red Maple
Supervisor Martin stated that the memo regarding her conversation with Mr.
Cotter had been included in the Board packets for information only. Mr. Cotter
was not present at the Board meeting.
Decker
1890 Barry Rd
Mr. Decker had submitted a letter to the Township requesting that Barry Road be
repaved. Supervisor Martin said that the cost to repave the road could not be
justified by the traffic counts but she had informed Mr. Decker that his
request would be forwarded to the traffic committee and let them make their
decision. Supervisor Martin said that she plans to contact Joe Pulver to see
what material is being used for road salt on this road.
Rentals in Williamstown Township
Mr. Canarile had previously asked if the Township should consider adding a
rental licensing section to its Township ordinance. Supervisor Martin said that
her research on the subject indicates that having a licensing requirement
actually encourages rentals. She said the City of East Lansing had to add this
provision because they have so many student rentals. However, it doesn’t make
sense for a Township of our size so the legal recommendation is that we move
forward without any changes.
Closed Session-Ciolek
REPORTS
NIESA
Trustee Zaban reported that he and Supervisor Martin had attended the last
NIESA meeting together and had presented the letter prepared by the Township
Board. He stated that NIESA had been very amicable toward the letter and
understood where the Township was coming from with their request for a fire
department presence in the Township. They agreed that any expansion of the fire
department should come out to the Township. Trustee Zaban also reported that
NIESA is planning to expand their existing building at a cost of approximately
$50,000 and that they plan to add a new tower.
PARKS
Trustee Wright said there was no new activity to report. He asked whether the
drain commissioner had asked about the site and Supervisor Martin reported that
they had not.
OTHER
MTA Meeting
Supervisor Martin stated that this is the 50th anniversary meeting and asked if
any Board members planned to attend. Supervisor Martin said that she had too
much work to do in the office. Trustee Zaban and Treasurer Fink said that they
prefer to go to the informational meetings and that this meeting was going to
be primarily social so they did not plan to attend.
ICCMTA Meeting
Supervisor Martin reported that this meeting would be hosted by Williamstown
Township. They have requested that the date be changed to February 5th to avoid
conflict with the big MTA meeting. Clerk Hiner asked if the Township would be
providing food. Supervisor Martin said the Township would provide appetizers.
Library Meeting
Supervisor Martin reported that the next library meeting would take place
Wednesday January 22, 2003. Clerk Hiner said that she will try to attend this
meeting and Trustee Wright said that she would be a good representative because
her family uses the library frequently.
PROPOSED BUDGET
Supervisor Martin presented a proposed budget for the 2003/2004 fiscal year
(effective April 1, 2003). She said that the Board would need to approve a new
budget at the February Board meeting. She requested that each Board member
review their relevant budget categories and make recommendations for any
adjustments. She said that the renovation is included but will need to be
increased based on the Swanson Design information presented tonight. The
cemetery and park changes still need to be added. She said that hourly employee
increases have been included in the proposed costs for Deputy Clerk, Deputy
Treasurer, Office Manager and Planning Assistant. No increases were made to the
meeting compensation amounts. She said she had a question about the Cable
Commission. That is the only committee that doesn’t get a $65 stipend (they
currently receive $25). Trustee Wright said he has served on this committee in
the past and that they don’t meet very often so it is not a significant budget
concern but they certainly should be compensated at the same rate as the other
committees. Supervisor Martin agreed that compensation for the Cable Commission
needed to be consistent with other Township committees.
Clerk Hiner added that there will need to be a budget amount in place for
elections even though there will be no election held in 2003. The county has
recommended we budget $2000 per precinct for acquiring new voting equipment.
There will be additional funds provided by the federal government. Supervisor
Martin asked for an itemized estimate of those costs.
Supervisor Martin requested that Board members provide any other budget
recommendations and remember that any expenses over $200 need to be included in
the budget. She requested the information as soon as possible so that a revised
copy can be distributed before the February Board meeting.
Adjournment
Trustee Zaban made a motion to adjourn supported by Trustee Wright. Motion
passed unanimously. Meeting adjourned at 10:52pm.
_________________________________      ______________________________
Susan L. Hiner               Lori A. Pincumbe
Clerk                     Recording Secretary
FEBRUARY 4, 2003
PRESENT: Supervisor Mickey Martin, Treasurer Nancy Fink, Clerk Susan Hiner,
Trustee Steve Zaban, Trustee Martin Wright, Building Inspector Walter Aven, and
Recording Secretary Lori Pincumbe.
ABSENT: None
CALL TO ORDER
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order at 7:30 p.m. She provided
an overview of the meeting agenda and made a request for any changes. No
additions or corrections to the agenda were made at this time.
PLEDGE
CONSENT AGENDA
Supervisor Martin made a request for any additions or corrections to the
consent agenda. One correction was noted on the minutes for the 1/07/03 Closed
Session. No other changes were identified. Clerk Hiner moved to: 1) approve the
1/7/03 Regular Meeting Minutes; 2) approve the list of bills paid and to be
paid; 3) approve payroll; and 4) accept and place on file the Treasurer’s
Report and the Building Inspector’s Report. Motion supported by Trustee Zaban.
Motion passed unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Planning Commission Chair Dan Kraft stated that he frequently receives
information about training classes that might be helpful to members of the
Planning Commission. He asked if there is Township funding available for
members to attend a relevant training session and was it appropriate for them
to do so. Supervisor Martin said that funding is available for outside training
and she would encourage Planning Commission members to attend.
NEW BUSINESS
Brookstone Preliminary Plat Extension
Planning Commission Chair Dan Kraft stated that this request is very similar to
the plat request presented last month for Hideaway Woods subdivision (located
next to Brookstone). He said the Planning Commission had previously granted one
extension with nine (9) conditions attached. He reported that progress has been
made by the applicant and only five (5) conditions remain. Mr. Kraft stated
that the Township’s Planning Consultant (Chris Doozan-McKenna Associates)
recommended that the Planning Commission consider approving this extension. Mr.
Kraft said that the big issue with approving this preliminary plat is still the
capacity of the City sewer lines in this area. The Planning Commission voted to
recommend approval of a one (1) year extension of the Tentative Preliminary
Plat for Brookstone Subdivision with the five (5) remaining conditions set
forth in the McKenna letter dated January 10, 2003.
Supervisor Martin made a request for questions from the Township Board or
comments from the applicant. There were no questions or comments.
Trustee Wright made a motion supported by Trustee Zaban to approve the
extension of the Brookstone Subdivision Preliminary Plat for one year with the
five (5) conditions attached as identified in the McKenna Associates letter
dated Jan 10, 2003. Motion passed unanimously.
Mr. Kraft stated that he is continuing to work with the Ms. Schultz to adjust
the content of the Planning Commission minutes until they achieve a format that
works for everyone. He said that future minutes will identify the information
commissioners received in packets prior to and during the meeting. These
documents can then be cited by reference rather than included as actual text.
Supervisor Martin asked that the January minutes be edited to reflect that she
offered an opinion regarding past practices at the request of the Planning
Commission rather than state that she made a recommendation to the Planning
Commission. She added that she never wants it to be implied that she, as the
Township Supervisor, has made a recommendation to the Planning Commission.
Bartels-Burn Petition
Supervisor Martin provided an overview of a letter sent to the Township by Mr.
Karl Bartels regarding the Burn Ordinance that was passed last fall as well as
her response letter. She said that Mr. Bartels had called last December to get
a burn permit and discovered that his property was in a restricted area. He was
initially confused because he thought the zoning had changed but now realizes
that only the burn status for his property changed. He has concerns about the
current burn status for Pheasant Run Subdivision. Supervisor Martin invited Mr.
Bartels to address the Board.
Mr. Bartels reiterated that he was indeed initially confused and thought that
the zoning for his property had changed. He said he wasn’t aware that the Burn
Ordinance had changed. He said that his neighbors that signed his petition were
also unaware. Supervisor Martin responded that everyone in the Township was
notified in the October 2002 Township Newsletter. Mr. Bartel’s said he had read
the newsletter but was confused by the black and white map. He said that the
reason he was appearing at the Board meeting tonight was to ask that the
calender system (where burning takes place only on the day that it is allowed)
be eliminated for Pheasant Run Subdivision and their original “call-in” burn
status returned. He added that he believes that the new system is unsafe
because it does not allow for burning to take place on weather appropriate
days.
Supervisor Martin requested questions from the Board. Treasurer Fink asked for
clarification of how Mr. Bartels shares burn space with his neighbors. Mr.
Bartels explained that he and his neighbors accumulate brush at a single
community location. When the pile has reached a sufficient size, he burns the
material at a weather appropriate time. Mr. Bartels added that several times he
has phoned for a burn permit but the weather did not cooperate so he did not
burn. Treasurer Fink agreed that when citizens are restricted to burn on a
specific day, it may not allow burning on the most appropriate weather day. Mr.
Bartels asked if it was a possibility that the rules could be changed so that
he could burn on the weather appropriate day he chooses. Treasurer Fink stated
that she believed it was a possibility.
Supervisor Martin explained that the Burn Ordinance was written to include
specific burn days for subdivisions because, without restriction, it is
conceivable that somebody could be burning every day of the week. This results
in many neighbor complaints. She added that there are many people in the
Township that don’t want the Township to allow burning at all. They find it an
environmentally poor practice, are not happy with the smell or they complain of
physical problems like asthma. The citizens that prepared the Burn Ordinance
believed that if everyone in a subdivision knew which day of the month burning
could take place, they could prepare themselves by burning at the same time or
temporarily leaving their property if they found the smoke offensive. This was
a compromise to accommodate all citizens.
Mr. Bartels said he understands this issue can be a problem in dense
subdivisions but he does not agree that it applies to his subdivision. Trustee
Wright added that the Township held numerous public hearings on this issue and
numerous citizens provided input. He said it would have been good if Mr.
Bartels or somebody from his subdivision had attended to voice their opinion.
Mr. Wright stated that there were many people at those meetings, including
Ingham County’s representative, that didn’t want to allow burning at all
(similar to the policy followed in Meridian Township). Mr. Bartels referred to
a statement in Supervisor Martin’s response letter about residents in the
Township not imposing on the rights of others. He suggested that the ordinance
infringes on his rights. Treasurer Fink said that indeed it does but that’s
because the Township is becoming more and more crowded so the Board has to look
at everybody’s rights. She added that she could foresee this ordinance becoming
even more restrictive in the future. She said if she were to change the
existing ordinance, she might consider allowing burning on days when it was
weather appropriate (instead of on pre-specified days) but she would vote to
limit the number of requests that could be made (for instance to four times per
year). She would not be willing to return to an open policy for burning
whenever a citizen wanted.
Mr. Bartels asked if the petition he submitted with 100% of the neighbors in
his subdivision agreeing with his request held any weight in the Board’s
decision. Trustee Wright asked if the people signing the petition understood
that the changes regarding burning in their subdivision were not due to a
zoning change (as stated on the petition). He said he is concerned that they
may not have understood properly what they were signing. He said that he would
like to speak to a couple of people on the petition to make sure they did.
Trustee Wright added that if 100% of the homeowners in a subdivision want to
change the requirements for their subdivision, then he doesn’t have a problem
allowing the change. But, if one or two of the neighbors do not agree, then
there is a problem. Treasurer Fink stated that the burn ordinance allows for
preparing a petition as a course of action by subdivision homeowners. She added
that she is not sure that Mr. Bartels’ petition meets the format requirements.
Mr. Bartels said he hoped his petition would be enough to initiate discussion.
Supervisor Martin asked Mr. Bartels to clarify the verbage he used to describe
the current burn status to his neighbors signing the petition (noting that the
wording on the petition incorrectly refers to a zone change from Ag-Small Farm
to RR). Mr. Bartels said his verbal explanation was basically that the petition
signatures were being collected to eliminate the restrictions of a calender
date. He added that he reworded his second petition to eliminate the zone
change information before collecting additional signatures from neighbors
outside of his subdivision that may be impacted by his community burn.
Supervisor Martin agreed that the second petition wording was much clearer.
Trustee Wright explained that the Board has been working on a policy for
outlining the format requirements for a petition. He stated the Board needs to
establish those standards to be sure that the people signing a petition are
completely aware of what they are signing.
Citizen LeBlanc asked if the petition were accepted, would the burn rules for
all subdivisions zoned RR change. Trustee Wright said he would not entertain
making an across the board change. Mr. Bartels stated that he was requesting
the change for his subdivision only (where there are about 10 homes on 40
acres). Supervisor Martin stated that the people who signed the second petition
are not in Mr. Bartels’ subdivision so their property has not been affected by
the Burn Ordinance change. Mr. Bartels said he took the second petition to
people outside his subdivision to be sure he spoke with everyone that might be
affected by smoke from his brush pile.
Supervisor Martin said that she hoped the people that signed this second
petition were not under the misimpression that their burn status had changed.
She clarified that the change to the Burn Ordinance prohibited burning on RR
zoned land in subdivision and condominium developments only. Homes in RR zones
outside of subdivisions don’t have the same restriction and they still have the
ability to request a call-in burn permit. Mr. Bartels said that perhaps he
should move his brush pile to the property of a neighbor outside of his
subdivision. Treasurer Fink stated that this might be a good option. Mr.
Bartels added that his existing brush pile is in an ideal location because it
is isolated and has ready access to water.
Supervisor Martin said that the ordinance was written to allow individual
subdivisions to request special consideration if there is 100% agreement among
the homeowners. Treasurer Fink stated that the ability to petition for change
is identified in the ordinance. Mr. Bartels said that he could go back around
and recollect signatures on a revised petition. Trustee Wright said that the
Board has to be sure that the people signing understand what they are signing
to avoid having somebody come in after a change is made and declare that they
didn’t understand. Supervisor Martin stated that this is the first request for
a modification to the Burn Ordinance so it will set a precedent. Trustee Wright
said a lot of time and effort went in by many Township residents and the Burn
Ordinance Committee to prepare the ordinance and careful consideration must be
made before changing it
Clerk Hiner asked if the Board wanted to determine the content of a revised
petition. Treasurer Fink clarified that there is specific instructions for what
should be included in a petition made by a subdivision to alter their
restrictions for burning and that she would like to see the petition
resubmitted in compliance with these items. Mr. Bartels said he would bring the
petition in for review by Supervisor Martin before he goes to his neighbors
again for signatures. Trustee Wright reiterated that the Board is not against
this request, but they want to make sure that it is handled correctly. Trustee
Wright added that if the Board considers making a change for Pheasant Run
Subdivision, the homeowners surrounding the subdivision would likely be
notified as well.
Treasurer Fink reiterated that the Township came up with this very complicated
Burn Ordinance document trying to satisfy everybody’s needs. Supervisor Martin
added that this Burn Ordinance is a compromise. In the old ordinance, citizens
couldn’t even have a campfire without a permit. With the changes included in
the new ordinance, campfires are now permitted. Mr. Bartels reminded the Board
that the procedure he uses for a community burn effectually limits the burns in
his subdivision. Trustee Wright said that this is a very good point and this
fact will make the Board’s decision a lot easier.
Recycling
Trustee Wright reported that the resources that have been available to him for
the last ten (10) years that allowed him to provide a recycling service to the
Township are no longer available (except at a cost that would be prohibitive
for the Township). He presented an alternate proposal for Granger to handle the
Township’s recycling needs. Granger would continue to collect recycling on the
2nd Saturday of each month. He explained that the proposal includes a container
delivery fee, a trucking fee, and a processing fee. The total cost for each
monthly service is $295. He added that this is $105 less than current costs but
does not include staffing. Trustee Wright suggested that the new maintenance
person also supervise recycling. He added that supervision is necessary because
there are a lot of seniors that use the service and some assistance is helpful.
People don’t necessarily recycle properly and if there is contamination, the
load has to go to the landfill which will cost the Township about $100 more. He
added that the opening to the container is high and some people may have a
problem lifting their material. Trustee Wright said that the collection
container would be kept locked except during posted collection hours. People
will still probably leave bags around the storage container during off hours
but they could be processed by the maintenance person. Trustee Wright said the
Township could probably even offer expanded hours. Supervisor Martin said that
she had spoken with Gerald Gorton (who will be assuming the maintenance
position on February 11) and he said he had no problem with working the 2nd
Saturday of every month. Trustee Wright said that people typically drop off
recycling between 11:45 a.m. and 2 p.m. with a final rush at 3 p.m. (near
closing time). Recycling hasn’t been open earlier because the soccer fields are
often in use on Saturday morning.
There was a discussion of where the container should be placed. Supervisor
Martin suggested using the circle drive. Trustee Wright said that there are 5
compartments in the container with some compartments having access from both
sides. He added that the scouts typically collect newspapers with an unmanned
trailer during the Township’s recycling hours. He recommended that if the
Scouts continue, they provide their own supervision. That leaves the Township
to collect magazines, #2 plastic, milk jugs, clear glass, tin, and brown glass
(which only amounts to 10-15 gallons). Trustee Wright said that Granger will
provide signs. He said the Township dumpster is used for anything that gets
rejected. Granger will provide educational handouts.
Trustee Wright said that Saturday, February 8, 2003 will be his last recycling
service. Granger is prepared to start the 2nd Saturday of March if their
proposal is approved. He offered to help cross-train Mr. Gorton in March and
then drop by for the next couple of months to answer any questions. Clerk Hiner
asked if the Scout newspaper collection coincides with the Township recycling
schedule. He said that the Scouts collect papers on the 2nd Saturday of every
other month to coincide with the Township schedule.
Citizen Katie Lo asked Trustee Wright to define recycling contamination. He
responded that people might throw any debris they can (trash, roof shingles,
clear plastic bottles, etc…) into recycling containers if left unsupervised.
Citizen LeBlanc said he’s seen contamination everywhere he goes to drop his
recycling (even at the Granger offices) so he agrees it is wise to have
somebody supervise the drop off. Trustee Wright said that if the load has more
than 15% contamination, Granger rejects it and sends it to the landfill.
Trustee Wright said that Philip Mikius (Granger Recycling Manager) has agreed
to commit to the proposed cost schedule for three years. Trustee Wright said
that recycling should be offered 9 a.m.-3 p.m. to justify Mr. Gorton coming in.
There are several other Township maintenance tasks that could be completed
during drop-off slowdowns.
The Board agreed to accept the proposal from Granger for recycling materials on
the 2nd Saturday of each month. Clerk Hiner said she will contact the Scouts
about staffing the newspaper collection trailer. Supervisor Martin said that
because this is only a change in the way services are being handled, a formal
vote is not necessary.
Poverty Asset Level
Supervisor Martin reported that the Township must approve a Poverty Asset Level
Test in conjunction with the previously approved Poverty Guidelines. This means
the Township needs to determine how much a taxpayer is allowed in assets to
still meet the Poverty Level Guidelines. Trustee Wright asked what a typical
asset level was. Clerk Hiner said she could find no guidelines at the federal
level or with the Township Association. Members of the Board agreed that
homesteads should be exempt from inclusion in any asset level test. Clerk Hiner
said that one vehicle should also be exempted. Trustee Wright asked for
clarification if this process is to set a limit for assets (in addition to
income) that a person cannot exceed before qualification for property tax
exemption. Treasurer Fink explained that the Township has a four (4) page
document that must be completed by anyone seeking to have their property taxes
exempted. There is currently only one person in the Township that has made this
request. Supervisor Martin said that the federal poverty guidelines are very
strict and she doubts that anyone that meets those poverty guidelines will have
many assets. Treasurer Fink said that in order for someone to maintain
financial independence, they should be allowed one working vehicle to be
exempted. Supervisor Martin said that the Board of Review can decide to allow a
partial property tax exemption. Trustee Wright suggested that all assets be
included except an applicant’s home and one vehicle. Supervisor Martin
requested a motion.
Treasurer Fink moved that the Township adopt an Asset Level Test that exempts
the applicant’s home and one vehicle when determining whether an individual
meets the Township Poverty Level Guidelines for property tax exemption. Motion
supported by Trustee Zaban. Motion passed unanimously.
Surplus Property
Supervisor Martin read the following suggested policy into the minutes: “It
will be the policy of the Williamstown Township Board to have the most
qualified person determine the value of surplus properties. The price will be
set with a suggested guideline of approximately 10% of the value of new.”
Supervisor Martin explained that the Township is not allowed to give away or
donate anything removed during the remodeling. It can only be sold or thrown
away. There has to be consistency in how items are sold which is why this
policy has been prepared. She said that she would like the Township to keep a
running list of every item that needs to be disposed of so that Board members
can regularly review the sale prices to make sure that they are reasonable.
Trustee Zaban made a motion to accept the policy as stated. Trustee Wright
supported the motion. Motion passed unanimously.
Board of Review Appointments
Supervisor Martin stated that every odd year she must recommend appointment or
reappointment for Board of Review members. She recommended that the Township
reappoint Gerald Eidt, Robert Tetzlaff and Frans Wilbrink. Trustee Wright asked
if any other Township residents had expressed interest in serving on the Board
of Review. Supervisor Martin said that she had not been contacted by anyone
else.
Trustee Wright made a motion, supported by Trustee Zaban, to reappoint Gerald
Eidt, Robert Tetzlaff and Frans Wilbrink to the Board of Review. Motion passed
unanimously.
Budget
Supervisor Martin scheduled a budget hearing on February 25, 2003 at 6:30 p.m.
following the Board’s meeting with Swanson Design at 5 p.m. on the same
evening. She added that this hearing must be held before the budget can be
officially adopted at the March 4, 2003 Board meeting. Supervisor Martin
highlighted that the draft budget now includes cemetery income and
expenditures, and includes standard rate increases for hourly employees.
Treasurer Fink asked if the Township is going to bookkeep the cemeteries as
part of the general fund. Supervisor Martin said that this is how it is
currently set up based on input from the Township accountant (Aaron Stevens).
Treasurer Fink said that she would like to track all income from cemetery
investments separately and that she objects in general to the cemetery
accounting being mingled with the general fund. She said that she would like to
read the law again to clarify how accounting for the cemetery should be managed
but that she would prefer to see the cemetery accounting kept separate from the
general fund for at least one year. She said for example she would prefer the
interest from the cemetery investment accounts be allocated to a “general
cemetery fund” account rather than a “general Township fund” account.
Supervisor Martin said that if the Clerk’s department also agrees to tracking
the cemetery accounts separately (the Clerk has mandated responsibility for all
payables and the Treasurer for all receivables) then this modification could be
considered. Clerk Hiner said that she is flexible on this issue but wants to be
sure that checks for the cemetery can be printed from the Quickbooks software
system rather than manually generated (as they are currently).
Supervisor Martin said that the Township accountant has recommended that the
relationship between the City of Williamston and Williamstown Township be
clearly stipulated regarding responsibilities and funding. The original
resolution dates back to 1945. Treasurer Fink added that she would also like to
see the spirit of the agreement that has been made between the Cemetery Board
and customers that have made special arrangements for flowers and upkeep be
maintained. Supervisor Martin said that this topic can be further addressed
during the Cemetery discussion later in the meeting.
Supervisor Martin summarized that the excess of income over expenditures for
the proposed General Fund budget for Williamstown Township is $ 421,357. This
is solely due to the renovation which will be funded from reserve. She added
that the Trustee budget was adjusted to reflect the additional meetings that
they attend without previous compensation. Supervisor, Clerk and Treasurer
rates remain unchanged. Supervisor Martin asked for any questions or comments
from the Board before putting the proposed budget before a public hearing.
Supervisor Martin added that she feels that at some point the Township is going
to need to consider more police protection as the Township continues to grow.
She added that if it weren’t for the renovations, the Township would be
realizing income again in 2003. Trustee Zaban asked what this profit could be
attributed to. Supervisor Martin said that nobody is taking any raises and the
Township has been doing some consolidating. The new maintenance position will
also eliminate several contracted costs (lawncare, snow removal, etc…). A new
lawnmower will still need to be purchased.
Treasurer Fink asked how much money will need to be transferred from investment
principal to cover the renovation fees and asked when that money will need to
be made available. She stated that certain investment funds (for instance CDs)
are not easily liquidated so she’ll need advance notice. Supervisor Martin said
that she will not know the exact amount or timeframe until the bidding process
is complete and she will inform Treasurer Fink as soon as she has this
information. For now, Treasurer Fink should use the budgeted amount of $581,000
for renovation as a working estimate.
Trustee Wright made a motion, supported by Trustee Zaban, to hold a budget
hearing on February 25, 2003 at 6:30 p.m. Motion passed unanimously.
Salary Resolutions
Supervisor Martin stated that Salary Resolutions need to be passed by the Board
because the Township is holding an annual meeting on March 4, 2003 prior to the
regular Board meeting. She added that Salary Resolutions are usually only
required if Board members receive a pay increase (which they will not in 2003)
but they are an annual meeting requirement.
Trustee Wright made a motion to pass a resolution to establish Township
officer’s salaries. Motion supported by Clerk Hiner. Motion passed unanimously.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Building Expansion
Supervisor Martin reported that the soil borings and survey steps have been
completed. Carpeting and paint chips have been considered. The Township is now
waiting for the project to go out for bid.
Supervisor Martin said that consideration is needed about where meetings should
be held when the Township offices move to the banquet hall. One option is to
take the meetings to an outside location but this would require considerable
work because it will involve a number of meetings where a lot of equipment
would need to be transported. Trustee Wright said that the renovation should
start in April or May and will probably last for eight (8) months. The
consensus was that space should be set aside for the meetings in the temporary
office area at the time the staff moves over and to keep the meetings in-house.
Cemetery
Clerk Hiner reported that a Cemetery Board meeting had taken place on February
4, 2003. She said that she and Betty Honey were the only members to attend. Mr.
Powell is back in the hospital and she had not been contacted by the City
representative (Dawn Horstman). No decisions could be finalized because there
was not a quorum. Clerk Hiner said that she met with Mrs. Honey at length who
had provided a list of concerns/priorities that she would like to see for the
cemetery. She stated that Mrs. Honey is very committed to the cemetery. For
instance, she has personally investigated procedures for cleaning stones and
would like to make the names readable on the older stones. She provided Clerk
Hiner a list of several items including locating and replacing the broken
stones that were picked up by the mower. Supervisor Martin said that she feels
Mrs. Honey has a lot of great ideas and hopes the Cemetery Board will pursue
them.
Treasurer Fink said that in a casual conversation with Wayne Fate last week, he
told her that he and Mr. Powell had talked about the “flower fund” account
(which contains about $15,000) and that they had decided to dissolve this
account and spend the money on benches, fences and other items. Clerk Hiner
said that she had also spoken to Mr. Fate this afternoon regarding the same
issue and he is mentally moving towards agreeing to turn the account over to
the Township. He told Clerk Hiner that his reluctance to do so is only because
he wants to make sure that the money that was collected for flowers is used to
purchase flowers and not absorbed into the Township general fund. Clerk Hiner
said that she assured him again that she could guarantee that it would be
maintained this way. Treasurer Fink said that she has told Mr. Fate this same
thing several times so she finds it difficult to understand what his problem
is. She added that there is no evidence that Mr. Fate was using the interest
from these accounts for flowers previously. The history of these “flower fund”
CDs is that the interest has been rolled back into the CDs for the past five
years. Not one flower has been bought with this interest previously. Treasurer
Fink said she told Mr. Fate that the Township would continue providing flowers
and that she needed a list of the people that the flowers should go to. He said
he just gives the list to Williamston Greenhouse each year. He agreed with
Treasurer Fink that money for the flowers had not been coming out of interest
from these CDs in the past. Treasurer Fink said she is not sure what Mr. Fate
is really trying to say here. Clerk Hiner said that Mr. Fate told her last week
the names of the four (4) people who have provided money for flowers. She also
clarified that the flowers had been purchased from Williamston Greenhouse in
the past for this purpose. Treasurer Fink agreed but said the purchase had not
been made with “flower fund” money because those funds were still locked in
CDs.
Treasurer Fink summarized that that there is no problem with earmarking
interest from the “flower fund” specifically to flowers. Supervisor Martin
stated that Mr. Powell had contacted her this afternoon and said he doesn’t
think the funds need to be liquidated, he just wants the money to be used as
intended.
Clerk Hiner said that after talking to him today, she believes Mr. Fate is
ready to turn the fund over. She thinks this has been a painful process for
him. Trustee Wright said he thinks we should give Mr. Fate another chance to
turn it over. Trustee Zaban suggested one week longer. Trustee Wright asked if
we could add two (2) names to the CDs (which recently rolled over) and
therefore require two (2) signatures. Treasurer Fink said that this is the
Township’s policy on all accounts and that Republic Bank is willing to do this
but that Mr. Fate has been unwilling to go to the bank with her to complete the
process. Trustee Zaban suggested calling Mr. Fate on Monday and asking him
which day this week he is meeting Clerk Hiner and Treasurer Fink at the bank to
add signatures to the accounts. Clerk Hiner added that Mr. Fate wants some sort
of assurance that the money from this account will go towards flowers.
Treasurer Fink said that this is absolutely possible to accomplish. Treasurer
Fink said she can meet on Wednesday and Friday or other days with notice. Clerk
Hiner said that she will contact Mr. Fate to make the arrangements.
Supervisor Martin reported that a funeral had taken place this afternoon and
the new administrative process appears to be working.
Complaints
Ciolek
1054 E. Sherwood
Supervisor Martin reported that a court date has been set for this case on
March 5, 2003 at 3 p.m. Citizen Katie Lo asked for an explanation of this
lawsuit. Supervisor Martin explained that Mr. Ciolek is arguing that he is
exempt from all Township zoning restrictions because of the Right to Farm Act
(he claims to farm “branch water”).
McManaman
1779 Haslett Road
Trustee Wright asked if there were any other complaints currently being
considered in the Township. Supervisor Martin said there was one property
complaint about a pole barn. Building Inspector Aven said that he left a
telephone message this morning. He also visited the property but nobody was
home at the time. He said there were footprints around the home but no
footprints around the barn.
Trustee Zaban asked if its time to manage this type of zoning problem with a
code enforcement officer. He said he sees a lot of zoning violations around the
Township.
Supervisor Martin said that it should be discussed at a workshop whether the
Township wants somebody driving around the Township looking for zoning
violations. Right now it is not Township policy to do that. Constable Dahlstrom
could probably do this one day a week if necessary.
Walt Aven asked if the Township can be proactive and go out and enforce zoning
requirements or does the Township need a complaintant (other than Mr. Dahlstrom
because he is an employee). Trustee Wright asked what the law was regarding
this proactive approach-can the Township do this or is it just Board policy to
wait for a complaint? Supervisor Martin said she would look into this and added
that once Constable Dahlstrom goes out to a property, he becomes the
complaintant on behalf of the Township. Supervisor Martin said that she
believes the Township’s approach is just a Board policy. Treasurer Fink said
that it is less expensive to handle violations by complaint. Treasurer Fink
clarified that adding a code enforcement officer is a different issue than
adding additional police protection to handle traffic violations, break-ins,
etc...
Citizen LeBlanc said that zoning might go unenforced for 20 years before a
neighbor files a complaint. An occupational hazard of having the public take
the initial step to file a complaint when they see a zoning violation is that
the person in violation may claim that he is “grandfathered” because nobody had
identified a problem before.
REPORTS
NIESA
Trustee Zaban reported that he was unable to attend the last meeting but
minutes have been provided in the Board packet. Supervisor Martin asked what
the billing question discussed in the minutes referred to. She said it appears
that some people are refusing to pay their NIESA invoices if the fire
department or ambulance responds when a person didn’t contact them or want
their assistance. Trustee Zaban said that there is always a problem when there
is a call to decide what vehicle(s) need to respond. He said this has been a
discussion for quite a while and that NIESA sends an invoice presuming that an
insurance company will pay for it. Supervisor Martin added that it also
appeared from the minutes that there was going to be some reorganization among
the leadership.
PARKS
Supervisor Martin reported that she had spoken with Brad Krieder (Kamminga &
Roodovets, Inc.) and he anticipates they will be done by the middle or end of
September next year. She said she’s having Mr. Krieder provide the Township
with a price for the storm culvert that needs to be placed to avoid flooding on
the soccer fields. She said she has included this task in the Parks budget for
this year. She said Mr. Krieder will also be providing a price for the future
parking lot that is identified in the Park plan (he said that it was his
understanding that his current contract required that he put gravel in this
location but did not include preparing an actual parking lot). Supervisor
Martin said she would clarify this point in the original contract. In the
meantime, Mr. Krieder will provide a price to do this project as well.
Treasurer Fink asked for clarification about the storm drain. Supervisor Martin
said the storm drain will be an 8” PVC pipe that will handle runoff from the
soccer fields.
Treasurer Fink reported that the Park Committee is talking to three (3)
different contractors about the upcoming prairie burn. They are planning to
schedule the burn for late March/early April. She said that this will be a big
event when it happens and that there needs to be a comprehensive burn plan
prepared before the project can begin. Treasurer Fink added that this 50 acre
burn project was larger than a couple of the contractors had handled before so
she expects that 2 or 3 contractors might bid on the project together.
Citizen Lo asked how a burn is handled. Treasurer Fink said there is a
technical process that must be followed to hold a natural burn to establish a
prairie. For instance, the wind and rain have to be carefully gauged. Citizen
Lo asked if the local fire department could handle it. Treasurer Fink said that
the fire department is on call 24 hours so they are not able to participate.
Supervisor Martin reminded the Board that the Township sledding event takes
place at the park this Sunday from 1-3 p.m. She encouraged everyone to attend.
OTHER
ICCMTA Meeting – 2/5/03 (Hosted by Williamstown Township)
Supervisor Martin reminded the Board that Williamstown will be hosting this
meeting at 7 p.m. tomorrow evening.
February Schedule
Because of the large number of meetings and events taking place in February,
Supervisor Martin provided Board Members with a February schedule.
MDEQ Public Comment Meeting - Hilty Property
Supervisor Martin reported that the meeting held last night by the MDEQ
regarding the Hilty property was very interesting. She said that there was no
support from the neighbors for Mr. Hilty to cross wetlands area with a road.
The Drain Commisioner (Mr. David Love) also spoke and he did not support the
proposal and said that he wanted another approach to be identified. Supervisor
Martin said that the MDEQ did a very nice job holding the public hearing. Their
representative was there to hear public comments only and he offered no
response. He said he will hold the public hearing open for ten (10) days and
then he will make his decision. Supervisor Martin said the neighbors were not
necessarily opposed to a quality subdivision but they didn’t think there had
been sufficient planning based on the proposal submitted. Supervisor Martin
added that she had no idea how MDEQ will decide.
Building Fees
Supervisor Martin reported that a question has arisen regarding building fees.
When somebody blatantly or unintentionally ignores getting a building permit,
it often takes extra effort by the Building Inspector to track the building
permit down. Walt Aven (Williamstown Township Building Inspector) stated that
according to the original Uniform Building Code, the Township was allowed to
double fees as a penalty in this circumstance. The Michigan Uniform Building
Code, however, does not address this issue at all so if the Township wants to
penalize people for not obtaining the proper permits (and thereby causing extra
administrative time by the inspector) the Board would have to establish this as
a policy. The inspector cannot just double the fees arbitrarily without a Board
decision. He added that this penalty is especially appropriate for contractors
who know the rules. We may need to be more flexible with homeowners who are
unaware of the permit process and when it applies.
Trustee Wright agreed that we should be more lenient with homeowners who are
new to the area but that contractors are well aware of the permitting process.
Supervisor Martin agreed that the Board should set a policy to handle this type
of situation.
Inspector Aven said that the minimum building permit fee is $35 so doubling
would bring the fee to $70. Supervisor Martin suggested that a person should be
given one warning and if they don’t come in to get the proper permit, then
their penalty fee should start being applied. Treasurer Fink added that the
Township should require a deadline to respond. Supervisor Martin asked Mr. Aven
how Meridian Township handles these situations. He said that the situation did
not occur very often but their response varied. If it was a homeowner, they
gave them a warning but if it was a builder (who knows the rules) they doubled
the fee. Supervisor Martin asked how they handled a homeowner that didn’t come
in to get the permit after a warning. Mr. Aven said there was never an instance
where the homeowner didn’t come in and pay the fee once notified.
Supervisor Martin asked Inspector Aven to prepare a written schedule for how
building permit fees and penalty fees should be applied to present at the March
Board Meeting. Supervisor Martin asked that a warning letter be the first step
in the process. Citizen LeBlanc asked if it is possible to add a statement to
the warning letter saying that there will also be a charge for any attorney
fees associated with collecting the building permit fee. Supervisor Martin said
the Township attorney has not completely clarified whether the Township can do
this. Treasurer Fink added that a reminder about building permits should go in
the next newsletter.
Cemetery Building
Supervisor Martin asked Trustee Wright to look at the cemetery storage building
to see if it could be modified to accommodate the new mower. Trustee Wright
said that, once Mr. Gorton starts his new position, he would like to meet him
at the site and go over everything with him. Supervisor Martin will alert
Trustee Wright once Mr. Gorton has started so that he can set up this
appointment.
Phase Two Stormwater Runoff Permit
Treasurer Fink reported that the Township is under a March deadline for
submitting a Phase Two Stormwater Runoff Permit to the State of Michigan. She
added that this is an unfunded mandate from the federal government. The draft
permit has been prepared but needs to be edited to state …“the Township will be
responsible for whatever we can be legally responsible for and that all other
entities will not claim responsibility for.” Treasurer Fink said that this
wording is consistent with what other townships are using.
There is a mid-March deadline for submitting the draft permit so Treasurer Fink
said she would like to present the final wording at the March Board meeting.
She said that Mr. Lindemann enforces Township drain issues because we have made
the decision to defer to the Ingham County Drain Commissioner (this is not true
for every municipality-for instance, the City of Williamston makes their own
drain decisions). Treasurer Fink said that Mr. Lindemann had asked her how much
money the Township had budgeted for this task and she told him she wouldn’t
respond until he provided her with a proposal to justify what he’s going to
need (she doesn’t want him to think there is a bottomless fund available to
him). She said right now the Township is, in essence, filing an empty permit.
She said that the Township does want Mr. Lindemann to continue performing this
stormwater review work (if, in fact, there is any work to be done) because the
Township would otherwise have to hire outside contractors.
Adjournment
Supervisor Martin called for any other business from the Board or the public.
None was offered. Trustee Zaban made a motion to adjourn supported by Trustee
Wright. Motion passed unanimously. Meeting adjourned at 10:08 p.m.
_________________________________      ______________________________
Susan L. Hiner               Lori A. Pincumbe
Clerk                     Recording Secretary
MARCH 4, 2003
PRESENT: Supervisor Mickey Martin, Treasurer Nancy Fink, Clerk Susan Hiner,
Trustee Steve Zaban, Trustee Martin Wright, Building Inspector Walter Aven, and
Recording Secretary Lori Pincumbe. ABSENT: None
CALL TO ORDER
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order at 7:33 p.m. She provided
an overview of the meeting agenda and made a request for changes or additions.
Supervisor Martin added the topics “Recycling” and “Proposed Resolution
Submitted by Citizen Rutgar Hoag” to New Business, and “Burn Ordinance Petition
Submitted by Citizen Karl Bartels” to Unfinished Business.
PLEDGE
CONSENT AGENDA
Supervisor Martin reviewed the items included in the consent agenda packet. She
noted that a cemetery account balance is now included as part of the
Treasurer’s monthly report. No corrections were identified. Trustee Wright
moved to: 1) approve the 2/4/03 Regular Meeting Minutes; approve the 2/25/03
Budget Hearing Meeting Minutes; 2) approve the list of bills paid and to be
paid; 3) approve payroll; and 4) accept and place on file the Treasurer’s
Report for the Township and the Cemetery, and the Building Inspector’s Report.
Motion supported by Clerk Hiner. Motion passed unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS
There were no public comments.
NEW BUSINESS
2004 Meeting Dates
Supervisor Martin stated that Board meetings for the 2004 fiscal year have been
scheduled for the first Tuesday of each month. Trustee Wright requested that
the June 3, 2003 meeting be rescheduled to June 10, 2003. No other changes were
requested by members of the Board.
Trustee Wright made a motion supported by Trustee Zaban to approve the proposed
2004 Meeting Dates with the single correction of rescheduling the June 3, 2003
meeting to June 10, 2003. Motion passed unanimously.
Supervisor Martin asked Clerk Hiner to publish these meeting dates in the
Enterprise with the synopsis for this meeting and to re-post the corrected
schedule at the Township office.
Petition Policy
Supervisor Martin presented an informal petition policy prepared by Clerk
Hiner. Clerk Hiner said that she researched policies of other townships and
modeled her proposed version using portions of those that made sense for our
Township’s needs. She added
 
that she kept the draft wording very basic because the policy is not binding so
it should not be complex. She added that if we were preparing a policy for
legally binding petitions, the Township would need a very detailed document.
Clerk Hiner explained that the absolute basic requirements of an informal
petition policy are that the petition be legible, printed on paper, and signed
by at least one person who resides in the Township with their printed name and
address. Therefore, she chose to adopt these three requirements into the draft
Township policy. In addition, she has prepared an attached document which
explains the steps that must be taken to present an informal petition and
offers suggested guidelines for preparing the petition.
 
Citizen LeBlanc stated that these guidelines are important because people have
a tendency to sign anything just to get rid of the person presenting a petition
at their door.
Supervisor Martin said she would not consider any petition valid if there was
not an explanation of what was being signed at the top of the page.
Treasurer Fink said that it would be misleading to tell the public that this
draft informal petition policy is the minimum requirement. She said that if a
petitioner includes only these three items and then brings their petition to
the Board, she would be obligated to turn the petition down because there is no
wording at the top of any page identifying the issue being petitioned.
Trustee Wright said that he feels that the information that has been included
in the suggested guidelines should be made the required guidelines.
Clerk Hiner said that the more guidelines you add to the informal petition
policy the more weight you give to the petition. She said that her proposed
policy presents the minimum requirements and that the attachment titled “Steps
in presenting an informal petition” is the document that would be given to a
citizen to guide them though assembling a petition.
Treasurer Fink asked how the petition process was worded in the Burn Ordinance.
Supervisor Martin read from the ordinance “…the petition should be consistent
with general policies of the Township regarding format and content of
petitions.” Trustee Zaban clarified that, since the Township does not currently
have a general policy regarding format and content of petitions, the topic is
being discussed tonight.
Trustee Wright made a motion supported by Trustee Zaban to approve the proposed
Petition Policy as written. Motion passed unanimously.
Foia Policy
This topic will be discussed at a workshop meeting prior to presenting a
proposed policy to the Board.
Permit Fee Policy
Supervisor Martin read the proposed Permit Fee Policy into the minutes:
“Whenever any work for which a permit is required by the building code has been
commenced without first obtaining said permit, a special investigation shall be
made before a permit may be issued for such work.
An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether
or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be
equal to the amount of the permit fee required. The minimum investigation fee
shall be the same as the minimum fee. The payment of such investigation fee
shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of this
code nor from any penalty prescribed by law.
   Fee      For expenditures up to and including $5,000.00      $35.00
   For each $1,000.00 or fraction thereof above $5,000.00   $ 5.00
   Re-inspection fee                  $35.00 ”
Supervisor Martin recommended expanding the wording in the first sentence to
state “provisions of the building code.” Trustee Wright clarified that if a
homeowner puts a deck on his property without first getting a permit, he may
pay $35 for a permit plus a $35 penalty. The decision to apply this fee will be
made at the discretion of the Township and will be based on whether the
omission was intentional or due to inexperience. Fees will be applied to
contractors that fail to get the proper permits because they are aware of the
requirements. Supervisor Martin added that citizens moving into our Township
from other areas may be confused because every municipality has different
permit requirements and they may simply not realize a permit is required for
certain tasks. Supervisor Martin suggested that the wording “ an investigation
fee shall” be changed to “an investigation fee may” so that the decision can be
made at the discretion of the Township. Supervisor Martin said that she is most
concerned with the people who have been notified of the permit requirement and
they still fail to come in to get the proper permits. Trustee Wright asked if
the Township has any leverage for collecting permit fees in this case and if it
could be attached to property taxes? Supervisor Martin said that it could not
be attached to property taxes but any new or modified structure involved could
be tagged as a violation to be taken down. The issue could also be taken
through the court process.
Trustee Zaban made a motion supported by Trustee Wright to approve the proposed
Permit Fee Policy with the wording corrected to “provisions of the building
code” and “an investigation fee may” as discussed. Motion passed unanimously.
Recycling
Supervisor Martin presented a document submitted by Ingham County Health
Department titled “County Supported Recycling Facilities (Webberville, Leslie,
Mason).” She stated that the plan presented in this document had been
previously presented to the
 
Board by ICHD staff last summer. The Ingham County Solid Waste Management Plan
states that these three recycling centers exist and anyone in Ingham County is
allowed to use them. A copy of this document was included in board packets for
information only-no action is required. Treasurer Fink asked how these
facilities were being funded. Trustee Wright said that originally Ingham County
had planned to start charging a tax on all waste leaving the county and that
they expected the haulers to collect the tax from citizens (the hauler’s
customers) for them. The haulers filed a lawsuit against the County because
they did not agree that they should be collecting taxes on behalf of the
County. Trustee Wright added that the issue was settled and never actually made
it to court. Instead, the haulers agreed to pay the money necessary to run the
program in the form of a donation. They preferred this solution to having the
County force them to collect the tax from their customers.
School Resolution
Citizen Rutger Hoag (Williamstown Township Planning Commissioner) presented the
Township Board with a draft resolution for consideration regarding the position
of the Township on the upcoming school bond issue. Supervisor Martin read his
proposed resolution letter into the minutes:
“Be it resolved that the Township of Williamstown sand against the proposed
Williamston Community Schools Bond proposal scheduled for vote on April 22,
2003:
To preserve the rural environment required in the township Master Plan all
major development in the township must be south of Sherwood Road. However, the
portion of monies collected form this Bond proposal would in effect fund school
facilities north of Sherwood Road being in direct violation of the Williamstown
Township Master Plan.”
Treasurer Fink clarified that the Township Master Plan does not say “must,” it
says “should.” Trustee Wright said that he does not believe the Township should
take a position for or against the bond issue until after it is voted on and
the school board has to come to the Township for approval.
Walt Aven said that school construction projects must be submitted for plan
review and on-site inspections. Supervisor Martin read from the February 2003
Michigan Department of Consumer & Industry Services Bulletin for clarification:
“…the law also provides for inspection by local code enforcement agencies where
the local school board and the local unit of government certify the local
enforcing agency has full-time plan review and inspection staff and are
otherwise qualified to perform these duties in the review and inspection of
school buildings.”
Trustee Wright asked whether just by having the bond proposed and approved by
the voters, does that necessarily mean the Township has to allow development.
Supervisor
Martin said that the School Board must have Township approval for design, but
does not need Township approval to determine whether the project happens or
not.
Citizen LeBlanc said he had read something that suggested that they school
board would also be putting any future additional facilities at the Lockwood
property site as well. Supervisor Martin agreed that this had been stated in
some documents. Treasurer Fink said the schools will have to construct their
own sewer. She added that it will become one of those isolated sewer systems
that the Township is not endorsing.
Citizen Frans Wilbrink said that at one meeting he attended, there was
discussion that a future high school and/or possible 8th/9th grade school could
go on that property.
Trustee Wright asked if the Township Board should meet with the School Board
before the bond issue election takes place. Supervisor Martin said that she had
been contacted by the School Board for dates that they could present to the
Township and she had given them the April meeting dates for both the Township
Board and Planning Commission. Supervisor Martin suggested that this discussion
with surrounding communities should have taken place a year ago.
Citizen Frans Wilbrink said that he felt it would set a bad precedent for the
Board to take a position on the school bond as suggested in Mr. Hoag’s proposed
resolution. Trustee Wright said that he doesn’t believe the Board should take a
position on the School Bond issue until the election takes place.
Citizen LeBlanc asked who would need to approve any proposed sewer system.
Supervisor Martin said that the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality
would be involved and the Ingham County Health Department would also likely be
involved. Treasurer Fink clarified that the Township Board had decided not to
endorse sewer systems because there is a history in the Township of these
systems failing.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Kim, Young – Tabled Zoning Request
Supervisor Martin reported that at the suggestion of the Township attorney she
had written a letter to Mr. Kim’s attorney (Todd Chamberlain) stating that the
Board had tabled the decision on Mr. Kim’s zoning request at the February Board
Meeting. Mr. Chamberlain and Mr. Kim both sent a letter in response. Mr.
Chamberlain asked that the decision be tabled for another month (until the
April Board meeting) at tonight’s Board meeting.
Supervisor Martin stated that her recommendation is that the Board agree to
table the decision for one more month but, after that point, Mr. Kim must have
some type of action in progress regarding the Planning Commission’s decision.
Supervisor Martin added that a new lawyer (Charles Clausen) had contacted the
Township regarding Mr. Kim’s issue and that he had been surprised the Township
had received a letter from Mr. Chamberlain.
Trustee Wright said that he was unclear what Mr. Kim was stating in Item 1 of
his response letter. Treasurer Fink added that Item 4 is unclear as well.
Trustee Wright said that he feels the Board can wait until April for action to
be taken by Mr. Kim and his attorney(s) because the Township does not want the
applicant to feel that he did not have enough time to present his request.
Supervisor Martin stated that Mr. Chamberlain requested the Township forward a
copy of the Board minutes for this meeting to his office to verify that Mr.
Kim’s zoning request had been tabled until the April 2, 2003 Board Meeting.
Building Expansion
Supervisor Martin reported that everything appears to be moving forward
smoothly with regards to the building expansion. She suggested that Red Cedar
Recreation be notified that construction will be taking place so they don’t
schedule activities on the playing fields from April to October. Clerk Hiner
asked if construction would start before the spring soccer season ends and
Supervisor Martin responded that construction was scheduled to begin April 1.
Trustee Wright said that Red Cedar Recreation should be informed that the
playing fields will be unusable for the entire 2003 calendar year.
Supervisor Martin reported that drawings should be completed by March 5th so
that bids can go out. A site walkthrough is scheduled for Wednesday, March 12,
2003. Supervisor Martin said that because we are not required to take the
lowest bid, it is important to make sure that the bid packages include
everything that is required.
Cemetery
Clerk Hiner reported that a cemetery software program had been selected after
extensive research of the programs available for this type of application. The
Township will be purchasing a package that will allow for plot information to
be tied to a mapping system so that customers can easily identify plots that
are available for sale and which plots are sold.
Trustee Wright asked if the Cemetery Board was going to continue. Supervisor
Martin responded that Lisa Hitchcock (City Manager-Williamston) had contacted
her and requested that a new agreement be prepared between the City and the
Township regarding management of the cemeteries. Supervisor Martin said that
Ms. Hitchcock recognized that the Township is doing all the work and she wanted
to make sure that the City’s contribution was fair. Supervisor Martin said that
Conrad Taschner has agreed to be an at-large representative on the Cemetery
Board. She added that the cemetery process is moving forward and it is possible
that the Cemetery Board eventually be made a committee. Trustee Wright
suggested that the City DPW may be able to do some of the maintenance tasks
required at the cemeteries.
Complaints
Ciolek
1054 E. Sherwood
Supervisor Martin reported that Mr. Ciolek has hired a new attorney and has
requested an extension. She said that the case is scheduled to for court
tomorrow (March 5) but her appearance may just be to hear the judge allow the
requested extension.
Stormwater Phase II
Treasurer Fink presented the final information being submitted regarding the
Township Stormwater Phase II application. She said she had spoken with Kurt
Guter and he had recommended the Township contact our representative (Ms.
Sheryl Bartley) from the
Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ) to ask what the downside
would be to the Township submitting a jurisdictional permit. Ms. Bartley said
the downside would primarily affect the MDEQ and not the Township. Treasurer
Fink explained that the Township was originally supposed to file a watershed
permit for stormwater discharge. Part of the Township’s new mandated area is in
the Looking Glass Watershed (we previously were only included in the Red Cedar
Watershed). Treasurer Fink said had also spoken to Norman Kammeraad who is
preparing a similar application for Blendon Township Township. His plan is to
also use the approach of submitting a jurisdictional permit. Applications for
jurisdictional permits were issued on February 26 (12 days before their March
10 due date). Treasurer Fink added that Tetra Tech had resubmitted documents to
the Township with corrected drain information. Treasurer Fink said she believes
the Township can submit a jurisdictional application and still satisfy the
filing requirements adequately. She added that nested jurisdictions include
Ingham County Roads and Ingham County Drains so she is going to list Ingham
County as a potential nested jurisdiction. She will cite the reason as because
they own the roads and the drains.
Treasurer Fink said that the Township is probably going to need to hire a
consultant at some point and recommends Mr. Kammeraad be considered because he
is knowledgeable of this issue and already providing consulting services to
other municipalities. She said that the Township is still technically filing an
empty permit because our application claims that we have no jurisdiction over
anything in or area.
Supervisor Martin said that she has been continually reviewing the stormwater
information that has been sent to the Township office and feels that the
jurisdictional permit process is the best way for the Township to submit.
Treasurer Fink made a motion, supported by Trustee Wright, to transfer all
stormwater documentation made from a watershed permit over to a jurisdictional
permit. Motion passed unanimously.
Citizen LeBlanc asked which two drains were identified in the Looking Glass
Watershed. Treasurer Fink said the two drains were located in Pebblebrook
Subdivision and Pheasant Run Subdivision.
Budget
Supervisor Martin said that the 2003 Fiscal Year Budget had been presented at a
public meeting on February 25, 2003. She noted that a separate budget has been
prepared for operating the cemeteries. Supervisor Martin reminded the Board
that the budget is being approved by cost center. She asked for any other
discussion and added that the budgets for the Township and the Cemeteries
should be addopted separately.
Trustee Zaban made a motion for the Board of Trustees to adopt the proposed
2003
Fiscal Year Budget by cost center. Motion supported by Trustee Wright. No
further discussion. Motion passed unanimously.
Supervisor Martin presented the 2003 Fiscal Year Budget for operation of the
cemeteries.
Trustee Wright made a motion to adopt the 2003 Fiscal Year Cemetery Budget by
cost center as written. Motion supported by Trustee Zaban. Motion passed
unaminously.
Trustee Zaban asked for clarification of what “local contribution” included in
the cemetery budget. Supervisor Martin stated that this budget item included
the operating contribution made by the Township and the City each quarter.
Burn Ordinance Petition
Supervisor Martin reported that Karl Bartels’ revised Burn Ordinance Petition
had been received by mail today. Trustee Wright clarified whether burning of
leaves and grass was permitted by the burn ordinance in Pheasant Run
Subdivision. Supervisor Martin read from the ordinance and verified that it was
permitted.
Trustee Wright said that it is hard to argue with the desires of every single
person who lives in the Pheasant Run Subdivision. He asked what needed to be
done when the houses in the subdivision sell and new people move in if the
Township agrees to grant Mr. Bartel’s request. Clerk Hiner said that if this
request is approved, the issue should be revisited in 2 years. This is the same
schedule for reviewing the entire burn ordinance. Trustee Wright said that the
Township should allow a change in the burn requirements for Pheasant Run
Subdivision to be valid until such time as the burn ordinance is revisited by
the Township. Treasurer Fink asked if the Township wants to accept all the
requests the petitioners have made. Trustee Wright said the Township should
approve the request as long as all burning is done on the community burn pile
as indicated by Mr. Bartels at the February Board Meeting. He clarified that
tonight’s approval would allow for burning in the subdivision’s community burn
pile but does not allow homeowners to deviate from the burn ordinance
individually. Treasurer Fink said that she agrees the Board’s approval should
be limited to allowing burning outside of the burn ordinance in
the designated area only. She added that the community burn pile concept is the
reason why this exception request is agreeable. Supervisor Martin agreed.
Trustee Wright made a motion that the Township approve the Pheasant Run
Subdivision request made in Mr. Karl Bartel’s petition with the following
conditions: 1) individual parcels in Pheasant Run Subdivision will continue to
adhere to the burn ordinance as written, and 2) the subdivision must have a
designated burn area and burning will meet the same requirements as for non-
subdivision lots designated RR. This change is allowed until such time as the
burn ordinance is revised. At that time this request will also be reviewed.
Motion supported by Trustee Zaban. Motion passed unanimously.
REPORTS
NIESA
Trustee Zaban reported that he had attended the February NIESA meeting. He
presented a proposed new draft contract between all participating entities and
NIESA. NIESA is asking that each community re-sign a new two-party contract
with them. Trustee Wright stated that this will be good for the Township.
Trustee Zaban said the draft contract will be distributed to all Board members
and reviewed by the Township attorney before signature on the final version.
Supervisor Martin noted that the February NIESA Minutes indicate that NIESA
currently only has a signed contract with the City of Williamston and
Webberville and that NIESA prefers to have a separate agreement with each
entity.
Trustee Zaban also reported that the fire department is going to go back to
billing for their services directly rather than using a billing company. They
feel they now have the staff to do the billing in-house. Trustee Zaban added
that they hope to see a cost savings and there was also some concern about the
way the billing company was dealing with citizens. Trustee Zaban added that
NIESA recently purchased a used “pumper” from Meridian Township and they plan
to sell one of their older models.
Parks
Supervisor Martin reported that she, Trustee Wright, Brad Krieder (Kamminga &
Roodovets, Inc.), and Les Linsemier (Fitzgerald, Henne & Associates) had met
recently to review the last stage of plans for the park (including a drainage
system that still needs to be added to plan along with a cost estimate). The
general feeling at the meeting was that the estimate for the drainage system
provided by Brad Krieder was reasonable. Supervisor Martin reported that Mr.
Krieder believes they should be finished earlier than anticipated because his
company is now only doing the street portion of the project. Another company
will be doing the streetscape portion of the project because that portion is
funded separately so it had to go out for separate bids. When they are done
with the street work, they will update the entrance to the park. Mr. Krieder
said there will probably not be enough material accumulated to expand the
sledding hill as anticipated. Supervisor Martin said she told Mr. Krieder that
if he accumulated any unwanted clean fill on future projects, he was invited to
bring it to the park for this purpose.
Supervisor Martin said that the Township will make a final site visit/
walkthrough once the work is done. Mr. Krieder said the park drive should have
a nice hard surface road when they are complete because the bonding material
they put down has compacted well under their heavy trucks.
MDOT
Supervisor Martin presented a change to the M-43/52 Corridor Access Management
Plan forwarded to the Township by MDOT. She noted that the ordinance change
will impact the Grand River corridor only. She explained that the required
change can be included in
the Township Ordinance as an overlay (MDOT had prepared the document in this
manner so that it wouldn’t unnecessarily cost the Township time or money to re-
write our ordinance). Supervisor Martin said she will also provide this
information to the Planning Commission at their meeting this month. She added
that the Township is free to adjust
the wording as necessary. Trustee Wright observed that it appears a lot of the
work has already been done by MDOT and the document should not need much
adjusting.
Library
Supervisor Martin presented the Board minutes from January 22, 2003 meeting of
the Williamston Community Library Foundation. She added that the mayor of
Williamston has prepared a proposal for the library to rebuild at its current
location. He supported his proposal by saying that since the property is
located in the center of the city, an adequate sized building could be
constructed corner to corner on the lot. The mayor’s proposal suggests that
they construct a building in whatever configuration they choose. There is
already available parking space. He also proposes that the City will lease the
land to the library and they can put a building on it for $1 for 99 years. The
mayor has stated that he doesn’t want to see the Library Foundation spend money
for property when the existing site could be used in a satisfactory way.
Supervisor Martin said that if Williamstown Township is interested in
participating in this project financially, the Board should ask representatives
from the library to address Board members at an upcoming workshop. Trustee
Wright said that it is important for the Township Board to let its
representatives on the Library Foundation Board understand what the Township
Board’s expectations are. Trustee Zaban said he has attended several library
meetings and it is clear that they haven’t determined how they are going to
raise the money for property or construction. Clerk Hiner said she felt reusing
the existing site is a great idea. Supervisor Martin summarized that this
library issue should be addressed at a Board Workshop. She added that Capitol
Area District Library (CADL) has agreed to pay for the additional staffing
required by a two story building.
Keep Williamston Beautiful
Supervisor Martin presented a letter submitted by Keep Williamston Beautiful
Committee. This committee has formed to gather funds and provide money for
matching
grants to beautify the Williamston area. Beautification projects would not be
funded from taxpayer money. The creation of this committee was spearheaded by
Ann
O’Connor, Joann Bumbalo and Bev O’Malia. They are asking for a Township
representative to attend their meetings. The Township Supervisor is also
invited (with no voting rights). Supervisor Martin reported that Citizen Howard
Dahlstrom has volunteered to serve on the committee as a Township
representative. Supervisor Martin said she plans to also contact a couple other
people in the Township that may also be interested in participating. Members of
the Board agreed with this plan.
OTHER
Supervisor Martin called for any other business from the Board or the public.
None was presented.
Adjournment
Trustee Zaban made a motion to adjourn supported by Trustee Wright. Motion
passed unanimously. Meeting adjourned at 9:50 p.m.
_________________________________      ______________________________
Susan L. Hiner               Lori A. Pincumbe
Clerk                     Recording Secretary
April 1, 2003
PRESENT: Supervisor Mickey Martin, Treasurer Nancy Fink, Clerk Susan Hiner,
Trustee Steve Zaban, Trustee Martin Wright, Building Inspector Walter Aven,
Township Attorney Vincent Spagnoulo and Recording Secretary Lori Pincumbe.
ABSENT: None
CALL TO ORDER
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order at 7:35 p.m. She provided
an overview of the meeting agenda and made a request for changes or additions.
Supervisor Martin added the topics “Planning Commission Draft Letter to
Property Owners with Red Cedar River Frontage” and “Letter from Citizen Mary
DeWeese” to New Business. No other changes were made.
 PLEDGE
CONSENT AGENDA
Supervisor Martin reviewed the items included in the consent agenda packet. No
corrections were identified. Trustee Wright moved to approve the Consent
Agenda. Motion supported by Clerk Hiner. Motion passed unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin invited comments from the public for any non-agenda items. No
comments were offered. Supervisor Martin welcomed Ryan McGuire to tonight’s
meeting. Ryan has attended to observe how local government works for his 5th
grade benchmark project at Explorer Elementary.
NEW BUSINESS
Complaints-Hofmann 4270 Beeman Road
Supervisor Martin explained that the process for dealing with citizen
complaints is that: 1) a complaint is made to the Township office, 2) the
complaint is investigated, 3) the Township Supervisor writes a letter to the
person in violation and 4) the issue is then brought to the Township Board if
further action is necessary.
 
Supervisor Martin stated that a complaint has been made against the owner of
4270 Beeman Rd. (Mr. Herb Hofmann) by a neighbor at 4300 Beeman Rd. (Mr. Carl
Franks ) about activity not permitted in the zoning ordinance. The complaint
was investigated and Mr. Hofmann was sent a letter (dated 3/25/03) regarding
the zoning violations. Supervisor Martin read the letter into the minutes which
specifically identified two (2) violations: 1) parking of commercial vehicles
on the property (Section 4.01, subsection E of the Zoning Ordinance states that
“the parking of no more than one (1) commercial vehicle with a rated capacity
of over one (1) ton may be permitted on a residential parcel) and 2) noise
disturbance (Section 9.02, subsection A.2, of the Zoning Ordinance states that
“all such activity shall be prohibited between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. Monday through Saturday or any time on Sunday or holidays in such a manner
as to cause a noise disturbance across a residential district boundary”).
 
Supervisor Martin reported that Mr. Hofmann responded to the Township’s 3/25/03
letter in writing and his letter was received at the Township office on Monday,
March 31, 2003. Supervisor Martin summarized the response letter in which he
states that the equipment is not commercial because it is not licensed to drive
on a public thoroughfare and has not been used for any commercial endeavor. He
also states that he only used the equipment after 8:00 p.m. one time and that
he is using the equipment for landscaping his own property. His letter stated
there is other equipment on the property owned by Mr. Jorgenson which will be
removed by April 7. Supervisor Martin said that Constable Dahlstrom has visited
the property and she asked that he report his observations.
 
Constable Dahlstrom stated that he had visited the property on Sunday, March 30
at 3:20 p.m.. He reported that there was equipment at the site but it was not
running at that time. Supervisor Martin requested any questions from the Board.
There were no questions at this time.
 
Supervisor Martin invited Mr. Hofmann to present his position to the Board. Mr.
Hofmann introduced himself and stated that there were three (3) things he
wanted to address to the Board-the accusation that he was running a business
from his home, his equipment and the commercial use of his equipment, and the
noise:
 
1)   Mr. Hofmann stated that he is not running a business from his home. He
said he owns (and stores on his property) a case loader, a 5 yard dump truck,
and a tree chipper/truck combination. He said that the Jorgensen family owns
the bulldozer, grader and trencher currently on his property. The other
equipment Constable Dahlstrom recorded on the property was a Jorgensen truck
(used to move the grader and the dozer) that has now been removed. Mr. Hofmann
said that a friend was storing a plow, salt spreader and sprayer in his pole
barn (which will be gone next week). Mr. Hofmann stated that the equipment he
owns is used for the sole purpose of landscaping his 15 acre property and has
never been used commercially and is not plated for street use. He stated that
he believes he is truly improving his property and invited the Board members to
visit anytime to see what he is doing. He introduced Tom Smith, President of
Grass Roots Landscaping, who prepared his landscaping site plan.
 
2)   Mr. Hofmann said that he had reviewed the Zoning Ordinance book regarding
the definition of “commercial vehicle.” It reads “…all motor vehicles used for
transportation of passengers for hire or constructed or used for transportation
of goods, wares or merchandise and/or all motor vehicles designed and used for
drawing other vehicles and not so constructed for carrying any load thereon…”
 
3)   Mr. Hofmann said that he believes that this definition states that a
commercial vehicle is determined based on use and not on size. He said that
because his equipment is being used for the sole purpose of landscaping his own
property, it is not, by definition, considered commercial equipment. He said he
needs the case loader to build a retaining wall. He needs the dozer and grader
to reseed his back yard. He said that when his backyard reseeding is complete,
the dozer and grader will be gone. He will be left with his loader, dump truck
and chipper which he needs to renovate his yard.
 
3)   In terms of the noise, Mr. Hoffman said that when he moved in from Okemos
last year and was unaware of the ordinance and that he was using the equipment
after an 8:00 p.m. curfew. After Inspector Aven visited his property last year
to notify him of the ordinance, he has been diligent in not using the equipment
after that time.
 
Supervisor Martin asked Inspector Aven for his comments. Mr. Aven said that his
issue with work being done on the property pertains to the grading which is now
in compliance but not complete. Mr. Hofmann said that he is following all the
rules but when an extensive landscape project like he is doing is in progress,
there will be a season where it doesn’t look good. Mr. Aven reminded Mr.
Hofmann that black top debris cannot be buried in the back pond. Mr. Hofmann
said that it will not.
 
Trustee Zaban asked Mr. Hofmann what his proposed timeline was to complete the
entire project. Mr. Hofmann asked Tom Smith (Grass Roots Landscaping-2133
University Park Drive, Suite 700, Okemos, MI) to respond on his behalf.
 
Mr. Smith said he has been advising Mr. Hofmann on the landscape plan for his
property since before it was purchased. The site had been surveyed and he had
prepared the landscape plan for the soil erosion permit that is now in place.
Mr. Smith said that Mr. Hofmann is doing the site work himself but Grass Roots
continues to advise him and provide design work as needed. Mr. Smith said that
he believes the majority of this first phase of site work will be done by the
end of this season. He clarified that this is Mr. Hofmann’s residence and he is
doing the work himself. He said landscaping projects are often ongoing. He
expects the major site work to be done this season but added that Mr. Hofmann
will continue to make ongoing improvements. Mr. Zaban asked if the bulldozer,
grader and trencher would be removed by the end of this season. Mr. Hofmann
said that they would be. He said the trencher will be gone within a month once
the rewiring from the house to the pole barn is complete. The grader and dozer
are there to spread the existing soil and once done, they will be gone. The
loader, chipper and dump truck will remain. Mr. Hofmann said the equipment he
has will allow him to complete the project much more quickly. Mr. Hofmann said
90% of the equipment would be gone by the end of the week. What remains will be
screened by arborvitae.
Supervisor Martin said that Mr. Hofmann can go to the Planning Commission and
request permission to have extra equipment on his property, as long as it is
screened properly and used within ordinance specified times. She added that any
extra commercial vehicles must be screened from the neighbors. She said that
there are remedies to handle situations like this. Since there is a complaint,
the Township must act on the complaint. Mr. Hofmann re-stated that he does not
believe his equipment meets the ordinance definition of commercial equipment.
Supervisor Martin read the definition of “commercial equipment” from the body
of the ordinance: “... equipment rated over one (1) ton.” She said she
understands Mr. Hofmann’s position and that this is a question that needs to be
discussed with the Township’s planning consultant. She said the Board will
consider this point. She said the Township’s planning consultant has already
stated he believes the dump truck meets the definition. Mr. Hofmann said that
his equipment does not meet the definition on page 1/1-9. Treasurer Fink said
that the definition wording in the ordinance is very broad and would include
equipment that moves goods, wares and merchandise whether it is street-licensed
or not. Mr. Hofmann said that goods, wares and merchandise refer to commerce.
 
Supervisor Martin said tonight’s discussion wasn’t a trial but an opportunity
for the Board to hear both sides of the issue first hand. She said that, after
that, she will review the information with legal council and then bring a
recommendation for remedy back to the Board. Supervisor Martin invited Mr. Carl
Franks to present his position.
 
Mr. Franks introduced himself and stated that he lives directly north of Mr.
Hofmann at 4300 Beeman Road. Mr. Franks said that Mr. Hofmann started doing all
this work last year without any permits. He said the main reason they
originally were upset is because he was working until 11:00 p.m. last year and
that he began cutting into their property by 20 feet. Mr. Hofmann had not done
any property survey. Mr. Franks said that even after Mr. Hofmann got the 3/25/
03 letter from the Township, he has shown no respect for the requirements. He
said that this past Sunday, Mr. Hoffman was using the loader and that last
Sunday he was using a portable welder all day long. Mr. Franks said they did
not have one minute of peace last year. Mr. Franks said they don’t care what he
does as long as he does it within the code and, he stated, “we are tired of
looking at his junk.”
 
Supervisor Martin said that the Board has received letters from both parties,
they have listened to both parties speak this evening, and if there is no
additional information, she will next meet with council to decide the best way
to solve this complaint. She said she is confident that a solution can be
found.
 
Constable Dahlstrom asked if the dozer, grader, and trenching equipment could
be stored somewhere else until it is needed. Mr. Hofmann said it would be
needed as soon as weather permits so this would not be practical.
 
Mr. Franks stated that last weekend Mr. Hoffman had a friend in his barn using
a portable welder. He added that even after the landscape construction is done,
there is going to be a noise problem if he is allowed to continue to let people
work in his barn in this way and asked if it was legal for him to do so.
Supervisor Martin said she would address this question with legal council.
 
Mr. Hofmann responded that the Zoning Ordinance specifies a 55 decibal
threshold that he cannot exceed. Mr. Hofmann said he doesn’t want to break any
laws but if he has to shut down on Sundays, the job will take twice as long to
complete because he works full time Monday through Friday.
 
Supervisor Martin summarized that the Board has now heard all the testimony and
she will be going over it all with the attorney so that the Board can make a
determination. She said the Township wants to ensure the Zoning Ordinance is
being complied with and it sounded like Mr. Hofmann is willing to work within
the ordinance. She added that she appreciates all of the information and the
letters and photos from each party.
 
Mr. Hofmann said he had not been made aware of this meeting. Supervisor Martin
said it was customary for citizens on the agenda to receive a copy of the
agenda prior to the meeting providing there is adequate time. She responded
that she had not received Mr. Hoffman’s response letter until Monday, March 31.
If it had not been received, she would have simply informed the Board at
tonight’s meeting that a complaint had been made and that the residents
involved had 10 days to respond. Because Mr. Hoffman’s letter arrived prior to
the meeting, the topic was added to the agenda for discussion at tonight’s
meeting to avoid delay.
 
Other Complaints
Constable Dahlstrom reported there was a fire run to 3824 Beeman Road on March
18 due to a burn pile on a vacant lot around the golf course. The scene was
cleared but there were several more citizen phone calls about burning on the
site later that day. Constable Dahlstrom said that Mr. Dave Mahaney had a burn
permit for his house (3784 Beeman Road) but was buring illegally at the wrong
location (3824 Beeman Road). Constable Dahlstrom said he notified Mr. Mahaney
in person at the Brookshire that the fire needed to be put out. Mr. Mahaney
agreed that he was in violation. Constable Dahlstrom said that at 7:30 p.m. the
fire was still burning so the fire department was dispatched. Mr. Mahaney will
receive a $500 bill from the fire department and have his burn permit rights
revoked for six (6) months.
 
Constable Dahlstrom reported that he had visited Mr. Nielson on East Grand
River. He is selling used cars (there were a total of nine (9) cars on the
property) and his property is zoned RE. Constable Dahlstrom said this has been
an ongoing problem that he will continue to monitor.
 
Constable Dahlstrom reported that he was contacted by Supervisor Martin on 3/
29/03 to check burning at the Theis property. He resaid that Mr. Theis is
burning brush accumulated from clearing 25-30 acres of his property. Mr.
Dahlstrom asked him to keep the brush piles knocked down. Constable Dahlstrom
said there is a lot of burning going on in the area right now and that it is
much drier than people might think. He reported that the fire department
responded to two (2) brush fires earlier tonight.
 
Supervisor Martin asked Inspector Aven if Mr. Theis needed any permits for
cutting in a wetlands area. Mr. Aven said when he visited the site Mr. Theis
was cutting trees, but not in the wetlands area. Constable Dahlstrom said that
he is familiar with wetlands located adjacent to that property and he suspects
the Theis property is also wetland area. Inspector Aven commented that he is
not a wetlands consultant. Supervisor Martin asked the Board if they felt that
it was appropriate to have a wetlands consultant determine the status of this
property since the Township has a such a consultant now and there is a wetlands
ordinance in place. Trustee Wright said that since we have a wetlands
consultant, he should be consulted.
 
Trustee Zaban asked Constable Dahlstrom if Mr. Mahaney was done burning.
Supervisor Martin said that once a burn ordinance violation occurs, the owner
is prohibited from burning for 6 months. She clarified that Mr. Mahaney was
burning on a 100 ft. lot located between two (2) houses. Treasurer Fink added
that a burn pile has to be more than 100ft. from neighboring property lines.
 
Mr. Carl Franks asked, if there is a violation on a Sunday and Mr. Dahlstrom is
not available, what alternative does a citizen have for filing a report so that
someone can respond while the violation is occurring. Treasurer Fink said he
could call the Sheriff’s office. Attorney Spagnoulo said Mr. Franks could also
document the violation himself.
 
Text Amendment-PC Recommendation
Planning Commissioner Chair Dan Kraft stated that Mr. Tom Van Camp had
submitted an application for a text amendment to the zoning ordinance to allow
him to have horse competitions without spectators at his arena. The Township
planner had prepared a draft text change and there was a public hearing in
February with no public opposition to the idea. There are four (4) other riding
arenas in the Township that will be affected by this change. Mr. Kraft stated
that the Planning Commission’s recommendation to the Board is that the draft
text amendment be adopted with one change to section G8, which would require
that existing riding arenas bring a permit application to the Township Hall to
be considered by the Township Board.
 
Supervisor Martin said that it appeared that this text change does not apply to
Ag-Commercial property. Mr. Kraft said it may not have been included because
this may already be a permitted use in the Ag-Commercial district. This text
change would now make this use possible by a special use permit for new riding
arenas that ask to hold competitions. When a new riding arena brings a site
plan, they can now request this special use. Supervisor Martin said there are
two (2) other riding arenas in the Township that are located in Ag-Commercial
zones.
 
Citizen Leblanc asked what this text change allows that is different from
before. Chairman Kraft said that this text change allows riding arenas located
next to properties zoned R1, R1-S, RR, RE, or Ag-SF District to use their
arenas for a wider use. The arenas can now hold competitions as long as there
are no paying spectators. Supervisor Martin added that the text change gives
the riding arenas a little more flexibility in the use of their arenas beyond
personal use.
 
Supervisor Martin asked for questions from the Board. Supervisor Martin added
that she had visited Mr. Van Camp’s property while one of these events was
taking place. She said that she was considered a participant by state law
because she was a non-paying spectator. Supervisor Martin said that she also
visited the site three (3) times through out the day to observe the traffic
flow, etc… and found the activity to be very acceptable. She said she couldn’t
tell the event was taking place until she entered the barn. Supervisor Martin
said she plans to contact the Ingham County Road Commission about placing a
“Slow Moving Vehicle” sign at this location.
 
Chairman Kraft summarized that the “private use” paragraph regarding this issue
has been struck from the ordinance and a “permitted use” has now been added
with limitations.
Trustee Wright made a motion to approve the text changes to the zoning
ordinance regarding riding arenas as outlined in the McKenna letter dated March
26, 2003. Motion supported by Treasurer Fink. Motion passed unanimously.
Mr. Van Camp asked what procedure he needed to follow next to receive a permit.
Supervisor Martin stated that he needs to submit a letter of request and the
Board will make its approval decision. Mr. Van Camp thanked the Board, the
Planning Commission, and McKenna Associates for their time and efforts toward
making this change possible.
Cemetery Audit Report
Supervisor Martin stated that the Cemetery Audit Report prepared by Abraham &
Gaffney had been distributed to Board members for review. She summarized their
internal control recommendations:
Recommendation #1: A budget should be approved.
Supervisor Martin reported that this was done at the March Board Meeting.
Recommendation #2: A new agreement should be made with the City of Williamston
Supervisor Martin reported she has contacted Lisa Hitchcock at the City and
they would like a new agreement as well. Arrangements are being made to meet.
Recommendation #3: The Township should prepare an investment policy.
Supervisor Martin reported that the Township has an investment policy in place
and it can be extended to incorporate Cemetery investments as well. Treasurer
Fink agreed that this could be done.
Recommendation #4: The Cemetery needs to have a credit card policy.
Supervisor Martin said that this policy actually needs to be prepared for both
the Cemetery and the Township. A credit card has historically been used for
cemetery purchases and the Township has a credit card with Home Depot.
Recommendation #5: Dual signature checks should be used.
Supervisor Martin reported that dual signature checks are now being used for
Cemetery payables (effective 4/1/03 with the new fiscal year).
Recommendation #6: Investments need to be moved to proper holdings
Supervisor Martin reported that the Township is aware that Cemetery investment
funds are not currently in correct places but Treasurer Fink will transfer them
cautiously and as appropriate to avoid incurring any substantial losses given
the current stock market situation.
 
Recommendation #7: All Certificates of Deposit need to be held by the Township.
Supervisor Martin reported that all CDs have been dissolved or are now in the
control of the Township (some issues were still unresolved at the time of the
audit).
Trustee Wright summarized that it appears that everything cited has been taken
care of by the Township with the exception of developing a credit card policy
which can now be done.
Trustee Wright made a motion to accept the Cemetery audit report prepared by
Abraham & Gaffney. Motion supported by Trustee Zaban. Motion passed
unanimously.
Treasurer Fink asked if the issues raised in the audit report about the 1099
reports pertains to last year only, or do they need to be reviewed further back
in time. Supervisor Martin said they only pertain to last year. Citizen LeBlanc
asked who would be providing the oversight to ensure that the audit
recommendations are put into place. Supervisor Martin responded that the
Township Board would perform this oversight. Treasurer Fink added that it is
the Board’s responsibility since the Township owns the cemeteries. Supervisor
Martin added that the Township will comply with each of the auditor’s
recommendations.
Fee Schedule
Supervisor Martin presented the Township Fee Schedule and said that it needed
to be modified to include “wetlands permit” for commercial and residential
properties. She asked the Board to consider whether changes can be made to the
fee schedule administratively as necessary, with a report to the Board at the
next meeting. Currently Board approval is required before any modifications can
be made. She added that changes are necessary occasionally. For instance, the
telecommunications fee should also be removed because of a recent change in the
state law.
 
Trustee Wright made a motion to amend the fee schedule to include the wetlands
permit fees for commercial and residential properties and to strike the
telecommunications fee. Motion supported by Clerk Hiner. Motion passed
unanimously.
Trustee Wright made a motion to allow the Township Supervisor or the Clerk or
the Treasurer to amend the fee schedule administratively as necessary with
follow-up report to the Township Board at the next regularly scheduled Board
meeting. Motion supported by Clerk Hiner. Motion passed unanimously.
DeWeese Reimbursement
Supervisor Martin explained that Paul and Mary DeWeese had applied for a lot
split last year but now have decided to sell the property. Mrs. DeWeese has
written the letter included in the Board packet to request a refund of the $225
fee. Trustee Wright asked if there was any cost incurred by the Township (not
including administrative costs). Supervisor Martin said there had been a lot of
problems with the split. The Drain Commissioner had visited the site on one
occasion and Supervisor Martin had walked the property with the City and the
Drain Commissioner on another. There was also time spent for meetings, several
phone calls, and drain commission approval. Supervisor Martin said that as an
elected official there are certain things she is required to do. She doesn’t
know whether the additional steps that have been taken because this property
had some difficulties qualify as incurred cost. Supervisor Martin added that
there may have been a fee for Chris Doozan (McKenna Associates) to review some
portion of the request. Trustee Wright said that he definitely thinks this cost
should be deducted.
Attorney Spagnoulo asked what percent complete the process was. Supervisor
Martin said that the process had been going on for 6-8 months and she estimated
it was about 75% complete. Supervisor Martin said she agrees that the Township
should deduct any consultant fees and any secretarial fees. The project went as
far as it could go within the ordinance until the drainage issue stopped the
process. Attorney Spagnoulo said the permitees might have made a decision not
to spend the money to go any further. Trustee Wright said that it appears to
him that the applicant has spent the money they paid for the application fee.
Attorney Spagnoulo said that the Township should consider the precedent that
will be set for returning a permit fee for a process so near completion. From a
precedent standpoint, if you give someone a break on a permit, they go through
the 95% through the process and, for whatever reason, they don’t want to go
further you now have a precedent set for returning fees. Trustee Wright stated
that he doesn’t believe the DeWeese’s are entitled to a refund of any of the
fee because it has been legitimately spent. Attorney Spagnoulo said this is
definitely a subjective decision. If the applicant comes back on Day Two,
that’s a different issue. After 8 months of work, you need to be concerned
about precedence. Trustee Zaban said he would just refund the fee after
reducing it by the amount charged by McKenna. Supervisor Martin said she would
investigate this cost and report back to the Board.
Red Cedar Draft Letter Regarding River Trail
Supervisor Martin said she had a concern about the April 22 date stated in the
letter prepared by Chairman Kraft for a Red Cedar River Trail Meeting because
the building might be under construction. Tim Howell concurred. He added that
the contractor will start approx. April 12th and they could be tearing things
up in the building by April 22nd.
Supervisor Martin said she thinks the letter is very appropriate to get
discussion started. Treasurer Fink said she thinks there is going to be a riot.
Supervisor Martin said the letter might need to include a statement that
constructing a river trail is a long-term goal. Treasurer Fink said it would be
better to consider looking at a greenway overlay to the master plan in general
and expand it to more than the river. There is a wildlife corridor that could
be considered. She said the letter could state something like “this is an idea
that the Township is considering as properties convert and will be used as a
guide for what the Township would like to see.” She said the letter doesn’t
really state what outcome is expected. Chairman Kraft said the Planning
Commission is interested in knowing where the property owners’ interest or
opposition lies-whether there is violent opposition or whether the idea will be
accepted. Treasurer Fink asked Citizen Katie Lo her opinion, since she is a
property owner on the river. how she feels. She responded that she doesn’t like
the idea and her husband would be very opposed. Supervisor Martin said that
feedback would be good for the Planning Commission to hear. If everyone is
violently opposed, then you know right up front. Trustee Wright said that he
owns riverfront property and he likes the idea.
Chairman Kraft said that the last time they looked at the concept, the Planning
Commission determined that a path could be constructed from the Brookshire to
the park at Meridian Road by crossing nine (9) properties and by jumping the
river two (2) times. Supervisor Martin said that Dwight Camp had wanted to
preserve the riverfront on his property but died unexpectedly before
arrangements had been made.
Supervisor Martin asked the Board whether they felt it was acceptable for the
letter to go out and added that the meeting might be better scheduled at a
different time or place. Treasurer Fink said they should certainly expect some
feedback.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Kim, Young – Tabled Zoning Request
Supervisor Martin said that Mr. Kim has come in and made application to the
Planning Commission for a text amendment. The application is lengthy.
Supervisor Martin told Mr. Kraft that Mr. Kim will be calling for a public
hearing at the next Planning Commission meeting (in April) which means a public
hearing will be held in May, the Commission will deliberate in June and send
their recommendations to the Board at the July meeting. Attorney Spagnoulo
asked how long the Board is willing to table the issue. Supervisor Martin said
she is willing to table the issue until the Planning Commission brings their
recommendation to the Board. Attorney Spagnoulo recommended tabling it to allow
the process to go all the way through to the end. He said that if the Board
denies the request, there are still some options for appeal.
Trustee Zaban made a motion to continue to table the Young Kim zoning request
until one month past the completion of the text amendment request by Mr. Kim.
Motion supported by Trustee Wright. Motion passed unanimously.
Building Expansion-Contractor Selection
Supervisor Martin reported that the Planning Commission had reviewed the site
plan at their last meeting and had made some recommendations. Chairman Dan
Kraft stated that the Commission had made two (2) minor suggestions: 1) the
lighting must comply with the foot-candle limitations in the Township
ordinance, and 2) the size of the sign will require a variance due to the size
of the Township site. The information regarding the foot-candles of the
lighting was provided by Tim Howell and sent to McKenna for review. The site
plan has been changed accordingly. Mr. Howell said that the sign, as designed,
is 30 or 32 feet. The ordinance states a maximum of 18 feet. Supervisor Martin
said that she and Clerk Hiner had measured the current sign and determined it
would be difficult to read any sign with a letter size of less than 5” (the
size allowed by an 18 ft. sign size). Supervisor Martin said she recommends the
Township request a variance for the office sign size and she further recommends
that the next time the ordinance is reviewed, the sign requirements be changed.
She added they are not practical as they exist.
Trustee Wright made a motion that the Board accept the Planning Commission’s
recommendations for approval of the site plan with a condition that a variance
be sought and received to increase the size of a non-lit sign to greater than
the 18 foot ordinance requirement. Clerk Hiner supported the motion. Motion
passed unanimously.
Tim Howell (Architect-Swanson Design Studios) presented the results from the
general contractor selection process. He stated that the Township hired Swanson
Design Studio as architects for the remodel project. Swanson had prepared
drawings and specs. Eleven (11) general contractors requested bids. Swanson
received bids on March 27th from eleven (11) general contractors. Mr. Howell
and members of the Township Board reviewed bids on that same day. The two firms
with lowest bids were ERA Companies and R.L. White Development Corporation.
Both companies met with Mr. Howell and Township representatives on March 31st.
After those discussions, Mr. Howell recommended that ERA Companies out of Flint
be awarded the contract. He said that in addition to being the low bidder they
are well qualified and have successfully completed similar projects. Treasurer
Fink asked if there were any local bidders. Mr. Howell said that there were,
including Louts, K&D, GJ Ross and several Lansing bidders. All of their bids
were higher.
Supervisor Martin added that both finalists appeared to be capable of doing a
very good job and, based on that, the lowest bid seemed like the best choice.
Trustee Wright made a motion for the Township Board to award the general
contract for the Township office expansion and remodel to ERA Companies based
on the bid received on March 27, 2003 subject to the Township attorney’s review
of the proposed contract. Clerk Hiner supported the motion. No further
discussion. Motion passed unanimously.
Mr. Howell said that since the Board had approved the decision, he would send
ERA Companies a letter of intent and let them know a contract is on the way.
Mr. Howell will also send a copy of the contract to the Township for signature
and to Attorney Spagnoulo for review.
Trustee Zaban stated that the bid came in considerably less than expected. The
Township had budgeted $581,000. ERA Companies bid came in at $381,500. It was a
very competitive bid and the Township is very happy. Mr. Howell said that the
R.L. White bid was very close so he is comfortable that the price is realistic.
Supervisor Martin said that ERA Companies also had the shortest timeline and
estimated completion in 16 weeks. Mr. Howell said he will talk to the
contractor now and then meet with the contractor again at a pre-construction
meeting in approximately one (1) week (this will give the contractor time to
put a schedule together and give Attorney Spagnoulo time to review the
contract). Citizen Katie Lo asked if the carpeting had been selected.
Supervisor Martin said that it had and everything will be a pleasant neutral
color.
Complaints
Ciolek
1054 E. Sherwood
Supervisor Martin reported that the legal process regarding this complaint is
still moving forward. Pending litigation will be discussed during tonight’s
closed session.
Hideaway Woods Site Plan
Planning Commission Chair Dan Kraft reported that the Planning Commission felt
that a T-turnaround was a better recommendation for this site plan than a cul-
de-sac. The benefit to the Township for a cul-de-sac was outweighed by the
impact on the developer. Both the developer and the Road Commission wants a T-
turnaround. Eventually this area may become a pass-thru area. Therefore, the
Planning Commission recommends a T-turnaround instead of redesigning the plan
to include a cul-de-sac.
Trustee Wright made a motion to accept the Planning Commission’s recommendation
for a T-turnaround in place of a cul-de-sac for the Hideaway Woods site plan.
Motion supported by Trustee Zaban. Motion passed unanimously.
Supervisor Martin asked Chairman Kraft if there were any other issues the
Planning Commission wanted to present. Mr. Kraft said that Mr. Rutgar Hoag had
brought his concerns about the proposed school bond and its impact on the
Township Master Plan to the Planning Commission at their February meeting. His
primary concern is that building of schools on the proposed site will bring
high-density development into an area contrary to the Township Master Plan. Mr.
Kraft asked if he should prepare a letter as Chairman of the Planning
Commission to present at the meeting being held with the Township Board and the
School Board next Wednesday night. Attorney Spagnoulo asked Mr. Kraft if the
letter would represent his personal opinion or the consensus of the Planning
Commission. Mr. Kraft responded that it would be presented as the consensus of
the Planning Commission. Attorney Spagnoulo said a letter would be fine as long
as it is the opinion of the Planning Commission as a whole. The Board agreed
that it would acceptable to present a letter at that meeting. Supervisor Martin
said the letter could be addressed to the School Board.
REPORTS
NIESA
Supervisor Martin stated that NIESA has sent a modified contract for the
Township to review. She added that she had met with the Mayor of Williamston
and the Supervisor of Wheatfield Township recently and Mayor Zichi has asked
that all communities involved discuss the contract together at the Annual Joint
Meeting in May. They have asked that everyone have a copy of the original
articles of incorporation with them at that meeting and to review them for
familiarity beforehand. That way discussion can take place and questions asked
during that meeting. Supervisor Martin added that a copy of the modified
contract would also be forwarded to Attorney Spagnoulo for review before any
document is signed by the Township. Citizen Katie Lo asked what changes were
included in the revised contract. Supervisor Martin said that there is
currently a millage in place, to fund NIESA but now NIESA wants to impose an
annual charge for any expenses that go beyond the millage funds. There will be
a public meeting before any changes are accepted but the topic will be
discussed at this joint meeting (which takes place annually as a result of the
425 annexation agreement). This year the meeting will be held at Wheatfield
Township. Supervisor Martin will provide the date as soon as she knows it.
Trustee Zaban said that the minutes for the monthly NIESA meetings are now
available for review. He added that the Fire Board spends their money
carefully. He reported that a letter appeared in the Enterprise from a woman
who lives in the City who was put on hold by a 911 operator while her son was
choking. She was told there were only three 911 operators in the Lansing area.
Trustee Zaban said there are a few people in the area that call 911 for things
like needing help getting up after a fall because they are so heavy. He said
NIESA is getting a lot of those kinds of calls and there is a question about
who is going to pay for these calls. Supervisor Martin said that NIESA
originally went to a millage so that the Township residents wouldn’t have to be
charged twice. Now NIESA is charging for calls even though taxpayers have
already paid their portion for service. Supervisor Martin said that this would
be a discussion item with other supervisors at the Annual Joint Meeting.
Parks
Treasurer Fink reported that Betty Challis contacted her to say that the
contractors wanted to do the prairie burn on Sunday. Notifications had not been
sent out but the proper weather window is a very predominant factor in a
controlled burn. Treasurer Fink said that she got the proper burn permit issued
through the Township and contacted 911 and the Fire Department. Treasurer Fink
said that someone must have called the fire department directly because the
fire department responded to the call even though 911 had been notified. She
said that the contractors were extremely professional. She added she thinks
this might have been the largest prescribed burn the contractors had ever
actually conducted (the parcel size is 50 acres). Treasurer Fink said she
thinks the contractor might have wanted to conduct the burn without a big
audience for crowd control purposes. She said the fire burned to the middle and
then burned out and it was an amazing process. Trustee Zaban asked what the
prairie burn cost. Supervisor Martin said it cost $5600. Dan Kraft asked what
they used for fuel. Treasurer Fink said the contractors used kerosene. She
added that the snow the next morning might have eliminated the smoke. During
the burn, the smoke was being lifted which helped keep its effect on
surrounding properties minimized.
MDOT
Supervisor Martin reported she is still working with MDOT on the access
management program. Chairman Kraft said the topic was discussed at last week’s
special meeting. He will present their recommendations at the May Board meeting
since tonight’s agenda is very long.
Library
Supervisor Martin reported that she had met with the Friends of the Library
Committee today. She reported that the Foundation feels like there are opposing
factions and the Friends and the City are also feeling frustration. Everyone
involved definitely wants to see some type of library built. Supervisor Martin
said she thinks everyone will keep meeting and something will be worked out.
The City position is that they have City property that they want to give to the
Foundation so money can be better spent on bricks and mortar. They will give
the property to CADL for $1 for 99 years. The Mayor is also concerned with
keeping his downtown alive. She said the Friends of the Library also want to
have the library in a central downtown location for the sake of the businesses
and the seniors. The Foundation has several sites they are considering.
Supervisor Martin said that she thinks everyone needs to be very vocal about
their opinion to keep the site downtown so that the Foundation will select the
correct site.
Trustee Zaban reported that at one meeting he attended the Foundation said that
if the existing building is torn down and replaced, they will have to find an
alternate location or close the library temporarily. They felt they would lose
their clientele if this occurred. Trustee Zaban said he doesn’t believe that
this would truly be an issue because people will certainly come back.
Attorney Spagnoulo stated that he also represents CADL and suggested they be
contacted for advice about the impact of closing the library for a period of
time.
Katie Lo asked who the Friends of the Library were and what role the Library
Foundation plays. Supervisor Martin said that the Library Foundation is a non-
profit foundation that was set up to raise funds for a new library. Ed Noonan
approached the Township about setting up the Library Foundation. Treasurer Fink
said a foundation was necessary to hold any money raised. Supervisor Martin
said there is going to have to be some compromise between all the parties.
Supervisor Martin said the City has brought up a couple of options including
using the whole site (including City Hall) for a 2-story building with the City
offices located on a second level.
City of Williamston
Supervisor Martin stated that she would notify everyone of the date for the
Annual Joint Meeting as soon as possible.
Other
Supervisor Martin reported that there is someone seriously looking at building
apartments in the Township. Chairman Kraft said he would like to be on the
docket for next month to present several things to the Board that are being
discussed at the Planning Commission.
Supervisor Martin reported that the Crossroads Community Church is holding
their open house on Sunday, April 6 at 10 a.m. Inspector Aven said they do not
have an occupancy permit and had quite a bit more work to do when he last
visited. He will contact them immediately.
Closed Session/Letter from Township Attorney
Trustee Wright made a motion to go into closed session. Motion supported by
Trustee Zaban.
Supervisor Martin stated that Chairman Kraft would be attending the closed
session. Citizen Frans Wilbrink asked what topic was going to be discussed.
Supervisor Martin stated it would be a discussion of private communication
regarding pending litigation. Mr. Wilbrink also stated that John Powell said
his father would probably be coming home on Friday. Closed session started at
10:13 p.m..
Adjournment
Trustee Zaban made a motion to adjourn supported by Trustee Wright. Motion
passed unanimously. Meeting adjourned at 10:50 p.m.
_________________________________      ______________________________
Susan L. Hiner               Lori A. Pincumbe
Clerk                  Recording Secretary
May 6, 2003
CALL TO ORDER
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order at 7:35 p.m. She provided
an overview of the meeting agenda. No additions or changes were identified.
PLEDGE
ROLL CALL
Present: Supervisor Mickey Martin, Clerk Susan Hiner, Trustee Steve Zaban,
Trustee Martin Wright, Building Inspector Walter Aven, and Recording Secretary
Lori Pincumbe. Treasurer Nancy Fink arrived at 7:55 p.m.
CONSENT AGENDA
Supervisor Martin reviewed the items included in the consent agenda packet. No
corrections were identified. Trustee Wright moved to approve the Consent
Agenda. Motion supported by Trustee Zaban. Motion passed unanimously.
GUEST SPEAKER-John Midgley (Director Ingham County Road Commission)
Agenda topic delayed until Mr. Midgley’s arrival.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin invited comments from the public for any non-agenda items. No
comments were offered.
NEW BUSINESS
Wetlands Permit Application-Drain Commission
Supervisor Martin explained that the Ingham County Drain Commission (ICDC) has
requested a wetlands permit pursuant to the Township’s newly adopted Wetlands
Ordinance. This is the first application received by the Township. ICRC plans
to re-establish a previously existing wetland and connect it with the Heath
Drain. The wetlands will serve a dual purpose of improving the environment and
collecting, cleaning and discharging storm water run-off from M-43 to the Red
Cedar River. Supervisor Martin explained that ICDC started developing this
project two years ago and they have already received a permit from the Michigan
Department of Environmental Quality. Tonight they are requesting a local
wetlands permit pursuant to the Township’s Wetlands Ordinance. Supervisor
Martin added that there is a provision in the Township’s ordinance that allows
the Township to automatically approve a permit if the wetlands area is
determined to be “non-essential.” The Township’s planning consultant (McKenna
Associates) has reviewed the information provided by the Township’s wetlands
consultant (Wetlands & Coastal Associates) and they agree that the wetlands in
question are “non-essential.” Supervisor Martin invited Deputy Drain
Commissioner Carla Clos to present a description of the proposed project to the
Board.
 
Ms. Clos introduced herself and commended the Township for adopting a local
wetlands ordinance. She added that the ICDC office strongly believes that
preservation and conservation of natural resources is extremely important and
that they are grateful to local governments like Williamstown Township who have
taken the progressive step of adopting a local wetlands ordinance to foster
environmental preservation. She reported that ICDC has had success with
preserving the water quality of the Red Cedar River by preserving wetlands at
other locations. She explained that the proposed project is actually a
reconstruction of a wetlands area that had existed previously until the
property was filled in by a former landowner. She introduced her co-presenters
Blair Webster (ICDC Wetlands Consultant-Water and Woods Ecology) and Alan Boyer
(Engineer-Ledy Design Group). She provided handout information about creating a
healthy aquatic ecosystem with wetlands and information for public distribution
about the positive effect a healthy wetlands area will have on decreasing
mosquito population (a public concern due to the recent West Nile Virus).
 
Alan Boyer explained the technical aspects of the project. MDOT was
experiencing flooding on the south side of M-43 and subsequently petitioned
ICDC to put in a drain. It was determined that some existing drain tile circa
1930 still existed in the area. He added that the Weigandts (adjacent property
owners) had maintained drain tile on their property well but said that the
portion south of Grand River had not been maintained. He identified the land
that drains to the tile on the Township map. He said that they had been able to
locate wetlands on the property south of Grand River (owned by Mr. Buehler).
They could also follow the tile north to Turner Road but the wetland was
degraded. So, in addition to locating the wetland area, they decided to
approach MDEQ about improving it and using it as a basin for flood protection
for M-43 and also as a detention basin. The wetland will contribute to the
water quality going down the drain tile to the Red Cedar River. He identified
the perimeter of the proposed wetland on the Township map and stated that there
will be a water level change of about 2 feet. He said that water will pass into
the wetland, be detained for a period of time, and then pass into the drain
tile and eventually to the Red Cedar River.
 
Blair Webster introduced himself and described his role in locating the
wetlands area and identifying the wetland species present. He explained that
when recreating the wetland, they plan to also increase the plant diversity
from four to sixteen dominant species. He explained that his first task had
been to delineate the existing plant life and then develop a planting plan. He
added that a lot of the newly introduced species flower so the area will be
more aesthetically pleasing.
 
Supervisor Martin invited questions from the Board and questions from the
audience.
 
Citizen Sharon Wiegandt stated that she lives across the street from the
proposed wetlands area. She said the farmer who leases property from them
installed the drain tile on their property about 10 years ago to drain the
farmland and that is the only tile they have been maintaining. She said she
received an easement request by mail last week and was surprised that this was
the first she had heard of the project. She stated that the valley will flood
during spring high water if any more water is directed into that drain. This
will damage her property. She said she is concerned that this project will
cause damage to her property similar to damage to the property located across
from St. Martha’s (where all the trees are dead).
 
Supervisor Martin said that the drain issue will be specifically discussed on
Thursday, May 8, 2003 at the Drain Commission’s public hearing. It would be
good for Mrs. Wiegandt to attend that meeting also to express her concerns. Ms.
Clos provided Ms. Wiegandt with her business card and said that she would be
like to meet with her at her property to specifically address any concerns they
have even prior to the Drain Commission meeting. Ms. Clos added that by
improving the wetlands, there will now be a proper means to convey water all
the way to the Red Cedar River so flooding should no longer occur at the drain
or on the Wiegandt property. The water will now move to the north in a
controlled fashion. Ms. Clos added that by using some of the existing tiles,
ICDC can contain project costs.
 
There were no further questions or comments.
 
Trustee Wright made a motion to approve the wetlands permit application
submitted by the Ingham County Drain Commission. Motion supported by Trustee
Zaban. Motion passed unanimously.
MDOT
Supervisor Martin introduced John Midgley (Director-Ingham County Road
Commission) who attended tonight to provide an update regarding ICRC contracts
and projects to the Board. He said that ICRC will be making a few minor changes
to the contracts this year and that any fiscal year issues the Township may
have can be addressed by making a call to his office. He said that this year
there will not be a cap placed on contract overruns. Supervisor Martin asked
what options the Township has if the contractor’s proposed cost for a project
comes back higher than the ICRC estimate. Mr. Midgley responded that
historically when the contractor’s cost came back higher than the ICRC estimate
(which is the cost used for Township budgeting purposes), ICRC would cover 95%
of the cost overrun and cap the Township share at 5%. He said that ICRC no
longer has the funds to eat this 95% cost. Supervisor Martin asked if the
Township can refuse to proceed with a job if the contractor estimated project
overrun is too high. Mr. Midgley said the Township will be able to go into a
project with an accurate project cost estimate. If the estimate is much higher
than ICRC predicted, and the Township does not feel they can afford to proceed,
the project can be postponed or cancelled. Supervisor Martin questioned whether
Township percentage will be returned if the project comes in lower than
estimated. Mr. Midgley said that the Township portion of any leftover money
would be returned. He added that the ICRC will also be trying to prioritize all
municipal projects so that the project starts soon after the Township makes its
payment. For instance, if Williamstown Township pays for a project in June, the
project won’t be delayed until October.
Mr. Midgely asked the Board if they had any questions or comments.
 
Trustee Zaban asked Mr. Midgley to travel Mitchell Road (which is posted at 45
mph) on his way home from the meeting tonight to see if he agrees that the
speed limit needs to be lowered. Trustee Zaban explained that the Township is
in favor of lowering the speed limit to 35 mph but does not have the authority
to make the change. Since MDOT (or the State Police) has the authority, he was
hoping that Mr. Midgley might get a first hand look at the road and support the
Township’s opinion. Trustee Zaban said there has been a lot of additional
development on Mitchell since the road was originally posted and the high
school enters and exits from Mitchell throughout the day.
This combination is causing the need to reconsider the speed limit.
 
Road Repairs-Recommendation from Committee
Supervisor Martin reported that the Township had received a request from ICRC
to identify which local projects we would like to see done this year.
Supervisor Martin added that the $30,000 match has been restored, so it is in
the Township’s best interest to fund a full $30,000 toward road repair (which
has been already included in the 2003-04 budget). She introduced Brian
Jennings, representative from the Township Traffic Committee, to present their
recommendations.
 
Mr. Jennings explained how the recommendations were developed. He said the
committee uses a software program that evaluates each road’s surface rating,
traffic volume, and the number of years its been on the ICRC “needs repair”
list. The committee members also visit each site. Mr. Jennings said the Traffic
Committee had received a specific request from the Oakleaf subdivision to have
their subdivision considered. He said there was also a request to look at
paving one of the gravel roads in the Township. Mr. Jennings said this request
needs a thorough analysis (including discussion with the residents involved)
before proceeding because it will be expensive to upgrade a gravel road and
could not be paid for out of the Township’s general fund.
 
Mr. Jennings reported that the Traffic Committee’s first road repair
recommendation is to repair the road at Quinlan Acres. This road work was
originally proposed two (2) years ago.
 
The Committee’s second recommendation originally was for Sunrise Drive to be
repaired. However, ICRCs estimate came in much higher than the Township had
projected. Mr. Jennings stated that the discrepancy seems to be due to the cost
of curb and gutter. The Committee had estimated $7-8000 and ICRC’s estimate
came back at $30,000. Mr. Jennings has contacted ICRC to find out why their
cost is so high and to ask whether all the curb work must be done? He suggested
that, if so, the residents of the subdivision help pay for it.
 
Rodeo Trail is the committee’s third recommendation.
 
Clerk Hiner stated that she was surprised to see the Committee report showing
that 300 cars travel through Quinlan Acres in 24 hours. Mr. Jennings said the
Committee uses an estimate of ten (10) trips per household per day. He added
that about 10 years ago, ICRC actually did a count on a subdivision (which they
usually don’t do) and they came up with 9.8 trips per household (which supports
this estimate).
Treasurer Fink asked how often counts are taken. Mr. Jennings said ICRC likes
to take a count every three years but sometimes the data is up to five (5)
years old (at most).
 
Supervisor Martin summarized that the Committee’s recommendation for top three
(3) priorities are 1) Quinlan Acres 2) Sunrise Drive and 3) Rodeo Trail. She
added that the Township has budgeted $30,000 with a $30,000 match from ICRC for
a total available budget of $60,000. From the information provided by the
Traffic Committee, it appears that two (2) of the jobs can be done within this
budget. She clarified that, using the pacer system, the percentage cuts would
be 25% ICRC and 75% Township. She commented that, from the information provided
by the committee, the Township must pay the full amount if for roads rated “1”
and “2”. Mr. Jennings said the roads have to be very deteriorated to be rated
this low. A rating this low means the road has to be completely reconstructed
(which is very expensive) so it is a benefit to the Township to repair a road
once it reaches level 3 to avoid huge future repair costs.
 
Treasurer Fink asked how the Committee determined which roads should be
considered. Mr. Jennings said the ICRC provides the Township with a list to
start with. Since this list is always more than the Township can afford, the
traffic committee prioritizes the list. Treasurer Fink asked why a major road
like Sherwood hasn’t been considered in the past 25 years. Mr. Jennings said
that Sherwood is a county road so they are responsible for prioritizing it. Mr.
Jennings said that if citizens ask the Township about the status of county
roads, it would be best to refer them to Mr. Midgley at ICRC. He added that it
is difficult for the Township to keep track of ICRC’s county road priority list
because it is constantly changing.
 
Supervisor Martin summarized that road projects for Quinlan Acres and Rodeo
Trail will cost $54,300 (without subdivision support). The Township’s 75%
portion would be $40,725. Completing these two (2) projects would be option
one. To do all three projects will cost $84,300 (with a Township portion of $
63,225). If subdivision support is required, residents of Quinlan Acres would
pay about $125 each and residents of Rodeo Trail would pay $522. The cost to
Sunrise Drive residents would be $250-$300 if the county money is divided
proportionally. Treasurer Fink asked if the Township would need agreement from
the subdivision citizens before proceeding. Supervisor Martin responded “yes”
and added that the cost would be billed as a special assessment.
 
Mr. Jennings recommended that the Sunrise subdivision project be delayed for a
year so that the discrepancy between the Traffic Committee estimate and the
ICRC estimate can be clarified. He added that the Township can ask ICRC to roll
the money that would have been assigned to this project to next year.
 
Supervisor Martin said that Quinlan is an old subdivision which has a pass-
through road that many Township citizens use. Rodeo Trail and Sunrise are dead
end roads that are only used by the subdivision owners. She said she thinks it
is appropriate for these two (2) subdivisions to help the Township with repair
costs. She asked the Board whether their opinion is to pay the entire cost for
road repair or should special assessments be made. She added that Delhi
Township Board developed a policy not to repair any roads unless the residents
contribute a portion of the cost. Leslie and Bunker Hill Townships just passed
a millage to use as a funding source for road work. She said it appears a lot
of Boards are moving towards using other funding sources. She said she would
prefer not to go to a millage but to look for alternative funding sources.
Mr. Jennings said there are pluses and minuses with every funding source. With
the millage option, everyone is contributing payment so everyone demands that
their project be considered first. With the special assessment option, citizens
will complain because they are being treated differently from other citizens in
the Township. Mr. Jennings suggested that the process for using alternative
funding sources start now for next year so that citizens have time to consider
what they prefer.
 
Citizen Frans Wilbrink said he thought the original policy was that a
subdivision could pay an assessment to have their road repavement moved to the
top of a priority list. When a subdivision requests road repair and they are
not at the top of the priority list, the subdivision residents can pay an
assessment (like 25%) to have their job prioritized.
 
Trustee Zaban said that his recommendation would be to definitely proceed with
the Quinlan Acres project because the traffic volume is so high on that street
and because it is a through street. He added that $24,000 looks like a bargain
based on the traffic count. He said he believes that some preventative
maintenance (ie. crack filling) is a higher priority than Sunrise Subdivision
based on it’s “number of trips.”
Mr. Jennings said that the Traffic Committee was planning to recommend that any
money left after road project selection be directed towards crack-sealing. The
Committee suggests trying it on a couple of roads to see if crack-sealing
materials had improved in the last 5-10 years. Mr. Jennings added that
subdivisions typically don’t like chip sealing because they get the stones in
their yards. He said that crack filling is estimated to cost $1200 per mile and
that the Committee had recommended two (2) roads in Maple Shade because there
didn’t appear to be any alligator cracking in the surfaces yet (which make it
inappropriate to crack fill).
Trustee Wright made a motion to resurface Quinlan Acres, crack-fill Maple Shade
and Golf View Drives, and roll the rest of the Ingham County and Township
budget for road repairs over to 2004 and ask the Transportation Committee to
study alternate funding options for Township roads and present their
recommendations to the Board for future road decisions. Motion supported by
Clerk Hiner. Motion passed unanimously.
Mr. Jennings asked the Board for some guidelines for the Traffic Committee to
follow. Supervisor Martin said guidelines could be discussed at the Board
Workshop Meeting scheduled on May 20th and recommended that Mr. Jennings plan
to attend. Supervisor Martin thanked Mr. Jennings and the traffic committee for
all their work.
Planning Commission Report
Planning Commission Meeting Minutes
Supervisor Martin commented that the minutes from the Planning Commission’s Red
Cedar Trail Meeting are included in the Board Packet. She said that the
Planning Commission doesn’t have anything to report tonight that requires a
Board vote but that Planning Commission Chairman Dan Kraft would like to
provide the Board with a summary of Planning Commission activity.
Commercial Zoning on Grand River
Mr. Kraft reported that the Board had asked the Planning Commission to consider
the commercial zoning issue along Grand River. Mr. Kraft reported that the
consensus of the commissioners was that there was adequate commercial zoning
available on Grand River. He said the Planning Commission decided that they
would like to see some design standards established. He said the Planning
Commission is also considering a multi-use zoning option.
Supervisor Martin said that the commercial use property in the Township is
restrictive. She said there are many businesses that come, inquire and leave
because there is too much retrofitting that must be done to the ordinance
before they could move in. She said she is pleased that the Planning Commission
is considering a multiuse option. Mr. Kraft said that the next step is for the
Planning Commission to provide their multi-use option to McKenna Associates
(the Township’s planning consultant), and then incorporate the multiuse zone(s)
into the master plan. They are considering Grand River from the east side of
the City of Williamston and west of Zimmer Road (both sides of the City in the
Township).
Mobile Home Park
Mr. Kraft stated that the Township must designate some areas on the master plan
for mobile home park sites. The Planning Commission recommends that a master
plan amendment be made to designate two (2) areas (one on each side of the
Township) so that mobile home parks developers have to work within the Township
use map. Supervisor Martin added that adding the designation to the master plan
is no threat to the current property because if they don’t want to sell to the
mobile home park developer, they don’t have to-the Township is designating
areas that are appropriate. Treasurer Fink asked if the designation would
constitute a map amendment. Supervisor Martin said that the designation is only
applied to the Future Land Use Map in Master Plan.
River Trail Meeting Minutes
Mr. Kraft reported that the minutes reflect a clear signal from the property
owners that a river trail would not be accepted. He said that the Wiegandts and
the Goodmans both have houses within 20 ft of the river. Mr. Kraft said that he
hasn’t met with the Planning Commission since the river trail meeting but he
doesn’t believe they will consider asking the Board for money to pursue this
idea. He said there was some interest at the meeting in preserving the greenway
(similar to what was done prior to development of the Steeplechase
subdivision). He said that Chris Riddle was present at the meeting and had
worked on many greenway projects. He said that green spaces (protected lands-
not trails) increase in value.
Citizen Sharon Weidgandt added that the majority of the people that attended
the meeting were opposed to the trail and it seemed to her that the Planning
Commission was “mystified” by this fact. She encouraged the Township Board to
have the Planning Commission spend their time on things like the existing
Township park on Grand River and other useful projects that the Township can
actually afford. She said that any further consideration of a river trail would
be met with legal action by the homeowners.
Citizen Sam Fowler presented the Board with a letter clarifying the position of
the citizens along the river. The letter had a list of signatures of property
owners (which he did not leave). Mr. Fowler said the Township should send a
follow-up letter to the residents that had received Mr. Kraft’s original letter
so that they don’t have to wonder what is going to happen next. He thinks the
citizens need a letter stating that there was a meeting, the citizens’ voices
were heard, and this is what is going to happen next.
Supervisor Martin said that the letter and meeting were part of an
investigation before starting a feasibility study. It seems obvious to her
that, based on the citizen response at the meeting, the Planning Commission
will make a recommendation not to proceed. The Board has no intent of going
forward without support from its Township citizens. She said that sending a
follow-up letter to everyone that received the original letter is a good idea
and is something that has been done in similar situations in the past.
Citizen Fowler said that he came to tonight’s meeting to ask how much further
citizens that own river frontage need to go to kill this idea. He said the
Planning Commission is saying that this is just a dream but he believes there
is intent because the Township bought an easement on the river front property
before Steeplechase subdivision was put in. Supervisor Martin corrected this
statement, stating that the easement was given by the developer to the
Township. The Township did not pay anything. He pointed out Mr. Farhat has also
come tonight and that he is a property owner in Steeplechase. Mr. Farhat stood
up and said that he would prefer to speak for himself and that he realized he
was buying property that had a river easement at the time of purchase. He said
that, based on the meeting and the discussion at tonight’s Board meeting, he is
no longer concerned that a lot of money is going to be dumped into a river
walk. He added that he was surprised to hear that two (2) property owners (out
of 100) were actually in favor of the trail. He stated that the citizens in the
Township are already worrying about road costs, school improvements, library
construction, etc… He said he thinks there are plenty of places where money
needs to be spent instead of developing a river trail.
Treasurer Fink said that calling the using the word “feasibility study” in the
letter was a misnomer. It was just an idea and that people wanted to see if
anyone else shared the same vision. The word “feasibility” caused people to see
it as something more and this was not intended.
Trustee Zaban said it would be great if the 100 Township citizens that are now
not going to have to fight development of a river trail, could redirect their
energy into improving the park. Mr. Fowler said there was a lot of support at
the meeting from property owners to improve the greenway by cleaning the river
banks, etc…
Burn Ordinance-Board Policy (Size, Weather Conditions)
Supervisor Martin said she would like the Planning Commission to clarify that
the size for brush fires in the Township Burn Ordinance. NIESA has suggested
brush fire specifications of 4’x4’x4’. She said she has also included an
Interim Township Policy for the Board to consider adopting for six (6) months
until the until the Burn Ordinance is formally amended
Treasurer Fink moved to adopt the Interim Township Board Policy for Burn
Permits to restrict the size of brush piles as identified. Motion supported by
Trustee Wright. Motion passed unanimously.
Treasurer Fink asked if the campfire provision of the Burn Ordinance allowed
for a citizen to keep adding brush after the campfire has been started. She
referred to a neighbor who owns an R1 property and is not taking out any
permits for burning before he does so. Supervisor Martin suggested that
Treasurer Fink put her question in writing and attend the Planning Commission
meeting when the Burn Ordinance revisions are going to be addressed. Supervisor
Martin added that the Township will never be able to control everything.
Treasurer Fink said she feels that the campfire provision has given citizens
the right to burn whenever they want without any limitations. She said that
their needs to be a better definition of campfire (she added that she would be
happy to write it). Clerk Hiner said there will always be someone who will find
a way to get around an ordinance and we shouldn’t over-regulate which would
impose on all citizens. Supervisor Martin said there were two (2) fires in the
Township recently that got out of control. One of those fires was burning
without a permit. Both property owners were fined by the fire department.
Supervisor Martin added that there is also a question about whether the
Township can deny permits based on weather conditions. She said that she and
Treasurer Fink are looking in to it. Trustee Wright recommended that the
Township could ask citizen Andy Provenzano to provide his expertise about
weather conditions and burning.
Citizen LeBlanc commented that 2-3 weeks ago there was an article in the
Detroit newspaper about two (2) Townships that had recently enacted a “No
Burning” ordinance. Citizen Brian Jennings suggested that the Township contact
the MDNR because they have an existing website about this issue so the Township
could push the jurisdiction responsibility onto that agency.
Telecommunication Resolution (#27)
Supervisor Martin presented the Township Board with a draft telecommunications
resolution due to the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights of Way
Oversight Act. She said the lawyer has reviewed the draft resolution and the
Township Board now must make a decision because the Act goes into effect on May
9, 2003.
Trustee Wright made a motion to accept the Telecommunication Resolution (#27)
as written. Motion supported by Trustee Zaban. Motion passed unanimously.
Roll Call Vote:
Treasurer Nancy Fink      Yes
Trustee Martin Wright      Yes
Supervisor Mickey Martin   Yes
Trustee Steve Zaban      Yes
Clerk Susan Hiner      Yes
Credit Card Resolution (#28)
Supervisor Martin presented the newly prepared Township Credit Card Policy. The
policy was developed as a result of recommendations by the Township’s auditors
(Abraham & Gaffney). The document has been reviewed by Attorney Spagnoulo.
Trustee Zaban made a motion to accept the Township Credit Card Policy as
written. Motion supported by Trustee Wright. Motion passed unanimously.
Roll Call Vote:
Treasurer Nancy Fink      Yes
Trustee Martin Wright      Yes
Supervisor Mickey Martin   Yes
Trustee Steve Zaban      Yes
Clerk Susan Hiner      Yes
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Supervisor Martin reported that there was no unfinished business to address.
REPORTS
NIESA
Trustee Zaban reported that minutes from the most recent NIESA meeting were
included in Board packet for review. He presented an audit record for NIESA
financial activity and said he would leave a copy for the Township file. He
said he has reviewed the document and highlighted for the Board the questions
he plans to ask at the next NIESA meeting about the report on behalf of the
Board.
Treasurer Fink asked if NIESA was happy with the price they got from selling a
fire truck on EBAY. Trustee Zaban said that NIESA had been originally willing
to take $500 for the truck so the $1900 that was bid on EBAY was a good price.
Supervisor Martin stated that the attorney has a copy of the contract sent by
NIESA for review. Trustee Wright added that in his review of the minutes he
noted that other municipalities shared many of the same questions that
Williamstown Township Board had asked about NIESA’s contract changes.
Parks
Supervisor Martin stated that minutes from the most recent Park Committee
meeting had been provided in the Board packet and invited Treasurer Fink to add
any additional information. Treasurer Fink stated that the Committee had some
concern about some “dumping” that was happening on the site. She added that the
Committee was also probably going to hire someone to do a walk through of the
site this summer and conduct an “after the burn” plant survey. Trustee Wright
asked how many rocks were pulled out of the soccer field. Clerk Hiner said that
six (6) adults (and one youth) had worked really hard over the weekend getting
the field prepared. They had planted some grass seed but a lot of rain
immediately fell that may have washed the seed away. Trustee Wright said that
it is in
the contractor’s contract to put vegetation on the property when they are done
using it as a staging area so the property will get seeded one way or another.
Treasurer Fink said there is also a problem with dog feces on the property
because owners are letting their animals run free (which is not allowed by the
Township ordinance). Treasurer Fink said they are planning to post “Dogs Must
Be Leashed” signs on the park kiosks. Supervisor Martin said that this should
also be noted in the Township’s next newsletter. Treasurer Fink said that the
Park Committee is considering assigning a designated dog run area.
ICCMTA
Supervisor Martin said that Treasurer Fink, Trustee Zaban and she had attended
the ICCMTA meeting and that it had been a good meeting. She added that there is
going to be a grab bag at the ICCMTA annual meeting next month and the Township
needs to bring something. She suggested approaching vendors in the Township for
some PR materials (ICCMTA has 1600 grab bags to fill for conventioneers).
Trustee Wright said he will provide some Granger pens.
Library
Clerk Hiner reported that Library Committee had visited each of the sites being
considered and had rejected all but 4-5. The consultants agree with their
selections. She said one top site appears to be the Howe property (which is
located right next to the park). Citizens appear to have some historic
affection for the old City Hall building so it didn’t sound like the City
property was still being considered as a first choice.
City of Williamston
Supervisor Martin stated that the joint meeting with the City is scheduled for
May 21, 2003 at 7:00 p.m. at Wheatfield Township Hall (later relocated to the
Community Center).
Other
Supervisor Martin brought attention to the letter in the Board packet from the
Michigan Association of Township Supervisors. She reported that she received a
nice thank you note from Ryan McGuire for the Township’s help with his 5th
grade benchmark project. She brought attention to the IRS letter in the Board
Packet regarding the auditor’s report. They are specifically requesting the
status of each of the auditor’s recommendations (which have all been
addressed). She added that the Township must prepare a response to the IRS by
May 30, 2003. Trustee Wright asked if an explanation of the recent transfer of
responsibility should be attached to the response letter. Supervisor Martin
agreed that it should. Supervisor Martin said she was surprised the letter came
back from the IRS so quickly. Supervisor Martin reported that she and Mr. Kraft
had attended a meeting with Williamston Schools representatives about the
failed bond issue. She said that the School Board had heard from several
entities in the community and are now forming a task force with all concerned
parties.
Meeting Review
Clerk Hiner will issue a Wetlands Permit to ICRC and send a of the approved
Telecommunications resolution to Attorney Gary Bender before the Act deadline.
Supervisor Martin will forward the Township’s road repair recommendations to
MDOT and prepare a memo for the Planning Commission regarding burn pile size.
Treasurer Fink will prepare suggested wording to add to the burn ordinance
clarifying campfires.
Supervisor Martin reported that she will be meeting with Michigan Alliance
about farmland preservation on May 29, 2003. Treasurer Fink stated that she had
sent a letter to that group saying that the Township would have more success
preserving farmland if a county plan existed. Supervisor Martin said that she
was also meeting with the County on May 7 to discuss the program.
Supervisor Martin said she will also be meeting with another potential weltand
consultant.
Trustee Zaban asked how the recycling program was going. Clerk Hiner said a
resident who was in the office said he appreciated the extended hours.
Supervisor Martin said the renovation is progressing well. She added the
contractor is doing an excellent job of keeping on schedule.
 
Adjournment
Trustee Zaban made a motion to adjourn supported by Trustee Wright. Motion
passed unanimously. Meeting adjourned at 10:16 p.m.
_________________________________      ______________________________
Susan L. Hiner               Lori A. Pincumbe
Clerk                  Recording Secretary
June 10, 2003
CALL TO ORDER
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order at 7:35 p.m. and provided
an overview of the meeting agenda. Supervisor Martin added the topic “August
5th Election” to New Business. No other additions or changes were identified.
PLEDGE
ROLL CALL
Present: Supervisor Mickey Martin, Clerk Susan Hiner, Treasurer Nancy Fink,
Trustee Steve Zaban, Trustee Martin Wright, and Recording Secretary Lori
Pincumbe.
CONSENT AGENDA
Supervisor Martin reviewed the items included in the consent agenda packet. No
corrections were identified. Trustee Zaban moved to approve the Consent Agenda.
Motion supported by Trustee Wright. Motion passed unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin invited comments from the public for any non-agenda items.
Citizen Nick Cannarile (4513 Petoskey Drive-Pebblebrook) stated that homeowners
in his area are concerned about speeding on Sherwood Road near their
subdivision but wasn’t sure where to report the problem. Supervisor Martin said
it was good to let the Township know so the concern could be passed on to the
Ingham County Sheriff’s office. He presented one resident’s (not his own)
written suggestions to address the problem: 1) Decrease the speed limit to
25mph, 2) Post a “Speed Limit Enforced” sign as a deterrent, 3) Ask police to
patrol the area more often during peak work travel hours, 4) Post a “Speed
Kills-Slow Down” sign as a deterrent, 5) Resurface the road because people
might be driving faster to smooth out the rough ride.
Supervisor Martin explained that the State Police Department sets the speed
limit based on the speed that 85% of vehicles are traveling (defined as “normal
traffic”) and that it is very difficult to get them to lower a speed limit.
Trustee Wright commented that Trustee Zaban has been lobbying for a similar
speed reduction on Mitchell Road (which has a high school entrance and exit)
for many years without success. Supervisor Martin said that the Township can
request a portable electronic speed sign be placed at that location. The
Township will likely be put on a waiting list because there are only two units
available for this area. The Township can also request more police monitoring.
Several comments indicated that the police do have some presence at this
location already.
Trustee Zaban asked Mr. Cannarile if he could ask homeowners at the next
Pebblebrook Subdivision meeting if they would be willing to pay another mil in
order to have a police presence in the Township. There are currently only two
police cars available to patrol a large area. Supervisor Martin suggested Mr.
Cannarile also personally write a letter to Sergeant Vicky Harrison at the
Ingham County Sheriff’s office stating his concerns and asking for her
suggestions. She said he should encourage the rest of the residents in his
subdivision to do this also.
NEW BUSINESS
Yard Maintenance Proposal-Zach Hiner
Williamston High School student Zach Hiner presented the Board with his
proposed Eagle Scout project. His plans are to create a volunteer program to
help senior citizens in the City and the Township with yard work that has
become too difficult for them to manage. He said he first came up with the idea
last fall when he and a friend helped an elderly person who was unable to
remove leaves from her property. She couldn’t burn her leaves anymore due to
the new burn ordinance. He realized that there may be others in the community
that could use assistance. Mr. Hiner said his plan is to gather a list of
volunteers and assign them to projects as they come up in a manner similar to
the way Mr. Larson coordinates volunteers at the food bank. Mr. Hiner said his
role would be to recruit the volunteers and administer the program.
Mr. Hiner asked the Board if they felt there was a need for this type of
service in the Township. Supervisor Martin said that she definitely sees the
need, especially after a storm when a lot of debris must be cleared. Treasurer
Fink suggested Mr. Hiner contact the senior center for their input as well.
Mr. Hiner asked support from the Township in two ways: 1) Would the Township be
willing to advertise the service through a short note in an upcoming next
newsletter and, 2) Would the Township be willing to take requests from citizens
and direct them to him. He will then follow through from there. Supervisor
Martin responded that the Township would be willing to advertise the service in
a newsletter and suggested the he provide a pamphlet with information that
could be available at the counter. The Township will also take requests from
citizens on his behalf.
Supervisor Martin asked how long he anticipated the service to continue? Mr.
Hiner said he plans to continue the project for the next two years (while he is
in scouts) and then cross-train some of the younger scouts to take the project
over. He will encourage them to make the project their own by expanding and
improving the service as they work toward their own Eagle project.
Treasurer Fink, Trustee Zaban and Trustee Wright stated that they were
definitely willing to support this type of program.
Supervisor Martin asked Mr. Hiner when he anticipated being ready to begin. He
said he plans to be ready for this fall. Supervisor Martin said that the next
newsletter is tentatively scheduled for September 1.
Digital Orthophotography with the Drain Commission
Supervisor Martin introduced Greg Minshall (Engineer-Fitzgerald Henne
Associates) to describe the use of Digital Orthophotography for mapping
purposes on behalf of the Ingham County Drain Commission (ICDC). The ICDC has
decided to use this technique to develop a base map for drains in Ingham
County. Mr. Minshall explained that he started working with Mr. Lindemann on
the project three years ago. ICDC has been awarded a 50-50 grant to create the
map of the county using digital orthophotography. This will be a 2-3 phase
project. He said that the first phase of the project required building a good
base map/ They began by drawing section corners in the county using GIS (which
is accurate to within a few centimeters). The Corps of Engineers has actually
completed the first phase which included taking aerial photos of the entire
area referencing the GPS locations which were marked by “X” targets painted on
the ground. The photos that are generated are 100 scale (each pixel represets a
6” x 6” square). Mr. Minshall said they also plan to overlay contours at 2’
intervals so the map can be used to identify high points and low points.
Mr. Lindemann is asking the communities that are going to benefit from these
new maps to participate in the cost of the project. The maps are not design
grade so, for instance, a Township cannot give the map to a consultant and ask
them to design a sewer from it. However, Townships can take a developer’s
drawing (at the same scale) and lay it over the map to see how site contours
are going to affect a project. Mr. Minshall said there are 2 primary phases of
the mapping project and the first phase is now complete. Townships can now plot
their own copies of the map or request a plot from Fitzgerald Henne as needed.
He said that the cost for the project is the best it could be because the
project was done county wide and because the Corps of Engineers is providing a
50% matching grant. Supervisor Martin commented that upgrades (like splits,
etc..) could be laid onto the map once a year. Mr. Minshall said that tax
descriptions could also be added to the properties.
Supervisor Martin asked the schedule for payment being requested by the Drain
Commissioner For instance, since Phase 1 is already complete, does he want the
Township to approve money for the project immediately? Mr. Minshall said that
the reason Mr. Lindemann moved forward quickly (without first approaching local
governments for financial support) was due to the deadline requirements of the
Corps grant. ICDC borrowed the money from the county to pay for Phase 1 and now
need to pay it back by the end of the year. Mr. Minshall said that Phase 2 will
start with the federal fiscal year (October 1, 2003). He added that the Corps
has stated that they have the additional money available but that is not
guaranteed. The second deadline for Phase 2 would be a commitment by Oct. 1,
2003. Mr. Minshall said that a Phase 3 would include tasks like overlaying a
wetland map, or flood plains map (FEMA is currently remapping so floodplains
have not been included in the first phases).
Treasurer Fink asked if the maps are not design grade, what is the Drain
Commission planning to use them for? Mr. Minshall said that Mr. Lindemann is
going to start requiring developers to provide engineer grade maps (from the
county base map). The engineered map can then be imported into the base map.
Trustee Wright commented that a year ago Marvin Fouty did a similar
presentation for the Board. Supervisor Martin clarified that his presentation
was for a GIS based map. Trustee Wright asked the cost of that proposal. Mr.
Minshall said the cost may have been less but that the digital orthophotography
map will be more accurate and include contours and drain information.
Trustee Wright said that he recalls that the Planning Commission liked what
they saw at the GIS presentation but had decided to wait until the County made
a decision on the method of development for the county map. He added that it
appeared that the County has its plan now in place. Mr. Minshall added that
Sidwell maps are not as accurate as the newly developed maps. Trustee Wright
said that, over a period of time, accepting to participate in the cost of
developing this map could save the Township much more than its going to cost.
Treasurer Fink asked if the map would satisfy documentation needs. Mr. Minshall
said that, for instance, the map would be fine for delineating a wetlands area.
Treasurer Fink asked if Mr. Lindemann planned to map the outfalls from the
Phase 2 Stormwater Outfall Program. Mr. Minshall said that Mr. Lindemann had
spoken to him about doing so.
Supervisor Martin said that she finds it encouraging that Lansing, East
Lansing, Delhi, Doug Stover from Equalization, Tri-County, etc.. were all
present at the recent meetings to discuss this concept. She added that it looks
like everyone is jumping on board and will be sharing the cost for this. She
added that it is good to see planning being done on a more overall basis.
Trustee Wright asked Supervisor Martin what Chris Doozan (Township Planning
Consultant-McKenna Associates) thinks of the mapping system. Supervisor Martin
said that he thinks it is good and that they can work with it. Mr. Minshall
said that Autocad maps can be downloaded by any computer. Supervisor Martin
said that ICDC plans to make a presententation to all the Townships in Ingham
and Tri-county. The more that agree to contribute to the cost, the lower the
cost to the Township could potentially be. Mr. Minshall said that tonight is
the first municipal Board presentation he has made so far.
Trustee Wright asked Mr. Minshall if ICDC was looking for a financial
commitment tonight. Mr. Minshall said he doesn’t need a commitment tonight but
would like the Board to consider it and get back to him. Trustee Wright said it
looks like something Williamstown Township would be interested in
participating. Treasurer Fink said some of the outer municipalities don’t have
the tools to map required by the storm water program so they should also need
to join. Mr. Minshall added that he would be willing to return to Williamstown
Township to answer any remaining questions and encouraged the Board to contact
him anytime.
Planning Commission Report
Planning Commission Meeting Minutes
Trustee Wright reviewed the Planning Commission minutes on behalf of Dan Kraft.
He reported that the Commission had discussed the Red Cedar River trail meeting
and decided that a letter would be sent to everyone that received the original
letter explaining that there is no plan to move forward.
Supervisor Martin asked that Trustee Wright let the Planning Commission know
that the proposed burn pile size is an administrative nightmare. Trustee Wright
said there was a broad range of policy to use for size criteria. McKenna
Associates suggested they put the proposed size down as a starting point for
discussion at the public meeting. Trustee Zaban said he was pleased to hear
about a joint meeting with Meridian Township and added that he would like to
attend the meeting.
River Trail/Letter to Residents
Supervisor Martin asked if there should be a motion to send the follow-up
letter regarding the river trail. Trustee Wright said that he felt it was
appropriate. Trustee Wright made a motion that the draft river trail letter be
finalized and sent to all the people that were sent the original letter. Motion
supported by Trustee Zaban. Motion passed unanimously.
NIESA Agreement
Supervisor Martin reported that Williamstown Township had been recently
forwarded an agreement for signature by NIESA. This agreement would be in
addition to the Articles of Incorporation that the Township entered into with
NIESA years ago. She introduced Mark Adams (attorney representing NIESA) and
Charles Galbraith (Locke Township Treasurer, Locke Township representative to
NIESA, and Chairman of NIESA) who have attended tonight to provide background
information and answer questions about the new agreement. Mr. Galbraith said
that he appreciates hearing the Township’s concerns and the plan is to address
those items that are worrisome to the various parties in a revised draft. He
added that Trustee Zaban had suggested they attend tonight’s meeting to
alleviate and address concerns the Board might have about signing the new
agreement.
Mr. Galbraith explained that the Townships already collect tax money on behalf
of NIESA and then pass it through so there is no change to what will be
required of the Townships in the new agreement. According to Mr. Galbraith, the
City of Williamston is concerned because they collect the money but have no
control over it. Also, because the City has a DDA and a TIFA district, some of
the NIESA taxes they collect don’t actually go to NIESA. Money that the voters
voted for when they approved the NIESA millage (and that citizens think are
going to NIESA) is going to TIFA or the Downtown Development Authority. State
statute allows the City to distribute the money this way. Treasurer Fink
expressed surprise to hear this was possible. Mr. Galbraith stated that he
admits that as the bylaws and Articles of Incorporation were being formed,
nobody thought about emergency service funds being captured. He said the idea
behind this new agreement was that there be “like terms” for everybody
contributing. He said that in NIESA’s quest for uniformity, they were hoping
that all the contributing parties (especially the City) would be willing to
sign the new agreement.
Supervisor Martin said she sees no benefit to the Township entering into this
new agreement. Trustee Zaban asked the speakers to explain the difference
between this agreement and the NIESA Articles of Incorporation. Mr. Adams
responded that the Articles of Incorporation were constructed around the basis
that the municipalities always have the final decision about who provides fire
and rescue service to their citizens. For example, there is currently one unit
that chooses to contract with the Perry Area Fireboard and NIESA pays the bill.
The primary purpose of this new agreement is to define the language “on similar
terms” by designating service districts. Mr. Adams added that there is a need
for the language to be cleaned up. The issues that make this clarification
necessary have evolved over the past six (6) years due to all the disparaging
interests. There was an agreement with the City of Williamston at one time
(1999) but it was never signed. Treasurer Fink asked if there had also been a
written agreement with Williamstown Township. Mr. Adams said that Shirley
Graham represented the Board at the time and the agreement was verbal.
Supervisor Martin explained that the City’s main problem is that their TIFA
funds are captured by the DDA. Unless the DDA elects to return the NIESA
portion of those funds to the City (so they can be forwarded to NIESA) the City
would have to take the money from their general fund to replace it. Mr. Adams
stated that it’s a benefit to NIESA and to all the units involved if the time
spent dealing with all the different agreements could be reduced. Time could be
better spent on planning and other important issues.
Supervisor Martin itemized her problems with the new agreement proposed by
NIESA. First, she said, she does not want to enter the Township into a thirty
(30) year agreement. Mr. Galbraith suggested that fifteen (15) years might be a
more reasonable timeframe since that is also the life of the NIESA millage.
Supervisor Martin said she also does not like the idea of an annual charge. She
said the Township has no intention of ever charging the citizens more than what
the Township turns over in millage. She added that she would also have a hard
time signing something that could commit the Township to fees when there is no
cap on what NIESA can charge. Mr. Adams said that the “user rate” wording was
inserted to try to meet some of the objections of the City. Supervisor Martin
said that Townships do not have TIFAs and DDAs so the contracts should be
worded differently. Treasurer Fink said that she feels the Township needs a
contract with NIESA but she doesn’t think we need this contract. Mr. Adams
explained that if each of the four (4) Townships agreed to sign the uniform
contract, then the City would also likely sign so the problem (regarding “on
like terms” and the captured DDA money) would be solved.
Supervisor Martin asked why the state contract reads “the authorities may
establish service districts” but the wording used in the NIESA Articles of
Incorporation is “the authorities shall.” Mr. Adams responded that the two
documents are essentially stating the same thing. Supervisor Martin said that,
for instance, Pebblebrook Subdivision may want to use Meridian Township’s
service. She asked whether the Township has the authority to contract their
entire service out ? Mr. Adams said that the Township could make that choice.
He added that the most important thing isn’t the term of the contract but the
ability to terminate it. The contract is terminable with fifteen (15) months
notice.
Supervisor Martin reiterated that she would like to see the Township contract
language worded differently from the City because the Township has a very
different structure. Mr. Adams asked whether it was fair for some portions of
the City to be allowed to pay less than the rest of the participants.
Supervisor Martin responded “no” but said that state statute does allow for
TIFA districts so the way the City money is being dispersed is legal. Mr. Adams
said NIESA believes that if they can come forward with clear, concise, uniform
agreements from all the remaining parties, then the burden will be on the City
to explain why they are not conforming. Supervisor Martin said she must
evaluate the agreement on its face value to this Township and without regard
for what the City is doing. Mr. Adams asked if the Township could send a
representative to help work out the language with NIESA so that it would be
acceptable to the Township. He added that Locke Township also voiced concern
with the “30 year” language and have recommended 15 years instead. He said that
Wheatfield has no problem with the current wording. Treasurer Fink asked how
this new agreement is going to prevent the TIFA money from still being captured
at the City. Mr. Adams responded that under the new agreement, NIESA will
assign a cost and the City will have to make up the difference of what is
captured by the DDA from their general fund. He added that Webberville made an
agreement with their DDA and now that DDA just sends all the captured money to
NIESA. Supervisor Martin said the Township doesn’t need a lot of the clauses in
the new agreement because they don’t apply. Mr. Adams said that because this
was a new statute at the time of formation, NIESA was one of the first to use
it. Under state law, NIESA has authority to do anything (including collection
of fees) their members can do if the authority is delegated to NIESA. This new
contract will clearly delegate the power to NIESA. He added that NIESA can
operate without the delegated powers, but they have more authority to collect
fees if they have the contract.
Treasurer Fink stated that NIESA already appears to have a separate agreement
with the Village of Webberville so they already will not have uniform
agreements with everyone. Treasurer Fink asked Mr. Adams to clarify the
definition of “uniform”. Mr. Adams said he expects that the City will sign the
Township Agreement and then add a couple of additional clauses. He said it is
really only paragraphs 4,5 and 6 that are potentially different between the
Township and the City agreements. He added there will be some “tweaking” in
paragraph 9 and possibly elsewhere.
Supervisor Martin stated that the Township’s contribution to NIESA went from
$28,000 out of general fund money to $171,000 per year being contributed by the
taxpayers of Williamstown Township due to the NIESA millage. Her understanding
was that this increased cost would be offset because there would no longer be
charges for ambulance and fire responses in the Township (since fees have
already been paid for out of our taxes). Mr. Adams said that before the
millage, the ambulance service was making money which was used to subsidized
fire service. He said there have been fundamental changes in society like
decreases in Medicare reimbursements and requirements for volunteers to be
certified in advanced life support certification. The cost of the service has
gone up considerably. Treasurer Fink said that it appears the Township is now
paying 5.5 times more for than before the millage with no added service except
another ambulance. Mr. Adams said that is not correct because there were
already ambulance fees. Treasurer Fink said that the people have been
misinformed. Trustee Zaban said that it is good for the Township Board and
NIESA to have this dialogue so that these specific concerns can be addressed.
Supervisor Martin said that this broader topic will be discussed further at a
Board Workshop. Right now the Board needs to have someone help hammer out the
wording of the agreement with Mr. Adams.
Treasurer Fink asked whether it was difficult for NIESA to respond to fire
ordinance complaints. Mr. Adams said that NIESA does not have the legal
authority to issue penalties for a citizen failing to follow local fire
ordinances. Mr. Galbraith said that NIESA has tried to recommend the NFPA
ordinance as a uniform ordinance for the area (this is what Meridian Township
currently uses). Treasurer Fink asked how NIESA responds to an illegal fire.
Mr. Adams said that if NIESA knows it is a permitted fire (because they have
been notified by the Township) they don’t respond. He added that ordinance
enforcement is a local police issue. Treasurer Fink said that people will call
911 if they see fire. Mr. Adams said if NIESA determines it is a permitted fire
that is out of control, they respond. If the property owner does not have a
burning permit, the fire department will charge them for the response. NIESA
does not have authority to tell them they have violated the Township’s burn
ordinance. Treasurer Fink clarified that NIESA only responds to a fire if it
has gotten away. She added that she would like to see a uniform ordinance. Mr.
Adams said that NIESA has discussed circulating one but Townships like Locke
and Leroy have no interest in having a burn ordinance.
Employee Policy (updated)
Supervisor Martin said it was necessary to update the manual because there have
been some changes since the last update including addition of a Cemetery
Sexton, a full-time Township/Cemetery Caretaker and a full time secretary.
Trustee Wright clarified that the recommended changes have been highlighted in
bold.
Treasurer Fink questioned the statement “all paid time off must be used within
the same calendar year” (page 6). Treasurer Fink asked if will be the
Township’s policy to pay employees for time off not used. Supervisor Martin
stated that she would prefer that the employee be required to use the time off.
Treasurer Fink said she thinks the policy should be to use it or be paid off
for the accrued time.
Clerk Hiner said the fact that time off is accrued needs to be clarified in the
policy. She said she could agree with a use it or lose it policy if all the
vacation time was issued to the employee on January 1 so they have the entire
year to decide when to use it. With an accrual plan, the employee has to wait
until the last pay period in December to receive their full two weeks of
accrued vacation time. Therefore, she does not think the proposed policy is
appropriate. Supervisor Martin said that her concern is that employees not
accumulate more than two weeks of vacation at any one time. Trustee Wright said
that “calendar year” should not be used in the wording. Treasurer Fink
clarified that Trustee Wright prefers to track vacation by employed year.
Supervisor Martin asked Clerk Hiner how she would word this item in the manual.
Clerk Hiner said she thinks the employee should be able to carry a portion of
their vacation hours over to the next year or the Township should have a “cash
out” clause. She added that because the Township is a small office, there
should be a clause that states employees cannot take more than one week off at
a time.
Supervisor Martin said she would agree that an employee can accumulate time as
long as they do not accumulate more than two weeks. If this is the policy, the
Township can notify an employee when their accrued time is going to reach the
maximum and encourage them to arrange for time off by a certain date. Trustee
Wright suggested that vacation time be stated as 80 hours instead of two weeks.
Supervisor Martin said a worksheet can be prepared so that full time employees
are aware of when they will reach the two week maximum (accrued vacation hours
also appear on each paycheck stub). The employee just cannot accumulate more
than 80 hours-once they reach 80 hours, no additional time will be accrued
until some is taken. Treasurer Fink clarified that this will be an incentive
for employees to use their time. Clerk Hiner said the Township could also
consider cashing out vacation time at a reduced rate. Trustee Zaban suggested
that the details be fleshed out at a workshop. Supervisor Martin said she would
like to address the issue tonight. Inspector Walt Aven asked if an employee is
required to give two weeks notice. Supervisor Martin said that the Township is
an at-will organization so the employee does not have to give notice.
Cemetery Board
Board Meeting Minutes
Supervisor Martin asked Clerk Hiner if there was a set schedule for Cemetery
Board meetings. Clerk Hiner said that the last meeting was held at 7:30 a.m. to
accommodate the City but their representative did not attend. She added that
George Monroe will now be representing the City. Clerk Hiner said that the
Cemetery Board plans to meet once per month while they flesh out the ordinance/
policy manual, but then may not need to meet so frequently.
Supervisor Martin noted that a bench had been purchased for $97.50 and that
there is a $100 spending limit for committees and then they need to report to
the Board for approval before purchase. Mr. Connie Taschner (Cemetery Board
representative attending tonight’s meeting) commented that 18 graves were
decorated this year in the area of the bench and he thinks its because of the
bench. He added that the Cemetery Board is creating an ordinance for management
of the cemetery because every other municipality that operates a cemetery uses
one.
Mower Purchase
Mr. Taschner also presented information to the Board to support the Cemetery
Board’s request for a new Mower. He presented a quotation from Deer Creek Sales
for a mower and two commercial weed wackers. Mr. Taschner commented that the
Smiths had been previously doing the mowing so the Township’s equipment is very
old. He said that, with the new tractor for grave digging (along with
attachment for mowing fields) that was already purchased) and this equipment,
the cemetery would be properly equipped. He added that the Cemetery Board was
not requesting money from the Township general fund because there is enough
money in the Cemetery investment fund to cover the cost for this purchase.
Treasurer Fink commented that her records show that the fund has decreased in
value over the last quarter (as of 3/31/03). Mr. Taschner said that he had
contacted Mr. Buehler before tonight’s meeting and was told the account balance
was $ 120,000. Clerk Hiner stated that the motion was for the mower and
trimmers to be paid for out of capital outlay in place of benches and fences
that were tentatively proposed at the time the budget was prepared.
Supervisor Martin commented that the Cemetery Board’s minutes need to be
modified to state “make a motion to recommend” because the Cemetery Board
cannot make a motion to purchase.
Supervisor Martin said she’s not convinced there is adequate storage space for
this proposed equipment because the recently purchased mower blade is currently
being stored outside. Gerald Gorton has said there is no room for the equipment
in the cemetery storage shed. Mr. Taschner said there is room in the storage
shed if it was cleaned out. Mr. Taschner added that next year the Board wants
to construct a 3-bay garage building at the back of the cemetery.
Supervisor Martin asked if the Township purchases this equipment (adding that
she has a problem with mid-year purchases that are not included in the fiscal
year budget), can it also be used to maintain the Township park. She also asked
what the Cemetery Board plans to use to transport the mower. Mr. Tashner said
Gerald Gorton will use the same trailer he has been using to transport the old
tractor. Supervisor Martin said that trailer belongs to Mr. Moline.
Trustee Wright asked how many complete times the cemetery has been mowed this
year? Mr. Taschner said the cemetery was mowed 14 times last year but he didn’t
know the current number for this year. Supervisor Martin said that the vendor
records show the cemetery was actually mowed only 8 times. Trustee Wright said
he doesn’t think we have enough historical data collected to determine if the
purchase is justified and asked if Mr. Gorton is behind in mowing. Supervisor
Martin said he is not behind at this time. She added that mowing was been off
by a couple of days during the spring because Mr. Gorton took some vacation
time. Trustee Wright said that he is not convinced the mower purchase is
necessary because we are now paying someone hourly to mow. Mr. Taschner said
he’s been on the Cemetery Board for 10 years and knows that they need the
equipment. Mr. Taschner said they have the money in the Cemetery investment
fund they need to buy the equipment and they need the tractor to do the job
properly.
Trustee Wright said he agrees that string trimmers are inadequate for the
cemetery work and he would agree that the purchase of two commercial trimmers
is appropriate. Mr. Taschner said he noticed on the budget there is a provision
for extra student help over the summer if needed. Supervisor Martin said that
was correct adding that at this point it hasn’t been necessary, but extra help
will be provided when needed.
Trustee Wright said he was willing to make a motion for the purchase of two
trimmers. Treasurer Fink asked that investigating the need for an additional
mower be added to the motion. Trustee Wright said that right now we are not
behind on mowing and we haven’t gotten to the point where we need to hire an
additional person. Treasurer Fink said she wants to ensure that all the
equipment is being maintained on a regular basis. Supervisor Martin said that
she is making a schedule/checklist for Gerald to follow and will add the
general maintenance tasks to ensure they are completed. Trustee Wright
suggested using the manufacturers’ recommended maintenance schedules. Trustee
Wright said that his concern is that the Township Board has collected
information from other municipalities that manage cemeteries and it is not
consistent with what our staff is telling us about time and equipment needs.
Trustee Wright made a motion to approve the purchase of two (2) industrial
grade trimmers and that the Township monitor the mowing situation to determine
actual equipment and storage issues. Motion supported by Trustee Zaban.
Discussion
Supervisor Martin called for discussion. Clerk Hiner said it is critical to
have the right equipment to do the job. She agrees the decision can be tabled
temporarily but does not want to see the issue tabled to a point where it
interferes with the job. She said that when she prepared the budget at the
beginning of the fiscal year, she did not have any experience with the needs of
the cemetery. Trustee Wright said it may become very evident that the equipment
is needed immediately. He said he realizes we need better equipment but also
wants to avoid loading up on a lot of new equipment when the job is being
completed on schedule with the existing equipment. He recognizes it will save
time to have new equipment and asked if there were any other tasks that were
not getting completed on time as a result. Clerk Hiner said the cleaning at the
Township offices is currently inadequate. Supervisor Martin said that the work
not being done at the Township office is more of a supervision issue regarding
efficient use of time.
Supervisor Martin called for a vote on the Motion. Motion passed unanimously.
Treasurer Fink suggested that the vendor be provided a purchase order form from
the Township. This is usually a standard vendor request for larger equipment
purchases. Supervisor Martin said the Township should buy the old trimmers (at
10% of their original purchase price) and bring them to the Township office for
use. Treasurer Fink said the book value of the trimmers is zero so they can be
simply transferred to the Township.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Telecommunications Update
Supervisor Martin reported that the first payment for Right-of-Way for
Telecommunications had arrived. The money will be placed in a separate fund
account because it must be used for specific purposes dictated by the state.
She added that Right-of-Way checks will come to the Township quarterly.
Treasurer Fink said that a budget item titled “Deferred Revenue” has been
created to track this income (as recommended by Abraham & Gaffney). Supervisor
Martin added that the Board will need to make a budget amendment for this item
at the next board meeting.
Renovation Update
Supervisor Martin reported that ten (10) trees had been donated to the Township
by a resident. They have now been installed along Zimmer Road and the office
has received several compliments on their addition. She also reported that the
Township office would be closed on Friday, June 13th because there would be no
water due to construction activities that day. The contractor is planning to
grind the parking lot on Monday, June 16th and then apply the asphalt. The
construction process is moving well.
August 5th Election
Supervisor Martin reported that an unanticipated election is now schedule for
August 5, 2003. The ballot question is being raised for the Capital Area
District Library. She added that August 5th is a scheduled Board meeting date
and asked Clerk Hiner if she would like the Board meeting rescheduled. Clerk
Hiner said that rescheduling would be difficult because of planned vacations.
She added that she does not expect a significant turnout (only approx. 300 out
of 7000 voters turned out for the school board election) so she is confident
she can manage the election and the Board meeting on the same evening.
REPORTS
Michigan Farmland Preservation
Supervisor Martin reported that she is continuing to meet with representatives
from across the county on this issue. The plan is to prepare a county wide
development plan to address future development issues. They are looking at
establishing a plan county wide transfer of development rights.
NIESA
Trustee Zaban reported that there continues to be problems having enough
volunteer fire personnel available when there is a fire. Many responders are
often actually from Leroy Township. He reported that NIESA is still considering
setting up a substation in Williamstown Township. Trustee Zaban said they are
also going to do an appraisal of the downtown building because the City hasn’t
given NIESA their half of the building. Trustee Zaban is recommending that the
City give up their half so there wouldn’t need to be money spent on an
appraisal.
Parks
The park meeting is cancelled for this week. Supervisor Martin said she needs
information about what the park committee wants mowed so that she can direct
Gerald appropriately.
Library
Clerk Hiner reported that there was a library meeting last week. She said some
members are still debating the concept of a two-story building. Trustee Zaban
asked if they had purchased any property yet and Clerk Hiner reported they had
not. The Republic Bank property is being considered and they have also been
approached for purchase by Burger King. Clerk Hiner said that the Howe property
is also still being pursued. The property has been appraised at $195,000 and
Mr. Howe is asking for a possible swap of property. The City indicated they are
willing to entertain this proposal. Clerk Hiner said that all the money that
has been donated has been absorbed into the city general fund. The Library
Foundation apparently had accumulated $28,000 in addition to a $10,000 donation
made by an elderly patron. For a time there was a separate line item in the
City budget for Library funds but that is no longer the case so the library has
no money of their own. Clerk Hiner said the conflict between the Mayor Zichi
and Ed Noonan over the issue of a two story facility on the existing site was
frustrating to those in attendance and interfered with progress at the meeting.
The next meeting is scheduled for June 18. She said there is no point in having
a meeting until they have numbers to prove whether or not a second floor is
cost effective.
Williamston Community Schools
Supervisor Martin stated that she and Clerk Hiner are continuing to meet with
the schools (there is another meeting tomorrow night) regarding the bond issue.
The process will be ongoing one.
Other
Audit
Supervisor Martin reported that the annual audit of Township finance records
will be conducted by Abraham & Gaffney on June 16, 17 and 18. Abraham & Gaffney
has forwarded a list of information they will need to have available which has
been distributed to Clerk and Treasury staff.
City of Williamston
Supervisor Martin notes that the minutes for the Williamston City Council
meeting were provided in the Board packet for review.
Ryan McGuire Brochure
Supervisor Martin noted that the brochure prepared by Ryan McGuire was now
complete and a copy was included in tonight’s Board packet. He did a great job
explaining how local government works. (Ryan’s research included attending a
Township Board meeting and visiting the Township office). Trustee Zaban
recommended that the brochure be passed on to Michigan Township Association or
a state representative. Supervisor Martin agreed.
Office Holiday Hours
Supervisor Martin recommended that the Township office be closed on July 5th.
MEETING REVIEW
Supervisor Martin summarized the following items: 1) There will be a Board
workshop on June 17 at 5pm, 2) Treasurer Fink said that only the park trail
needs to be mowed and only when it necessary, 3) Supervisor Martin reported
that she had made arrangements with Roger Roty and Patty to complete
reassessment of 1/5 of the Township each year for the next five years, 4) Clerk
Hiner asked Trustees Wright and Zaban to start completing a timecard each month
to document all the meetings they attend so she can be sure to pay them
properly, 5) Supervisor Martin said there will be a demonstration of the
backhoe by the vendor at the cemetery at 9 a.m. tomorrow morning (there is an
issue about whether the equipment is the proper size so D&G wants to see how it
is being used), needs to be used, 6) Supervisor Martin reported that Mrs.
Savage received money back from liquidated perpetual care funds is very upset
that the money was given back to her. She wants to return it to the Township to
be used for perpetual care (flowers for particular graves and some general
maintenance). Clerk Hiner reported that another lot owner brought up the need
for a master planting plan.
Adjournment
Trustee Zaban made a motion to adjourn supported by Trustee Wright. Motion
passed unanimously. Meeting adjourned at 10:16 p.m.
______________________________      ______________________________
Susan L. Hiner               Lori A. Pincumbe
Clerk                  Recording Secretary
JULY 1, 2003
PRESENT: Supervisor Mickey Martin, Treasurer Nancy Fink, Clerk Susan Hiner,
Trustee Steve Zaban, Trustee Martin Wright and Recording Secretary Lori
Pincumbe. ABSENT: None
CALL TO ORDER
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order at 7:30 p.m. She provided
an overview of the meeting agenda and made a request for changes or additions.
Supervisor Martin added “Resolution for Changing Authorized Check Signatures”
to New Business. No other additions or changes were made.
PLEDGE
CONSENT AGENDA
Supervisor Martin reviewed the items included in the Consent Agenda packet.
Supervisor Martin requested changes or additions. Trustee Wright asked for the
Workshop Minutes to be corrected to list hall rental and deposit fees. No other
corrections or additions were identified. Trustee Zaban moved to approve the
Consent Agenda. Motion supported by Trustee Wright. Motion passed unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin invited comments from the public for any non-agenda items.
Citizen Al LeBlanc presented the Board with the current Pebblebrook Subdivision
Newsletter. He asked for any feedback the Board had to offer. No other public
comment was offered.
NEW BUSINESS
Planning Commission Report
Supervisor Martin stated that there were several Planning Commission items that
needed Board action this evening.
Rezoning Request from Ag-C to R-1-S at 1435 Epley Rd-Templeton
Planning Commission Chair Dan Kraft reported that the public opposition to this
request was overwhelming. The original request came before the planning
commission 6 months ago when a neighbor complained that a road was being
constructed and litigation is pending on this issue. Mr. Kraft reported that,
based on the public concern at the public hearing and the recommendation by the
Township planning consultant (McKenna Associates), the Planning Commission
recommends denial of this request. Mr. Kraft added that rezoning would be
inconsistent with the Master Plan, would result in a spot zoning in a rural
part of the Township, and would be allowing special privileges to the applicant
(in addition to several other reasons noted in the Planning Commission minutes)
the Planning Commission voted to deny the request.
 
Supervisor Martin commented that there were no positive considerations listed
in the Planning Commission minutes to support the decision rezoning request.
Mr. Kraft agreed and noted that several of the items in the minutes are
statements of fact and cannot be considered either positive or negative.
  
Trustee Zaban referred to item (h) of the Planning Commission minutes and asked
if the 1320’ road that has been constructed exceeds the zoning ordinance 660’
maximum length requirement. Mr. Kraft responded that the subdivision ordinance
requires that a cul-de-sac road cannot exceed 660’. He added that, evidently, a
1320’ road has already been constructed. Supervisor Martin clarified that it
has been constructed as a private driveway at this point. Mr. Kraft said he
believed that, if the rezoning were approved, the property would be able to
accommodate 32 residential lots with frontage requirements accommodated.
Supervisor Martin clarified that this item then is a statement of fact and not
a positive or negative comment. Mr. Kraft concurred. Trustee Zaban reiterated
that the zoning ordinance requires a maximum road length of 660’. Mr. Kraft
concurred.
 
Supervisor Martin invited the applicant to address the Board. Mr. Bob Templeton
(445 Highland Ave. East Lansing) stated there has been litigation initiated on
this property and the Supervisor has been listed as a witness so he request
that the issue be tabled until the litigation process is complete. Mr.
Templeton said there was never an intent to split the property into 32 parcels
and that the reason he requested rezoning is that the Road Commission
requests that for a county road to be created, the road service more than 2
parcels. He said the engineer did draw the drawing with a 1320’ road including
a cul-de-sac (660’ +660’).
Mr. Templeton said another point he wants to make is that the current zoning
requires a minimum of 120 feet of frontage for that zone. For a real road, his
understanding is that the frontage requirement is 160’. He said that if that
property was rezoned and split using the current roadway plan, the splits would
be of no more density than the nearby properties. He said, to clarify, if you
take the piece of land he owns there and split it up into 6 parcels, the splits
would be 10 acres in size. Supervisor Martin corrected him stating that the
property being requested for rezoning is only 38 acres so you couldn’t create 6
ten acre parcels. Mr. Templeton agreed.
 
Mr. Templeton said that another point he has is that this property is similar
to the properties owned by Bob Hilty and Dwight Kamp. He said they were both
prior Planning Commission members and the zoning on their properties was
changed while they were on the Planning Commission. He said he thinks his
property is similar to their property so his zoning request should also be
allowed. He asked if a comment section was allowed after the Board responds to
his point. Supervisor Martin said not usually but, if he has more to say, he
can speak again.
 
Supervisor Martin responded to each of Mr. Templeton’s points. First, she asked
if the pending litigation has any thing to do with the rezoning request. She
added that she was unaware that she was a witness for any pending litigation.
Mr. Templeton responded that it is all tied up together. Trustee Wright said he
fails to see how the litigation pending between two private citizens has
anything to do with a rezoning request. Mr. Templeton said the road way is part
of the litigation. Treasurer Fink clarified that maybe Mr. Templeton is
concerned that a decision made at this Board meeting could impact his pending
litigation. Mr. Templeton said he is not a lawyer but a decision tonight may
impact the litigation. He said he would leave the decision on whether to table
the rezoning request up to the Board. Supervisor Martin clarified that it is a
personal civil litigation between a citizen and Mr. Templeton and not
litigation between him and the Township or the Township and any other person.
He responded that it is not at this time. Supervisor Martin said she is not
positive that there is a need to table the decision. She asked Mr. Kraft if, as
chairman of the Planning Commission, he saw a conflict of interest for her to
consider tabling this decision because of the pending litigation that names her
as a witness. Mr. Kraft said he did not see a conflict of interest in the
Supervisor, acting as chairman of the Board, and voting on the rezoning request
being a benefit to either litigant. The Board agreed that they were ready to
make their decision this evening.
 
Supervisor Martin clarified that even though the applicant stated that there
was no intent to split to 32 parcels, the rezoning will allow it so the
property owner will have the right to split in the future. Therefore, the Board
has to consider this as a future possibility. Supervisor Martin said she didn’t
know where Mr. Templeton’s information that 160’ of frontage is required. She
said R-1-S is 120’ and the next level up is RR which requires 240’ of frontage.
Mr. Templeton said that Ingham County Road Commission uses 160’ for its rural
road specifications. Treasurer Fink said that R-1-S district was not intended
to be put in rural areas. She said it was intended that R-1-S and R-1 districts
be located closer to the City where hook-up to sewer and water would eventually
be available eventually. Trustee Wright said he doesn’t understand why the
applicant requested R-1-S zoning if the intent was for there to only be a few
parcels split-there are other options for rezoning that make more sense. Mr.
Templeton said the 660’ requirement for a turnaround led him to make this
request. Supervisor Martin said the differences between this property and Hilty
and Kamp properties is that those 2 properties match up with the Master Plan by
being located south of Sherwood Road. She said the Hilty property is also
located on Grand River with water and sewer hookup available.
 
Supervisor Martin asked for any questions for the applicant from the audience.
Citizen Bob Lombardini (200 Epley Road) said that he urges the Township to
accept the recommendation of the Planning Commission and the Township planning
consultant (McKenna Associates) to reject this rezoning request.
Trustee Wright made a motion to deny the request for rezoning of this parcel
from R-1-S based on the recommendations and report of the Planning Commission.
Motion supported by Clerk Hiner.
Roll Call Vote:
Treasurer Nancy Fink      Yes
Trustee Steve Zaban      Yes
Supervisor Mickey Martin   Yes
Trustee Martin Wright      Yes
Clerk Susan Hiner      Yes         Motion passed unanimously.
Discussion
Mr. Templeton said that he realizes his next option is circuit court but asked
if the Township would be willing to sit down with him and work out some other
alternatives or solutions for the situation. Supervisor Martin said that the
Board would accept that option and suggested he meet with the planner (McKenna
Associates) as a place to start. Mr. Templeton said he believes this is a
situation that can be fixed. Supervisor Martin said she is not sure what he
thinks needs to be fixed. Mr. Templeton said he would like a road way there
eventually. Supervisor Martin said the Township only allows a county roadway or
a private driveway. Mr. Templeton said the Township also allows joint drives.
Supervisor Martin said it is allowed only under certain circumstances. Trustee
Zaban suggested Mr. Templeton work with the planner and see what can be
resolved.
 
Zoning Ordinance Revision-Addition of M-43 Access Management District
Planning Commission Chairman Dan Kraft reported that MDOT had provided the
Township with recommended access guidelines for access management along the M-
43 corridor and was encouraging local municipalities to adopt these guidelines
to better manage future commercial growth. The Planning Commission worked with
McKenna Associates to adapt those guidelines to our Township’s needs. The
Planning Commission is proposing an overlay district that would only apply to
the M-43 corridor and properties within 300’ of the corridor. In some
instances, it will limit the access points to Grand River to lower the
likelihood of traffic accidents. Mr. Kraft said there had been a 2 step public
hearing; the first meeting was held 2 months ago and then the final version was
deliberated on by the Planning Commission on June 17, 2003 with a final
recommendation that the Board adopt the M-43 overlay plan for the M-43
corridor.
 
Supervisor Martin clarified that this overlay does not impact parcels zoned
residential. Mr. Kraft concurred that this access management plan will affect
business or subdivisions when they move in. Supervisor Martin explained that
she had worked on this corridor study with representatives from MDOT and the
surrounding communities. The goal is to plan for 50 years down the road so that
we can avoid traffic bottlenecks like Meridian Township currently experiences.
She said that when businesses come in, they will need to provide service drives
and accesses from one business to another so traffic doesn’t have to move back
out onto Grand River. Supervisor Martin said that right now the Township does
not have the sewer capacity or the desire to commercialize Grand River but this
will help us manage the future. Treasurer Fink asked if it is going to affect
existing small businesses that won’t be able to connect up to the access
drives. Supervisor Martin said in that situation, easements can be installed.
This will be an overlay to our zoning ordinance.
 
Trustee Zaban made a motion to include the proposed text amendment for an M-43
Access Management District as an overlay to Article 25A of the Zoning
ordinance. Motion supported by Trustee Wright. Motion passed unanimously.
 
Text Amendment in RE District - Addition of Permitted Uses - Young O. Kim
Planning Commission Chair Dan Kraft reported that the Planning Commission had
been asked to consider this request as an outshoot of a request for rezoning
that the Board tabled last December. The Planning Commission made a motion to
deny this text amendment request. Another consideration the Planning Commission
discussed was to narrow the text amendment to what was originally asked for in
the rezoning request. There was opposition to this approach. The Planning
Commission voted to recommend denial of the text amendment to the rural estates
district. Supervisor Martin clarified that the text amendment request (items 5,
6, 9, 12 and 13) was considered using the wording submitted by the applicant.
Trustee Zaban asked if there had been a public hearing for this issue. Mr.
Kraft said there had been and there was no real strong support or opposition.
He added that there were some concerns expressed about the property on the
corner of Grand River and Glaser and also concerns expressed about the impacts
of this text amendment on development in the northern part of the Township.
This request would have affected all rural zones in the Township, so it would
have affected those parcels in the northern part of the Township as well.
Treasurer Fink asked if items 5, 6, 9, 12 and 13 have to be considered as a
group (ie. that all four proposed uses had to be voted on together) or could
the uses be considered individually. Supervisor Martin stated that the
applicant has requested they be considered as a group. Trustee Zaban asked if
there was any commercial activity currently allowed in the rural estates (RE)
district. Mr. Kraft said that some agricultural activities are permitted
including greenhouses. Treasurer Fink commented that growing and wholesale
sales is permitted now in rural estates. Supervisor Martin said that, by
special use, there are other commercial businesses allowed including operating
a bed breakfast, golf driving range, commercial kennel, etc… None of the
permitted uses are traffic intense. Treasurer Fink stated that if this RE was
changed, it would apply to all RE zoned parcels in the Township. Supervisor
Martin concurred.
 
Supervisor Martin invited the applicant to address the Board. Mr. Kim stated
that if his greenhouse business fails, he wants to have more options for an
alternate business. He has invested too much money to give up setting up a
business on this property. He said he hopes to have a good business but wants
to be prepared. Supervisor Martin asked for any other comments from the Board.
Supervisor Martin said she has great reluctance to pass something that could
impact all the other business in the RE district. Trustee Wright said it would
be better if the request could be narrowed to the Grand River corridor. He
added that if you read the recommendations presented by McKenna (they presented
4 points and Trustee Wright stated that he agreed with them), it would have
been a much better approach. Supervisor Martin said the Planning Commission had
to act on the request the way it was written by the applicant. Trustee Wright
said he would have been able to agree with the request if it had been narrowed
in scope as recommended in McKenna’s letter. Treasurer Fink said that it seems
to her that the applicant purchased a piece of property that was not suited to
do what he wants to do and now he wants the Township to change the zoning to
meet his needs. She said there are other properties in the Township that are
zoned appropriately and would have been more suitable for him to purchase.
Supervisor Martin reminded the Board that the original rezoning request was
tabled at the December 3, 2002 Board meeting until the text amendment request
was considered. At that time, the Planning Commission thought that a greenhouse
would work in the RE district with a text amendment to allow just for a
greenhouse in the RE as a special use on the Grand River corridor only. She
added that the Township probably would have considered this request favorably.
Mr. Kim was encouraged to come forward and make this request. She said that Mr.
Kim, however, chose to submit a request that asked for much more.
Trustee Zaban made a motion to deny the text amendment change request in the RE
district for Mr. Young O. Kim as recommended by the Planning Commission. Motion
supported by Clerk Hiner.
Roll Call Vote:
Treasurer Nancy Fink      Yes
Trustee Steve Zaban      Yes
Supervisor Mickey Martin   Yes
Trustee Martin Wright      Yes
Clerk Susan Hiner      Yes         Motion passed unanimously.
Rezoning Request from RE to B-2 at 1040 Grand River- Young O. Kim( Tabled
December 3, 2002)
Supervisor Martin called for a motion to un-table Mr. Kim’s rezoning request.
Trustee Wright moved to un-table the rezoning request made by Mr. Young Kim for
converting the property located at 1040 Grand River from an RE to B-2 zone, the
original request was tabled by the Board on December 3, 2002. Motion supported
by Trustee Zaban. Motion passed unanimously.
Planning Commission Chairman Dan Kraft reported that the rezoning request was
tied to a proposed use on the property. The Planning Commission kind of liked
the idea of a greenhouse operation on this property but they are not allowed to
spot zone based on use. The proposed B2 zone is for commercial use. The
applicants proposed use was for a commercial greenhouse with a retail sales
operation. When the use was eliminated from their consideration, the Planning
Commission voted to recommend denial of this rezoning request because it is
inconsistent with the Master Plan. The Grand River/Zimmer intersection is
considered the “town center” on the Master Plan and it is one of the last
existing open spaces on the corridor. The Planning Commission as it exists
wants to keep the zoning as it exists. The B2 zone would allow a number of uses
that would be unacceptable to the Planning Commissioners.
Supervisor Martin stated that there are several business uses already allowed
in the RE district including residential care facilities, essential services
and (by special use permit) bed and breakfast operations, golf driving ranges,
riding stables, commercial kennels, veterinary clinics, transmitting towers,
oil and gas processing facilities, greenhouses, sod growing operations, nature
centers, demonstration farms, etc... She said there are really a lot of options
available in the RE, especially when the option the applicant was interested in
was a greenhouse. Treasurer Fink asked if there is sanitary sewer available to
the property. Supervisor Martin said that the sewer line goes up to the
property and it would have to be part of the Township’s 7 remaining available
taps.
Supervisor Martin asked if there was any more information that the applicant
would like to add. Mr. Kim said he didn’t know what kind of information the
Board would like to hear. He said he applied the first time in B-2 because
there is commercial property around his property. He doesn’t understand why his
property can’t be commercial. Treasurer Fink responded that it is because the
Township Master Plan doesn’t want continuous commercial development along Grand
River. Mr. Kim asked how long this policy will last-100 years, 1000 years?
Treasurer Fink said the plan will likely be in place for 5 to 10 years. He said
he couldn’t understand why his property could not be commercial when all the
property surrounding it is commercial. Treasurer Fink said it is because he is
applying now and that is the policy that is in place now.
Treasurer Fink made a motion to accept the Planning Commission’s
recommendations and deny the rezoning application from RE to B2 at 1440 Grand
River. Motion supported by Clerk Hiner.
Trustee Zaban asked how long Mr. Kim had owned the property. Mr. Kim said he
had owned the property since last year. He wants to build a greenhouse but that
business might fail so he wants to have other choices. Mr. Kim said that if
business is good he would like to build another greenhouse. Mr. Kim said he
does not understand the reasons why this property cannot be commercial.
Treasurer Fink recommended to Supervisor Martin that the reasons be put in
writing for Mr. Kim. Supervisor Martin agreed that the reasons could be
summarized from the Planning Commission minutes.
Supervisor Martin said that in this Township we are very protective of our
property. Mr. Kim asked for how long and Supervisor Martin said that it may be
a 10-15 year investment for him, she’s not sure. She said there is B2 area that
is available and that at this time the Planning Commission doesn’t feel the
Township needs more commercial property. Supervisor Martin said that when he
bought the property, Mr. Kim knew that it was zoned RE and not commercial. Mr.
Kim said he bought the property last year in winter and did not realize it was
wetlands. He agreed with Supervisor Martin that he has an issue with the person
he bought it from. Mr. Kim said he appreciated that the Township Supervisor
tried to help him. Mr. Kim said he doesn’t understand why he spent $30,000 on a
blueprint. Supervisor Martin responded that he had made that decision on his
own. She reminded Mr. Kim that, when they first met with Chris Doozen and Mr.
Acre, he was told he may not get what he wants for 10 years. She said that she
told him she was willing to help him work through the process but she could not
guarantee that his request would be successful.
Trustee Zaban asked if there had been a public hearing on this issue. Mr. Kraft
responded that the public hearing was last October. He said that the neighbors
came out in support of a greenhouse but were concerned about traffic on Glaser
Road. Trustee Zaban asked if any attendees were in favor of the request. Mr.
Kraft said nobody spoke in favor of the rezoning but they were in favor of a
greenhouse without the retail component.
Supervisor Martin called for any further discussion on the motion. No further
discussion offered.
Roll Call Vote:
Treasurer Nancy Fink      Yes
Trustee Steve Zaban      Yes
Supervisor Mickey Martin   Yes
Trustee Martin Wright      Yes
Clerk Susan Hiner      Yes         Motion passed unanimously.
Mr. Kim asked the Board if he has permission to refill the wetlands. Building
Inspector Walt Aven explained that Mr. Kim was given a permit for the material
he had already put in (without having the appropriate permits). Mr. Aven said
that Mr. Kim has to first go to the Ingham County Drain Commission and get a
soil erosion permit from them. He can then bring the soil erosion permit to the
Township and Mr. Aven will decide if a permit can be issued. Mr. Kim said he
has a permit for filling in the remainder of the wetlands. Mr. Aven stated that
Mr. Kim only has a permit for the 50 yards he has already put in. Mr. Kim said
ICDC gave him permission to fill in and now Mr. Aven is taking it away. Mr.
Aven said Mr. Kim needs to make an appointment at the Township, bring in his
information from ICDC and a permit can be considered. The Township needs to
know how much material Mr. Kim is bringing in and where he plans to put it.
(Mr. Kim left the building).
Meeting Minutes
Planning Commission Chair Dan Kraft reported that the Planning Commission had
held a public hearing on the burn ordinance and it will be deliberated at the
next meeting. They will also be working on some Master Plan revisions to expand
the mobile home district and to consider a mixed use zone on the commercial
corridor of Grand River on the east and west sides of town. Supervisor Martin
said she wants the Planning Commission to look at the Burn Ordinance across the
Township. Treasurer Fink asked if the Board could receive a revised set of the
Planning Commission minutes once they have been finalized. Supervisor Martin
said the Planning Commission needs to consider how the ordinance can be
implemented if different sizes of property determine burn permit criteria. The
minutes need to be changed to state, “…it will make it very difficult Township
employees to issue a burn permit.” Treasurer Fink added it already takes a lot
of time to issue a burn permit.
Treasurer Fink informed Mr. Kraft that she has recently learned that NIESA is
not in the business of enforcing our burn ordinance. If fires are burning out
of compliance in the middle of the night, we are supposed to contact our Zoning
Enforcement Officer (Constable Dahlstrom) and not NIESA. Treasurer Fink added
that the Planning Commission needs to consider that this burn ordinance is
really not enforceable at all.
Complaint - 5545 Lounsbury Road - Blight 
Supervisor Martin reported that she, planning consultant Chris Doozan and
Constable Dahlstrom had visited the property owned by Dorothy Young in response
to citizen complaints. Supervisor Martin explained she had written a letter
after the visits reflecting their observations. Specifically, the letter refers
to piles of building material, building debris, a steep incline to an open
basement with no protection, unsightly tarps used in place of permanent siding
and roofing, wood planks used to provide access to the house and unsightly wood
sheets used in place of permanent wood siding and windows. Supervisor Martin
said these conditions have existed for an extended period of time and longer
than typical for a construction project. She said that Mrs. Young was notified
in the letter that she had 10 days to correct the problems.
Supervisor Martin stated that Mrs. Young and Mr. Witgen responded with a letter
of remediation (received by the Township on Saturday, June 27). Supervisor
Martin said the response letter describes what they are trying to do with the
property but did not clearly state a timeline for abatement. Mrs. Young stated
that their explanation was provided on page 2 of the letter. Supervisor Martin
read from the letter “…4 or 5 weeks as long as there are not too many rainy
days.” Supervisor Martin asked the Board if they have any questions. Supervisor
Martin asked the complaintant to clarify the timeline for abatement. Trustee
Wright said the letter was not specific enough. Mr. Witgen said he will have
the back end of the house completed in the next 4-5 weeks. He said that, once
complete, he plans to start on the front half of the house (which will require
new tarps). Mr. Witgen suggested that he could hold this part of the project
off until spring rather than leaving the front of the house covered in tarp all
winter. Supervisor Martin questioned whether the tarp was necessary.
Trustee Wright asked about the piles of building materials and building debris.
Mr. Witgen said that he has already taken care of these items. He said he has
put a barrier fence around the hole at the basement entrance. Trustee Wright
clarified that the tarps that are currently being used in place of siding and
roofing on the back side of the house will be taken care of within 4-5 weeks.
Mr. Witgen agreed. Trustee Wright asked the status of the wood planks. Mr.
Witgen said he has removed the wood planks temporarily and will put them back
when he needs to move lumber in because they make the job easier. Supervisor
Martin asked what he is using for access to the house if he is not using the
planks. Mr. Witgen said that there is a wood boardwalk in place that is like a
deck but sits on the ground. Supervisor Martin clarified that this boardwalk is
different from the wood planks that were removed and Mr. Witgen said that was
true. Trustee Wright asked about the areas that are currently just covered in
sheeting but need siding and windows.
Mr. Witgen said he is concentrating on the roof right now and would like to put
the porch on next before he does the siding. He said that once he gets the
footings in, the 2 porch roofs can be put in and then he can start the siding.
Once the siding goes on he was planning to take care of the windows.
Trustee Wright said that from what he can see, this process has been going on
for some time. Mr. Witgen said he’s been working on the project for 3 years,
starting with the basement. Trustee Wright asked Building Inspector Walt Aven
if he had any suggestions. Mr. Aven said he thinks Mr. Witgen needs to get more
help. Mrs. Young said that there is a legal agreement between Mr. Witgen and
her and Mr. Witgen is putting in sweat equity because he eventually wants to
buy the property. Mr. Witgen said cost is a factor with hiring a person. He
said he already has a lot invested in the property.
Trustee Wright said there needs to be some definite dates for progress. Mr.
Witgen said that by the next Board meeting, there should be some progress.
Supervisor Martin clarified that the Board could expect an inspection conducted
on August 5th to show the following items accomplished: piles of building
materials and debris will be gone, the steep incline to an open basement will
be protected, the unsightly tarps will be removed, and the wood planks will be
removed. Mr. Witgen said the sheeting would not be removed by the next meeting.
Mr. Witgen said there will be progress but you won’t see a difference from the
outside. Trustee Wright said the main thing the Board needs to see is
significant progress.
Trustee Wright said the Board will start with this and then set some new
deadlines at the next Board meeting. He explained that the Board needs this
issue addressed by fall because there have been many, many complaints about it
from neighbors. Mr. Witgen said he realizes that the public location of the
property is a problem. He said he wants to make the farmhouse a building that
looks good and fits in with the neighborhood. Trustee Wright said the Board
realizes that and wants to see him succeed in this endeavor. Trustee Wright
said the Township has had complaints over the last couple of years and have
tried to minimize it so Mr. Witgen could get the project going but now the
complaints have increased and become more intense so they need to be addressed.
Trustee Wright said it looks like the first 3 items have been addressed or will
be within a month; Mr. Witgen has committed to get the tarps down and have the
back enclosed. At the next Board meeting the Township would like to see his
plans for the 5th item which involves the porches. Trustee Wright said the
Board needs to see significant progress. Mr. Witgen said that he plans to also
start working on the front of the house, and this is going to open another can
of worms. Trustee Wright said Mr. Witgen is going to have to work to minimize
the problem. Mr. Witgen said that is why he proposed waiting to do the front
until spring. Clerk Hiner told Mr. Witgen he needs to finish the work he has
begun before he begins a project on the front of the house so his neighbors are
confident that it won’t be another 6 years before the problem is going to be
resolved. Supervisor Martin said that Mr. Witgen
needs to be fully prepared with supplies and funding before he begins the front
of the house. Trustee Wright said Mr. Witgen needs to cut down the timeline for
this project because it is in such a conspicuous location.
Supervisor Martin summarized that the first 4 items outlined in the Township’s
letter will be abated by August 5th and Mr. Witgen will bring a plan and a
timeline for the 5th item to be completed. Mr. Witgen agreed.
Cemetery Board Report
Investment Resolution for Cemetery Funds, Resolution #29
Supervisor Martin read the proposed investment policy for the Township
cemeteries which states that all cemetery investments must conform to the
Township Investment Policy. She said that the Investment Policy declares the
type of investments that are allowable. A copy of the Township Investment
Policy was provided in the Board packets for review. Supervisor Martin called
for a motion.
Trustee Wright made a motion to adopt the Investment Resolution for Cemetery
Funds which states that all cemetery investments must conform to the Township
investment policy attached. Motion supported by Treasurer Fink. Motion passed
unanimously.
Treasurer Fink stated that she has met with McDonald Investments and requested
that those monies turned over to the Township. She said, according to state
law, it is the Township’s responsibility to keep the principal of this
money intact and use the interest for the purposes requested by the perpetual
care contributors. She said she will be determining which portion of the
investment money is principal and interest. She will then chart the interest to
the cemetery fund for use in the cemetery operation as required.
Dan Kraft commented that he had observed a car pull up to the pile of bricks at
the back of the cemetery and load them into their trunk. Connie Taschner said
that Mr. Moline uses the pile of bricks to form a slab under foundations before
they go in (which is required by the State). The bricks are being donated to
the cemetery. Mr. Taschner said there are more bricks than necessary and the
Cemetery Board wants to remove the bricks and clean the area up for a future
building. Mr. Wright said that we should encourage people to take more of them.
Mower Purchase
Mr. Taschner asked if the mower question could be discussed next. He said that
one mower has been broken down for a week so there is no mower at the cemetery.
Supervisor Martin said employees have been using the Simplicity mower. Mr.
Taschner said the Cemetery Board met this morning and is recommending that the
Simplicity mower be used as a back-up and that the Township go forward with the
purchase of a new mower. Trustee Wright asked if there was room in the storage
shed yet. Mr. Taschner said there is definitely room. Supervisor Martin said
the finish mower is being stored inside now.
Treasurer Fink said she would like to see the money from McDonald Investments
first to determine exactly what amount of interest is available for spending
this year. Mr. Taschner said the Cemetery Board is not contemplating any other
purchases this year. Treasurer Fink said the interest from the investments will
need to be fed into the budget each year so that the Cemetery Board knows what
they have to work with.
Trustee Wright said he needs to see the storage shed cleaned out to make space
for new equipment before he is willing to authorize any new purchase.
Supervisor Martin said that she agrees with Trustee Wright and when the
employees have the shed cleaned out, she would be willing to consider the
mower. Supervisor Martin said she will speak to Gerald Gorton and Ben Moline
and explain that if they want new equipment, they need to clean the building
out so that it can stored in a secure place. Clerk Hiner said it would be
irresponsible of the Township Board to purchase equipment when it cannot be
cared for properly. Supervisor Martin concurred. Trustee Wright said the
employee responsible for this task needs to be put on notice to complete this
task. Clerk Hiner recommended that Mr. Gorton be given 2 days to complete this
project. Supervisor Martin agreed. Mr. Taschner commented that the young man
working at the cemetery this week is doing an excellent job and should be
complimented.
Cemetery Board Meeting Minutes
Clerk Hiner reported that the Cemetery Board met earlier today and began work
on the Rules and Regulations book which is essentially the Cemetery Ordinance.
George Monroe represented the City at the meeting.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Resolution for Updating Authorized Bank Signatures-Resolution #30
Supervisor Martin called for a resolution to submit authorized signatures for
the Capital National Bank account(s). Treasurer Fink said that a Board
resolution is required by some banks.
Trustee Wright made a motion supported by Trustee Zaban to adopt a resolution
to change authorized signatures to be Treasurer Nancy Fink, Clerk Susan Hiner,
Deputy Treasurer Susan Jennings and Deputy Clerk Lori Pincumbe for Capital
National Bank.
Treasurer Nancy Fink said she will present a summary of all the accounts to the
Board at the next meeting since there has been some recent repositioning of
funds.
Digital Orthophotography with the Drain Commission
Supervisor Martin said she still supports the Township participating in the
digital orthophotography program and she said she would like to go forward with
it. Trustee Wright said his only concern is that if the other parties back out,
the cost for Williamstown Township could go up. Supervisor Martin said the
Board could word their motion to stipulate a maximum cost of $15,000 (the
proposed contribution from ICDC for phases I and II). Trustee Wright said,
otherwise, he believes it is a very feasible program and will save the Township
money over the long term.
Supervisor Martin said the bigger players (City of Lansing, Lansing Township,
Delhi Township) are already in on it. East Lansing is still considering.
Trustee Wright made a motion that the Board approve the expenditure to join in
the county wide digital orthophotography project with a maximum expense of
$15,000 for Phase I and Phase 2. Motion supported by Clerk Hiner. Motion passed
unanimously.
Renovation Update
Supervisor Martin reported that wallpaper has been put up, the asphalt has been
put in and the parking lot lighting locations have been started. The cabinets
for the office area and kitchen are installed. Additional cabinets will arrive
Thursday and carpet and vinyl will be installed in 2 weeks. The men’s room tile
is installed. The contractor has estimated that we will be moving into the new
office the last week of July. The construction will then move to the south side
of the building. Trustee Wright asked if there was going to be sufficient space
for the August 5th Board meeting. Supervisor Martin said she thinks there will
be adequate space. Supervisor Martin said she is pleased with the progress and
there is a lot of coordination that needs to happen the last week of the month.
Mr. Young Kim
(Mr. Kim returned to the meeting). Building Inspector Walt Aven asked
Supervisor Martin that, since Mr. Kim has returned to the meeting with his
permit sign, he probably would like an opportunity to speak. Mr. Aven
reiterated that Mr. Kim next needs to get his soil erosion permit from the
county and the permit he has is for the work already done. Mr. Aven recommends
that he and Mr. Kim meet at the property to work out the details because this
is not the place for discussion of the issue. Mr. Aven said he is not saying
the work cannot be done but Mr. Kim needs to get a permit from the Drain
Commissioner first. Supervisor Martin clarified that Mr. Aven, Mr. Kim and the
Drain Commissioner will meet at the site to clarify this issue. Mr. Kim asked
if he needs to get permission again. Mr. Kim said he never received a letter
that said for 50 yards only. Supervisor Martin said the permit did say for 50
yards. Mr. Kim said he doesn’t want to meet with Mr. Aven anymore. (Mr. Kim
left the room).
Mrs. Kim said that Mr. Kim has lived in Okemos for 40 years in and she is
feeling discrimination. Mrs. Kim said she does not speak English very well. She
said her husband is a very hard worker. Supervisor Martin said that what her
husband has to do is meet with Mr. Aven and go over the information. Mrs. Kim
repeated that she is feeling discrimination several times. Treasurer Fink said
that Mr. Kim is not being discriminated against and everyone has to follow the
same rules. Inspector Aven said he is not discriminating against anyone.
Supervisor Martin said there is no discrimination and everyone follows the same
rules. Treasurer Fink asked Mrs. Kim if the problem was that she and her
husband did not understand English clearly and needed a translator. Mrs. Kim
said she did not understand. Mrs. Kim said when she first started coming to
Williamston she liked the way people treated them. Now she is feeling
discrimination. Supervisor Martin said there is no discrimination here. She
added that it is unfortunate that she feels this way and thanked her for her
comments. She reiterated that everyone has to follow the same rules. (Mrs. Kim
left the room).
Clerk Hiner said there may be someone in the Township that could work with the
Kims as a translator. Citizen Frans Wilbrink said perhaps they misunderstood
the original comments that indicated everyone liked the idea of a greenhouse.
Treasurer Fink said that the Kims had rejected the idea of a special use
permit. Supervisor Martin said Mr. Kim has been in the area since at least
1968. Trustee Zaban said the bottom line is that Mr. Kim bought the property
just like anybody could have, without it having the proper zoning. He added
that it has been a difficult piece of property to move for many years. Mr. Kim
just bought a bad piece of property and the person who sold it unloaded it on
him. Trustee Zaban said that, based on Mr. Kim’s anger at tonight’s meeting,
Mr. Aven should not meet with Mr. Kim without another person present for the
Township’s protection and his personal safety. Clerk Hiner said she would make
a copy of that original permit for Mr. Aven.
Building Permits-Fee Based
Supervisor Martin stated that this issue was discussed at the workshop. She
explained that currently the fee is based on the size of the structure and
valuation of work. Some people put down what they think and some developers use
the worksheet that Mr. Aven prepared. Supervisor Martin said she believes
everyone should work from the same worksheet. Supervisor Martin asked Mr. Aven
if he felt that was acceptable. Mr. Aven said it will be acceptable but
the estimate by the worksheet formula will be on the low end for everybody (a
$300,000 house will look like $175,000 using the worksheet). Supervisor Martin
suggested that we start with this worksheet and if Mr. Aven
determines that we need to develop another one, that will be fine. Inspector
Aven said building permit information used to be published in the Lansing State
Journal so homeowners would flag the cost of their house if the builder’s
permit cost didn’t match what they were paying the builder.
Clerk Hiner asked Mr. Aven if he was comfortable with the cost per square foot
listed on the worksheet because it seemed very low to her. Supervisor Martin
said that cost was recently increased from $35/sq. ft. to $50/sq. ft. Trustee
Wright said his concern is that some people pay less than they should for their
permit. He added that sometimes when people estimate a lump sum based on what
they are spending instead of calculating fees based on square foot, they
undervalue what they are building. The valuation process is too arbitrary.
Supervisor Martin said that if this method doesn’t work, then we can try
something else.
Trustee Wright made a motion to accept the Building Permit Fees as listed.
Motion supported by Supervisor Martin. Motion passed unanimously.
REPORTS
NIESA
Trustee Zaban said that NIESA has not met since the last Board Meeting so there
is no new information to report.
 
Parks
Treasurer Fink reported that this month’s park meeting was cancelled.
Supervisor Martin said that Jim Flore mowed the field and Gerald Gorton did mow
around the trail once. Trustee Zaban asked if the proposed cemetery mower can
also be used at the park. Clerk Hiner said that it cannot be used outside of
the cemetery if all the money paying for it comes out of cemetery funds.
Trustee Wright said that the new mower is a finish mower and will be used for
close in work so would not really be used at the park. Clerk Hiner said that
whenever there has been shared equipment in the past, the cost has been shared
between the cemetery, the park, and the Township. She said it is appropriate to
share the costs if the equipment is going to be used in multiple locations.
Supervisor Martin said we should look at the Township budget for next month and
see if money can be appropriated to cover a shared cost of the new mower.
Treasurer Fink said it may not necessarily be used at the park.
Library
Clerk Hiner said she was unable to attend the library meeting but received
minutes by e-mail. She said the Library Committee has begun discussion with
Republic Bank. Republic is looking for a 4,000 sq. ft. building in exchange for
their much larger space. The Library Committee feels that the Republic Bank
space could be used as a library immediately. An addition may be necessary in
the future but she believes it is 10,000 square feet already. Trustee Zaban
asked where the bank would move to. Clerk Hiner said the existing library space
is being proposed for exchange because they need 4,000 sq. ft. space with
access for a drive thru. Supervisor Martin said the existing library building/
police station is 5,000 sq. ft. Clerk Hiner said this is a very exciting
proposition and the Republic Bank space would be ideal.
Williamston Community Schools
Supervisor Martin reported that the schools have taken all the information from
the focus group and they are now going to meet with the City. The schools are
looking at expanding and upgrading the football field so that it could stay
downtown. The schools determined from their focus groups that the only clearly
resounding position was that there was no support for moving the fields out of
the City to the Sherwood Road property.
Other
Supervisor Martin reported that last month the request was made that Ingham
County Sheriff’s office provide more coverage. There has been more coverage and
a speed light has been put out there but it has not been working properly and
they have been notified.
Supervisor Martin provided a list of several conferences that will take place
in the next few months and encouraged Board members to attend any that are
relevant. She noted that Clerk Hiner may be interested in attending MTA’s “Is
Your Township Open to the Public” presented by Evelyn David who is an excellent
presenter.
Meeting Review
Supervisor Martin requested that a copy of relevant excerpts from the minutes
be forwarded to Mr. Templeton, Mr. Kim, Mrs. Young and Mr. Witgen. She also
noted that the Township has paid the bill for road work to Ingham County Road
Commission this month. The bill matched the estimated cost of $24,000. She
added that the Township needs to monitor turnaround time because Mr. Minshall
(ICRC) indicated that there would be a shorter timeline between payment and
project start dates this year.
Adjournment
Trustee Zaban made a motion to adjourn supported by Clerk Hiner. Motion passed
unanimously. Meeting adjourned at 10:08 p.m.
_________________________________      ______________________________
Susan L. Hiner               Lori A. Pincumbe
Clerk                  Recording Secretary
AUGUST 5, 2003
PRESENT: Supervisor Mickey Martin, Treasurer Nancy Fink, Clerk Susan Hiner,
Trustee Steve Zaban, Trustee Martin Wright and Recording Secretary Lori
Pincumbe. ABSENT: None
CALL TO ORDER
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order at 7:35 p.m. She provided
an overview of the meeting agenda and made a request for changes or additions.
Supervisor Martin added the topic “Payment out of order for election workers”
to the Consent Agenda and “DeLaCruz property-Mitchell Road” to the topic
“Complaints.” Trustee Zaban requested that “Workshop Date” be discussed during
the topic “Reports.” No other additions or changes were made.
PLEDGE
CONSENT AGENDA
Supervisor Martin reviewed the items included in the Consent Agenda packet.
Trustee Zaban moved to approve the Consent Agenda. Motion supported by Trustee
Wright.
Discussion
Supervisor Martin requested that her statement on the first page of the July 1,
2003 Board minutes be corrected from “to support the (Planning Commission’s)
decision” to state “to support the rezoning request.” Trustee Wright asked
whether the July 1, 2003 Board minutes had been reviewed by Attorney Spagnoulo
and Supervisor Martin responded that they had. Supervisor Martin asked
Treasurer Fink why “Deferred Revenue-Right of Way Maintenance” was presented
under “Receipts” at $1,246.15 on the July Treasurer’s but no value is recorded
for this item on the August report. Deputy Treasurer Jennings stated that it
was left off the report due to a formula error and should have correctly
appeared on the August report at $1,246.15. Supervisor Martin requested that
the Ingham County Treasurer item ($457.38) and the invoice submitted by Ingham
County Road Commission ($11,417) be removed from payment consideration at this
time pending further review. Supervisor Martin stated that she agrees to
payment approval of the current Hayward-Pixley Insurance invoice for $5,809
(submitted to the Township after the actual policy expiration date) to prevent
Township vulnerability to claims but she is concerned about service from this
vendor. Clerk Hiner will investigate insurance options for the Township this
fall.
Motion passed unanimously with corrections discussed.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin invited comments from the public for any non-agenda items.
Citizen Katie Lo (290 E. Sherwood) reported that there had recently been some
minor vandalism on Sherwood Road including mailbox damage, damage to the county
speed trailer and discarded debris. She said she had reported the damage to the
Ingham County Sheriff’s office and asked if the Township Constable could also
respond to this type of problem. Supervisor Martin told Ms. Lo that she should
call and make an appointment with Constable Dahlstrom to discuss the issue. She
also encouraged her to report any future vandalism of this nature to the
Township office so that the Township could also follow-up with the Sheriff’s
office and notify Constable Dahlstrom. Treasurer Fink added that she is also
concerned about activities in the same rural area, including the use of
fireworks.
Citizen Al Leblanc (4720 Jadestone) invited the Board to the Pebblebrook
Subdivision summer picnic in August. He also reported that there had been a
recent attempted abduction in the Pebblebrook neighborhood. He asked the Board
about the requirements for a neighborhood watch and stated that he had heard
that a neighborhood couldn’t form an “official” neighborhood watch unless the
neighborhood has streetlights. Treasurer Fink asked Mr. Leblanc how “official”
is defined. Mr. Leblanc said that in Lansing, an official neighborhood watch
organization has a chairperson and vice chairperson identified. One of these
individuals calls the police once per day. Mr. Leblanc added that Pebblebrook
has initiated a calling tree to keep neighbors informed of safety issues. He
commented that he found it notable that, even though the attempted abduction
incident had been reported on two television stations and in the Lansing State
Journal, he discovered that several neighbors on his calling tree were still
unaware of the abduction incident when he contacted them. No other public
comment was offered.
NEW BUSINESS
Resolution to Transfer Funds Electronically (Resolution #31)
(MTA recently published draft wording for Townships to adopt a resolution to
handle transferring funds and invoice payments electronically due to computer
payment options now available). Supervisor Martin stated that she does not
fully understand what this resolution requires of the Township and requested
that a policy for making electronic payments and transferring bank funds
electronically be investigated and defined before adopting this resolution.
Treasurer Fink concurred.
Clerk Hiner stated that the Township currently makes an electronic payment each
month to DTE. She added that ING/Aetna has also recently notified her of the
option to file electronically; the Township currently files all paperwork for
ING/Aetna but still sends payment by check. Trustee Wright suggested that, once
the Township has developed a policy, we consider making as many payments
electronically as possible. Clerk Hiner said that she prefers electronic
payments but there are down sides-especially when a vendor (like DTE) makes
their withdrawal automatically. She said she prefers to see all electronic
transfers triggered by the Township and not set up as automatic payments.
Treasurer Fink stated that the Township should develop a policy. Then, if a
vendor like DTE doesn’t conform to the policy, we revert to payment by check.
Deputy Treasurer Jennings suggested that Bank One be contacted to see if they
have on-line checking available. Treasurer Fink commented that the two
signature requirement currently in place for check authorization may not be
possible with electronic payment. Supervisor Martin recommended that the Board
postpone adopting this resolution until further investigation and policy
discussion can take place. She stated that the Board agrees that existing
electronic payment plans can continue for the next two months until agreed upon
procedures are established.
Planning Commission Report
Planning Commission Meeting Minutes
Supervisor Martin reported that the minutes from the July 10, 2003 Planning
Commission meeting had been provided in the Board Packet and asked for
comments. Supervisor Martin asked Mr. Kraft to have the Planning Commission
consider requiring the proposed roadway name in Springbook Estates be changed
from Woodbury Road because a Woodbury Road already exists in the Township. She
said that dual names become a safety concern for NIESA and other emergency
responders. Mr. Kraft responded that the Planning Commission will make that a
recommendation right away.
Supervisor Martin said it would be helpful to have the phrase “…. and several
additional items” on page two clarified for future reference. Mr. Kraft said he
would notify the recording secretary. Trustee Zaban asked if the acreage of
Springbook Subdivision could be added to the minutes. Treasurer Fink asked the
location of Pinebrook Estates and Supervisor Martin responded that it is
located across the street from Springbook. Trustee Zaban asked if a public
hearing was the next step in the process for Pinebrook and Springbrook
subdivisions. Mr. Kraft said that the developers have been asked to provide the
Planning Commission with additional information by August 5, 2003. He stated
that there is no public hearing on a site plan review. The next step is that
neighbors of the proposed sites will be notified that the issue will be
discussed in August.
 
Ordinance Revision-Burn Ordinance
Planning Commission Chairman Dan Kraft reported that a public hearing had been
held regarding the revision of the burn ordinance requirement for the allowable
size of yard waste piles. He reported that there was very little comment on the
issue. He said that one citizen had asked whether the ordinance considered
burning yard waste on a windy day. Mr. Kraft also reported that the
commissioners did not understand the administrative concerns voiced by Township
staff about implementing an ordinance which specified two different burn pile
sizes depending upon the applicant’s property zoning. Clerk Hiner said it would
be clear to them if they answered the office telephone on the Friday before a
nice weekend. Mr. Kraft said the Commission felt that a yard waste fire size of
4’x4’ (the size recommended by NIESA) was too small and would result in yard
waste fires burning and generating smoke for a longer period of time.
Supervisor Martin stated that NIESA’s established their recommended yard waste
size requirement based on their experience with fires that typically get away
from people. She asked on what basis the Commission made their decision and
whether it was based solely on personal opinion. Mr. Kraft said that it was
most probably personal opinion but that most commissioners had experience with
yard waste fires from burning on their own property. Supervisor Martin said she
is concerned that the Township will be setting size criteria that are larger
than the 4’x4’x4’ dimensions recommended by NIESA. Chairman Kraft asked the
Board whether citizens ever ask about burn size requirements when they call the
office for a permit. Supervisor Martin said that they often ask or are
otherwise told the criteria by office staff during the application process.
Treasurer Fink said that she had reviewed the burn ordinances of several
neighboring communities and some also included a setback requirement for fires
from burnable items. She commented that the Township’s ordinance has no
criteria for setbacks.
Trustee Zaban clarified that the current ordinance states that a yard waste
burn pile must be no larger than 4’x 4’x 4’ in size and the Planning Commission
is now recommending the size be increased to 6’x 6’x 6.’ Citizen Frans Wilbrink
commented that farmers often want to burn larger piles. Supervisor Martin
clarified that if this issue passes tonight, the ordinance will stipulate a
maximum burn pile size of 6’ x 6’ x 6’. If the recommendation does not pass
tonight, the size will revert to the current Board policy of 4’ x 4’ x 4’. Mr.
Kraft said it makes sense to him to have a smaller size requirement for dense
areas and a larger size allowed for the rural areas. He added that there were
some commissioners that wanted an even larger size allowed so 6’ x 6’ x 6’ was
actually a compromise.
Trustee Zaban made a motion to accept the Planning Commission recommendation to
amend the burn ordinance to state that the maximum size for burn piles is 6’ x
6’ x 6’. Motion supported by Clerk Hiner.
Supervisor Martin called for a roll call vote of the Board members:
Roll Call Vote:
Treasurer Nancy Fink      No
Trustee Steve Zaban      Yes
Supervisor Mickey Martin   No
Trustee Martin Wright      Yes
Clerk Susan Hiner      Yes
Motion passed 3-2.
Supervisor Martin stated that she takes her position based on NIESA’s burn pile
size recommendation of 4’x 4’x 4’.
Mr. Kraft stated that he had no further Planning Commission issues to present
to the Board.
Cemetery Board Report
Clerk Hiner presented the July Cemetery Board meeting minutes. Supervisor
Martin asked if the damaged fence at Foote Cemetery was going to be repaired
using a property insurance claim. Clerk Hiner said that the Fence company
claims that the cost for repair estimated by the Township is below the policy’s
minimum charge for work so it will not be covered. Trustee Wright said that
before the Township contracts out the repair, the Township should attempt the
repair using in-house personnel and equipment. If inhouse staff can repair the
fence satisfactorily, it would save the Township the $425 estimated for repair
by a contractor. Trustee Wright said he believes the problem can be corrected
because the fence is constructed of aluminum. The repair may not be to
perfection but it could probably be repaired to satisfaction. Clerk Hiner also
reported that she had postponed the Cemetery Board meeting scheduled for this
morning (August 5, 2003) due to her time conflict with managing the Special
Election also being held on this date. The date for the next Cemetery Board
meeting will be scheduled once she and Board members Connie Taschner, Betty
Honey, George Monroe and Greg Lammers have determined a day that will work with
everyone’s upcoming out of town schedules.
UNFINISHED BUSINES
Complaints
Blight-Young Property
5545 Lounsbury Road
Supervisor Martin reminded the Board that Mr. Witgen (current resident) and
Mrs. Young (property owner) had attended the July Board meeting and Mr. Witgen
had been given a list of criteria that needed to be met by the
August Board meeting. Supervisor Martin stated that Inspector Aven and
Constable Dahlstrom had visited the property last Friday to determine the
progress made by Mr. Witgen. Inspector Aven reported that he had observed that
the unregistered vehicles had been removed and that some items discussed had
been done. He also said it looked like additional lumber and materials had been
brought onto the site. He said there was a lot of lumber to do the work but
that the roof work had not progressed yet.
Supervisor Martin summarized Constable Dahlstrom’s report stating that the
tarps are still on the house, the steep incline to the basement is in the same
condition, and the open hole still exists but now has warning tape on it.
Constable Dahlstrom also recorded that it appears that not much has been done
in the last 30 days. Supervisor Martin noted that Constable Dahlstrom had also
provided digital photos of the site.
Supervisor Martin invited Mr. Witgen or Mrs. White to respond. Mr. Witgen
stated that he had been unable to start the roof during the past 2 weekends
because rain had been predicted. He said that it looks like the weather
predicted for this coming weekend (August 9-10) will be good so he should be
able to slide the 15 roof trusses across and put the wall up. Supervisor Martin
said that the weather had actually been very dry lately. Mr. Witgen said there
has been rain all around Williamston so he didn’t want to take a chance. Clerk
Hiner told Mr. Witgen that this is the driest time of the summer and trying to
avoid rain will only get more difficult as fall comes. Mr. Witgen said he
really feels confident that the Board will “see that corner buttoned up” after
this weekend. The Board asked Mr. Witgen for a specific date to expect
completion. Mr. Witgen responded that it would take him 3 days from the time he
starts the work. Supervisor Martin told Mr. Witgen that everyone else currently
building in the Township is doing so concurrent with the weather. Mr. Witgen
said the only reason he put the tarps up is because of pending rain. He said
once he stands the walls up, the tarps would no longer be needed. He added that
he had been able to get the gable wall up already.
Trustee Zaban asked Mr. Witgen to summarize what he has completed. Mr. Witgen
said he has completed the gable and he has the headers and posts made so once
he has good weather, getting things up should go quickly. Trustee Zaban asked
about the cars on the property. Mr. Witgen said that all the unlicensed
vehicles are gone. Trustee Zaban asked if the materials are gone. Mr. Witgen
said that the old materials are gone but new materials are still there.
Supervisor Martin asked if more material had been brought onto the site since
the last Board meeting. Mr. Witgen responded that he had to bring in some
materials to continue with the work.
upervisor Martin told Mr. Witgen that the Board needs to have a deadline for
this work to be complete. Mr. Witgen responded that the tarp is up protecting
the building from the rain. He said when rain is pending; he has plenty of
other work to do. He repeated that it looks like this weekend is going to be
good so he should be able to make the Board happy. Supervisor Martin clarified
for Mr. Witgen that he is not being required to complete these tasks to make
the Board happy, he is required to do them to comply with the Township’s
ordinance. Mr. Witgen said he thinks Monday, August 11, 2003 should be fine as
a deadline.
Trustee Zaban asked how long this process has been gong on. Supervisor Martin
said the building permit was taken out 5 years ago. Trustee Zaban suggested to
Mr. Witgen that he round up a lot of help and get this project finished this
weekend so he can stop aggravating himself, stop aggravating his neighbors and
stop aggravating the Board.
Trustee Zaban reminded Mr. Witgen that he needs to make considerable movement
on this project in the next 90 days before winter comes. He added that he
doesn’t recall anyone else ever keeping an open permit for 4 years.
He told Mr. Witgen that he was putting the Board in the middle of his conflict
with his neighbors and it is getting very difficult for the Board to continue
defending Mr. Witgen to his neighbors. He added that it would only take one
lawsuit from his neighbors to cost all of us. Clerk Hiner told Mr. Witgen that
his neighbors have actually been very patient with him and now its time for him
to finish the project.
Supervisor Martin summarized that the site will be visited on Monday, August
11, 2003 and that the Board will expect that the roof task will be completed
and the tarps removed. Trustee Wright asked what the penalty will be if the
task is not complete. Supervisor Martin said Mr. Witgen will have 10 days to
respond and the Township will file then a lawsuit. Trustee Zaban told Mr.
Witgen that this is exactly what we all want to avoid. Supervisor Martin said
the tarp needs to come down and stay down; this is the blight that must be
corrected.
Mr. Witgen said that he would begin working on the front of the house once this
phase is complete. Supervisor Martin said the Township would not allow tarps to
go up on the property again. Mr. Witgen asked if the Township ever received
complaints about the Smith property that was tarped before he put his tarp up.
Treasurer Fink responded that this Board doesn’t look for issues; it just
responds to neighbor complaints. Supervisor Martin stated that Mr. Witgen has
until Monday, August 11, 2003 to remove the tarps. Mr. Witgen agreed. She asked
Mr. Aven to do a site inspection on Monday.
DeLaCruz Property Complaint
2155 Mitchell Road
Supervisor Martin stated that this property is the old farmhouse next to
Hughes’ property where a barn fire occurred earlier this summer. The property
needs to be vacated because it is not habitable due to a lack of electricity.
Inspector Aven clarified that Detroit Edison had turned off the power and that
the occupants had previously moved out. Supervisor Martin said that occupants
had returned to the house Monday night after Inspector Aven left and had
brought in a generator. Mr. Aven said that, once the process reaches this
point, the sheriff now must respond. Mr. Aven clarified that he is not
condemning the building to be torn down. He is requiring that the electrical be
brought up to code before the home is considered habitable. Mr. Aven said he
thinks that the power was turned off at the transformer as a result of the
recent fire at the Hughes residence. He added that the house is not livable
without electricity. Supervisor Martin said that there had been renters living
in the home previously and that there are now up to 5 people living there. Mr.
Aven added that one young man he spoke with said that he worked for Mr.
DeLaCruz.
Rooster Complaint
Oakleaf Hills
Treasurer Fink asked about the rooster issue in Constable Dahlstrom’s report.
Supervisor Martin explained that a complaint was made by a resident in Oakleaf
Hills Subdivision about a neighbor’s rooster on a larger parcel on Beeman Road.
The complaint was basically that the neighbor’s rooster crows at 6:15 a.m. each
morning, which disturbs the owner at this property. Supervisor Martin commented
that the neighbor is allowed to have roosters according to the zoning
ordinance. He is also allowed to have up to 4 dogs before the property would be
considered a commercial kennel. Supervisor Martin suggested that perhaps the
neighbor could contact animal control if dogs are barking. Inspector Aven
commented that, like our welcome signs say, Williamstown Township is a rural
community.
Charles Post
6340 Foster
Supervisor Martin explained that Mr. Post’s complaint is that four-wheelers are
driving through his property (which she identified on Township Zoning Map)
without authorization. Mr. Post said that he had already contacted the Ingham
County Sheriff’s office but he also wanted the Township to be aware of the
problem. Supervisor Martin
said that Mr. Post has been given Constable Dahlstrom’s telephone number so
that he can attempt to respond while the trespassers are actually on the
property. Mr. Post said the last group still has one truck stuck in the mud.
Trustee Wright asked if this is an acceptable zone for a 4-wheeler event and
could the neighbor that is allowing this activity
on his property be regulated. Mr. Post asked if the noise ordinance could be
used to regulate the problem. Mr. Post added that he and 2 other neighbors have
documented the activity extensively. Trustee Wright suggested Mr.
Post use a video camera. Supervisor Martin told Mr. Post that the Township is
also pursuing the issue with the MDEQ due to the potential damage to the
wetlands area on the property.
 
Renovation Update
Supervisor Martin reported that the office will be returning to the renovated
office space on August 13, 2003. Trustee Wright confirmed the time of the next
scheduled walkthrough as August 11 at 10:00 a.m.. Supervisor Martin said that
he was correct pending carpet installation on August 6th. Supervisor Martin
said she has requested that office staff box the material at their desks and
plan to be in the office on the day the move will take place. Supervisor Martin
stated that some excess office equipment will be put on sale and encouraged
anyone in the Township interested in purchasing used office equipment to
contact the office secretary.
Temporary Meeting Location
Supervisor Martin said that construction will next move to the banquet hall
side of the building so upcoming large meetings need to be temporarily
relocated. Arrangements have been made for the August 19 Planning Commission
meeting and the September 2 Township Board meeting to be held at the City of
Williamston annex building located behind the library. Treasurer Fink and
Trustee Zaban said that they each had a conflict with the August 19 Board
Workshop meeting. The Board consensus was to cancel the August workshop
meeting. Chairman Kraft asked where the ZBA meeting would be held. Supervisor
Martin said that the ZBA meeting could be held in her office since there will
be only a few people attending. Supervisor Martin confirmed that the September
16th Board Workshop meeting would be held at the Township office.
REPORTS
Treasurer
Principal & Interest amounts for Cemetery investment funds
Summary of all Township accounts
Treasurer Fink reported that she does not have the Cemetery fund information
available yet. She said that the McDonald Investment accounts had been
liquidated and Aaron Stevens (Abraham & Gaffney) can now calculate the
principal and interest amounts available to the Township for budgeting
purposes. She said that the Cemetery Board will need to prepare a policy for
how any new money accepted for perpetual care will be handled. Clerk Hiner
suggested that Treasurer Fink attend the September Cemetery Board meeting to
explain the money handling requirements for perpetual care funds and to help
establish a Township policy. Treasurer Fink concurred. Treasurer Fink said that
the bottom line is that money donated for perpetual care cannot be dipped into
sporadically as had been done in the past (before administration was brought
into the Township). Only interest generated by investment of these funds is
available for spending. Treasurer Fink said that it is important for the
Township to clearly define what “perpetual care” tasks will be automatically
provided by the Township as normal course of business and what “special”
services will be performed for a customer that pays additional money for
perpetual care.
Treasurer Fink said she will bring her recommendation for this definition to
the September Township and Cemetery Board meetings. Clerk Hiner said that
Wheatfield Township has recently prepared a good cemetery ordinance that
Williamstown could use as a model. Citizen Katie Lo asked if the Township is
considering providing perpetual care like placing flowers on graves and whether
this type of service would be too complicated to manage. Treasurer Fink
explained that these types of agreements already exist with several customers
but the responsibilities of the Township have never been very clear. Ms. Lo
commented that perpetual care seems like a significant burden on the Township.
NIESA
Trustee Zaban noted that NIESA minutes for the past two meetings have been
included in the Board packet and that he has nothing additional to report. He
added that he will be attending a meeting on Thursday, August 8th with NIESA
regarding the contract that they want the Township to sign. Citizen Katie Lo
asked if NIESA had designated a site for a second fire station. Trustee Zaban
said that he is in on the committee charged with this task and they plan to
start by seeking comments from the community.
Trustee Zaban also reported that the Fire Board had visited Harold Powell to
present him with a framed resolution thanking him for all the work he had done
for the Fire Board and for the community. Two ambulances and the Fire Truck
went to his home for the presentation. Ms. Lo asked Mr. Powell’s condition and
was told that he is currently under hospice care.
Parks
Treasurer Fink reported that a letter had been received from the MDNR stating
that the Township was off its schedule for using the park as a roadwork staging
area and that the contractor was late in completing the project. Treasurer Fink
explained that the MDNR representative had misinterpreted the timeline. The
contractor had originally stated that he would begin the 3rd grinding in June
and finish in October. Treasurer Fink thinks the MDNR rep believed the 3rd
grinding would be completed in June. Treasurer Fink said she had contacted the
MDNR rep and explained that the Township felt the contractor was on schedule
and that we suspected there had been a misinterpretation. Treasurer Fink read
her response letter for the Board. The MDNR rep told Treasurer Fink that if the
contractor (Kaminga) was going to need an extension to complete the project
later than October, then the MDNR needed to receive a letter requesting an
extension by September 15, 2003. The MDNR also needs to be notified
once the project is complete. Treasurer Fink said she doesn’t believe the
seeding will be completed on schedule so she plans to issue a letter to Kaminga
on August 6th notifying them of the extension request deadline. Supervisor
Martin stated that Kaminga’s contract states that they must have established
vegetation at project completion. October 1 is the finish date on the current
timeline so Kaminga needs to be notified that if he needs an extension beyond
October 1, 2003, the Township needs to notify MDNR by September 15, 2003.
Treasurer Fink said she also wanted to mention information she has been
receiving regarding the Mid-Michigan Water Authority. She suggested that the
Township contact MMWA to learn more about this organization. She added that
water is becoming a more important resource as time goes on and may be a
significant consideration in the future.
Library
Clerk Hiner reported that the Library did not meet in July and that the next
meeting is scheduled for August 13th. Clerk Hiner said she plans to attend and
presumes it will be held at Wheatfield Township at 7 p.m. as usual. Trustee
Zaban said he is willing to attend the library meeting if Clerk Hiner needs a
replacement.
Other
Supervisor Martin noted that Mrs. Betty Honey had forward the Board members a
copy of her letter to Virge Benaro regarding the unsafe conditions at the
corner of Zimmer and Grand River.
Supervisor Martin reported that the Township was currently advertising for an
applicant to fill the Township maintenance/Cemetery caretaker position. The
application date is open until August 11, 2003. She said that if there is a
good candidate, the Township will be hiring a new maintenance person as soon as
possible.
Supervisor Martin reported that she and Treasurer Fink had attended an
information meeting about the Emerald Ash Borer. She explained that the pest
has been reported at Meridian Mall, South Cedar Kroger and Home Depot and
several other locations. All infestations seem to be the result of newly
planted trees imported from the southern United States. She said that Infected
are being quarantined and chipped to 1” size. Source nurseries have also been
quarantined. Supervisor Martin said that the pest has not been reported in
Williamstown Township at this time but the Township has been asked to provide
education materials to the public. Supervisor Martin said the problem seems to
be very extensive. Treasurer Fink said there are only 3 sites of entry in North
America and Michigan is one of them. Supervisor Martin said they did recommend
that all Planning Commissions refuse ash trees as proposed landscape material
submitted by developers. Planning Commission Chair Dan Kraft said he would make
notify the Commissioners immediately. Supervisor Martin said they are also
asking Townships to go back and look at old plans (for instance Pres Kool) and
notify anyone that used ash trees of this issue Supervisor Martin said the
Township will be doing everything they can to provide the State with any
relevant information.
Citizen Witgen asked whether the trees that had been planted on Haslett Road as
part of the reconstruction project were under warranty (he had heard that they
were). He said he had contacted the Ingham County Road Commission last year to
let them know one of those trees had died. Mr. Witgen said he had also
contacted MSU and they said the trees were really planted too late. They
recommended that any damage to the trees be cut out to allow new growth to come
in and to prevent the tree from getting infected. Trustee Wright suggested Mr.
Witgen report his observations to ICRC again.
Supervisor Martin reported that the CADL Millage Special Election was held
today (August 5, 2003) and is now complete (polls closed at 8 p.m.). Clerk
Hiner said that precincts 1&2 had reported that they were complete and on their
way to Mason at 9 p.m. and that she presumes precincts 3&4 closed without
incident since they hadn’t contacted her during the Board meeting this evening.
Clerk Hiner said several young people (high school students) had worked as
election officials and their precinct chairs had reported they had done a good
job.
Supervisor Martin reported that the statewide voting system was recently
adopted by the State of Michigan and that their notification letter indicated
that the state will be paying for any new voting devices. Clerk Hiner said
that, since the letter came from Terri Lynn Land, the Township can probably be
confident that this is true. Supervisor Martin said the letter indicated the
State plans for the new equipment to be in place in time for the August
election. Clerk Hiner said that it is required for the equipment to be used
during the August election in order for it to be used during the November
General Election. Clerk Hiner added that Ingham County has already chosen their
vendor and the new equipment should upgrade the entire election process.
Supervisor Martin noted that a recent article in the journal “Capital Currents”
referred to a new procedure to raise or lower a speed limit on a country road
which includes Township Board input. Trustee Zaban asked if this is something
the Township wants to be involved in. Supervisor Martin said Williamstown
Township does not want to opt out of this plan and she will notify John Midgely
at ICRC that we want to participate.
Citizen Witgen asked why the police aren’t enforcing the graduated license
program that only allows two people in a car when a young person is driving.
Supervisor Martin said she did not have information about this but that she has
seen evidence of increased police awareness of teen driving.
Supervisor Martin stated that “Capitol Currents” also stated that there will no
longer be a homestead exemption available for school operating millage. It will
now be called a property exemption to avoid confusion.
Supervisor Martin asked if there was anything else that anyone would like to
have addressed. No additional comments were offered.
Meeting Review
Supervisor Martin said she will pursue the blights and reiterated that there
would be no August Workshop meeting. She also reiterated that the next Township
Board and Planning Commission meetings would take place at the City of
Williamston Annex building. She stated that Treasurer Fink would provide her
financial report at the next Board meeting and will investigate the resolution
for electronic transfers postponed this evening. Supervisor Martin added that
she will also be attending an MTA meeting this month.
Adjournment
Trustee Zaban made a motion to adjourn supported by Trustee Wright. Motion
passed unanimously. Meeting adjourned at 10:07 p.m.
_________________________________      ______________________________
Susan L. Hiner               Lori A. Pincumbe
Clerk                  Recording Secretary
SEPTEMBER 2, 2003
PRESENT: Supervisor Mickey Martin, Treasurer Nancy Fink, Clerk Susan Hiner,
Trustee Steve Zaban, Trustee Martin Wright and Recording Secretary Lori
Pincumbe. ABSENT: None
CALL TO ORDER
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order at 7:35 p.m. Supervisor
Martin added the topics “Legislative Conference,” and “Security Emergency
Management,” and “Response to citizens letters” to the agenda topic “Other.”
Treasurer Fink stated that she will present a status report of all cemetery
accounts at this meeting and of all Township accounts at a later date. No other
additions or corrections were identified.
PLEDGE
CONSENT AGENDA
Supervisor Martin identified items in the Consent Agenda packet: minutes of the
August 5, 2003 Board meeting, August activity report, accounts paid and payable
from the Cemetery and Township funds and the building inspector report.
Discussion
Supervisor Martin questioned why the ICRC invoice ($11,417.28) was included on
the accounts payable report. Clerk Hiner explained that, although it was tabled
at the last meeting, it remains an outstanding bill for consideration by the
Board until approved. Trustee Wright asked the status of work still to be done
by ICRC. Supervisor Martin said that ICRC has been notified of the additional
work they must complete before the Board will approve their invoice for
payment. Trustee Wright recommended tabling payment again pending completion of
the work. Supervisor Martin asked for clarification of the Williamston Storage
invoice. Clerk Hiner explained the warrant reflects the amount due for two
storage units. Trustee Wright asked if the storage units could be eliminated
soon (since renovation is nearly complete) and if documents stored at Kent
Record Management could now be returned. Supervisor Martin said that she hopes
so. Treasurer Fink asked why American Rental and Martin Block appear on the
report. Clerk Hiner explained that they are both actually credits that appear
due to a software glitch. Supervisor Martin asked what items were purchased
from Deer Creek Sales. Clerk Hiner stated it was an invoice for purchase of a
weed whip and parts previously approved by the Board. Supervisor Martin
recommended that the trailer invoice for Hitchcock be coded to the Township
general fund instead of the cemetery fund. Trustee Wright concurred that the
trailer will be used for Township purposes.
Trustee Wright moved to accept the consent agenda with noted corrections.
Motion supported by Trustee Zaban. Motion passed unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin invited comments from the public for any non-agenda items.
Citizen Al Leblanc (4720 Jadestone), representing Pebblebrook Neighborhood
Association, provided a follow-up report regarding establishing a neighborhood
watch. He said that Ingham County Sheriff’s office had clarified that
streetlights are not required to establish a formal neighborhood watch. The
sheriff’s office only requires that the group meets at least once per year and
be formed of willing volunteers. They prefer that there be at least 80%
participation by neighborhood residents. He added that Cherry Valle already has
a neighborhood watch in place and Williamston Estates is also considering
establishing one. No other public comment was offered.
NEW BUSINESS
Audit Report-Abraham & Gaffney
Supervisor Martin explained that an annual audit of the Township financial
records was conducted in June 2003 by the accounting firm Abraham & Gaffney
(A&G). She introduced Aaron Stevens representing A&G to present their report.
(Mr. Stevens invited the Township to contact Bill Tucker at their office with
any Quickbooks software questions). Mr. Stevens said that the audit went very
well and thanked the Clerk and Treasurer offices for their assistance. He
stated that A&G included one qualified opinion in their report letter because
the Cemetery did not have a budget in place for the first three months of the
2003 calendar year. He added that this qualification was resolved when a
cemetery budget was adopted on April 1, 2003 at the start of this fiscal year.
Everything else was in accordance with generally accepted accounting practices.
He said that pages 2 and 3 of their report present a combined balance sheet for
the Township. He noted that the unreserved, undesignated fund balance as of
March 31, 2003 was $908,237 which represents the funds available for
expenditure and said this represents a sound financial position. He said that
total revenues decreased approximately 9% ($61,000) from the previous year
(taxes were up, building permits, interest rates and state shared revenues were
down). Increases in expenditures this year were due to road work projects. The
Township used $105,000 from reserve but A&G still considers the Township to be
in a sound financial position. The A&G report on internal control structure
includes 2 recommendations. The first was to move illegal investments in the
cemetery fund (which has already been done) and second was to document the
return of donated funds that was made from the cemetery account by Mr. Fate.
Supervisor Martin explained to the audience that the additional cost for road
work was due to the upgrade on Mitchell Road. The road was upgraded so that the
county would take it over as a primary road and Township taxpayers would not be
burdened with upkeep caused by additional traffic expected from the schools on
Mitchell.
Report-Abraham & Gaffney Planning Commission Report
Commission Report Planning Commission Meeting Minutes
Planning Commission (PC) Dan Kraft clarified that the draft PC minutes
distributed in tonight’s Board packet are very rough and include several points
that are either confusing or incorrect (which he will clarify during his
presentation).
Tentative Preliminary Plat Approval-Springbrook Estates
Chairman Kraft reported that the PC passed a motion (by a 6-3 vote) to
recommend approval of the preliminary plat for Springbrook Estates subject to
the applicant meeting all conditions stated in the McKenna letter dated 8/13/03
and two additional conditions: 1) that the applicant eliminate the Zimmer Road
access and replace it with an ingress and egress access to Grand River Road and
2) that all roads meet the 60 ft setback from wetlands requirement except for
the road that crosses the wetlands(this will also require a revision to the
tentative preliminary plat). He added that the McKenna letter also addresses
this issue. Mr. Kraft said this means that if the developer complies with the
recommendations of the PC, they would no longer need a variance. They would
instead need to redraw their plan to comply with the 60’ setback.
Supervisor Martin stated that the Schedule of Regulations for Structures
(footnote D) is where the requirement for “structures” to be setback at least
60’ from wetlands is stated. She asked if the PC was interpreting a road to be
a structure. Mr. Kraft said that they did. He added that the McKenna letter did
state that there was some ambiguity in the ordinance with respect to what fell
into the 60’ setback and what didn’t and recommended a variance for anything
that was going to be closer than 60’ to wetlands.
Supervisor Martin said the motion made by the PC which eliminates the access to
Zimmer Road and adds an access onto Grand River actually violates the access
management portion of the Township Zoning Ordinance because the required site
distance from other driveways is not available. Mr. Kraft said the PC never
actually looked at where the access to Grand River would occur. They assumed
the access would be at the lot owned by the Ingham County Road Commission.
Supervisor Martin confirmed that this was the only land available as an access
point and, since it doesn’t meet criteria, the motion automatically violates
the ordinance.
Mr. Kraft suggested he explain the circumstances of their last PC meeting. He
explained that there was a large public turnout and they were there because
this development is one of the hotspots in the Township. Because this property
is located in the 425 area with access to City water and sewer, high density at
this location is a possibility more than in outlying areas. The public came out
and stated that 1) they wanted the PC to comply with the master plan, 2) they
were concerned about the wetlands and wanted no exceptions on the wetlands
issues 3) they are concerned about the burden to the school system a high
density subdivision would cause, and 4) their primary concern (about 90%) was
due to the existing traffic problems at Zimmer and Grand River. Mr. Kraft
explained that the public felt it was a possibility and perhaps a
responsibility of the Township to influence a change in the current traffic
problem at this intersection before considering any type of development in this
area-especially a high density one. He said that was the tone of the meeting.
Mr. Kraft said the resulting motion was made trying to address the concerns
expressed by the public.
Supervisor Martin clarified that the main issue the public has objection to is
not the subdivision but the traffic problem at the corner of Grand River and
Zimmer. Mr. Kraft concurred and noted that many of the citizens who expressed
concern at the PC meeting were also in attendance tonight.
Supervisor Martin noted that there are also some deed restrictions on the ICRC
lot which state that the property can only be used for residential purposes and
it is not deeded as a public right of way. Mr. Kraft said the PC had been
informed of this information by the applicant along with the fact that it would
create a mismatch with the intersections between the North and South sides of
Grand River.
Supervisor Martin stated that her first reaction is to send this motion back to
the Planning Commission for reconsideration due to the access management issues
and deed restrictions on the Grand River parcel. She added that she’s not sure
that ICRC would eliminate the Zimmer Road access (forcing creation of 2 cul-de-
sacs near Zimmer Road) even if the Grand River access was allowed. Mr. Kraft
said he personally had voted against the motion because the PC was not looking
at a drawing anywhere close to what the motion would create. Mr. Kraft said
that altering the access point is a huge change and a redraw should be
submitted before any decision made. Supervisor Martin said other agencies would
also need to review the redraw. Treasurer Fink also expressed concern that this
motion was not tagged to any drawing.
Mr. Kraft said he had been told that ICRC originally stated they would prefer
an access onto Grand River. Mr. Kraft said he believed this was because they
don’t like cul-de-sacs and want roads to be connected. Supervisor Martin said
she believes that’s because they are difficult to maintain and plow.
Trustee Wright stated that he agrees with Mr. Kraft and doesn’t like approving
something that the Board does not have a drawing of. He stated that he had also
voted against the motion because he didn’t feel it was a good motion or that it
was it well thought out. He added that whether discussion goes back to the PC
or is handled at the Board level more review is required. Supervisor Martin
said there is time for further investigation because the deadline for Board
action isn’t until after the October Board meeting. Trustee Wright said he
would like to listen to comments from the applicant, MDOT, ICRC and the public
before deciding how to proceed.
Supervisor Martin invited the applicant to address the Board. Mr. Ron Clark of
KEBS, Inc. spoke on behalf of applicant Bob Hilty and Springbrook Estates. He
thanked Mr. Kraft for his reflections on the PC meeting. He stated that the
Springbrook Estates plan was developed to meet the Township ordinances for open
space subdivision design for an R-1-S residential district. The plan meets the
letter and intent of the code. The access to Zimmer Road meets ICRC standards
for site distance. ICRC has stated their approval in a letter to the Township.
In that letter they requested the applicant look into an access onto Grand
River to eliminate the proposed cul-de-sac. ICRC suggested they look at using
an ICRC property on Grand River as an access point (which is part of a lot
intended for residential use only). He stated that ICRC has been aware of this
for quite some time and that their council was looking into it but has not
provided feedback to date. Mr. Clark said he has a meeting with ICRC on
September 8th to discuss several issues including Springbrook Estates.
Mr. Clark said the other access point for the subdivision is at the property
line and Belmont Avenue and is designed to ICRC standards. The road swings into
the wetland buffer. He said he believes the interpretation of whether the term
“structure” includes roads should be considered by the ZBA. Mr. Clark said he’s
sure that citizens concerns about traffic on Zimmer Road and this access will
have on that traffic are valid. However, the road is there and the location has
been approved by ICRC for use. He said the Springbrook design complies with the
ordinance. The plan has actually been submitted in 3 different proposals over
the last year and a half and it finally meets approval of the Township planning
consultant. He does not believe that the issue should be sent back to the PC
because he doesn’t believe the PC can ever be satisfied. He stated he feels the
motion was made at the last meeting in a reactionary way to try to appease
everyone in the room-indicated by the fact that they made a motion and approved
a change sight unseen.
Mr. Clark said he believes this plan is the very best that can be done for that
site and that there is enough time to wait for MDOT’s written response to the
issue of an access road on Grand River. He said he would like to see the Board
keep the issue at this level and table the motion until the next meeting. Final
decision does not have to be made until November 5th. Supervisor Martin said
that the planning consultant had set the Township’s 90 day deadline at November
3rd. Mr. Kebs said that he had contacted MDOT to check the status of their
response and they indicated they were waiting for information from the Township
about how the access management plan related to this plan.
Supervisor Martin called for any questions for the applicant. She stated she
agrees with Mr. Clark that the interpretation of “structure” should be
addressed by the ZBA.
Supervisor Martin invited Mr. Dave Sonneberg, representing Ingham County Road
Commission, to provide comment on the project and the issues involved in
putting a light at Zimmer and Grand River. Mr. Sonneberg said he wasn’t
prepared to speak on the subdivision issue but stated ICRC was planning to
pursue an access onto Grand River and their attorneys were addressing the
question. He said the offset with the street on the south side of Grand River
is only slight. He said the Grand River access was not solely a consideration
due to the cul-de-sac but also to distribute the traffic so one homeowner not
bear the burden of the entire subdivision’s traffic. He said ICRC is on record
with MDOT stating that they will accomplish upgrades necessary on the
approaches to the intersection required to install a traffic signal. Supervisor
Martin clarified that ICRC does not plan to eliminate the Zimmer access, even
if the Grand River access is added. Mr. Sonneberg concurred.
Supervisor Martin invited Mr. Steve Shaunessey (representing MDOT) to provide
input. Mr. Shaunessey identified himself as a representative from the Traffic
and Safety Division of MDOT reresenting Ingham County. He said they have been
working with the Township and the City for several years regarding the Zimmer/
Grand River intersection. Signal studies were conducted in 1998 and a meeting
was held at the post office with State Senator Paul DeWeese in July 2001.
Another signal study was done in 2001. MDOT is committed to do another signal
study and speed study after the 2 year construction period ends. The road
project should be completed in November and then they will proceed with the
studies.
Supervisor Martin read from an MDOT document prepared after the 2001 traffic
study that stated “the traffic volumes fall below the requirements needed to
justify the installation of a traffic signal”. She asked which road had low
volume. Mr. Shaunessey said the traffic load on Zimmer Road was below criteria.
He said MDOT follows warrants which are national standards set by the highway
administration. He said that the Grand River volume met criteria but Zimmer did
not. MDOT wants an updated study to evaluate the impact of recent development.
Supervisor Martin asked how MDOT plans to identify the significant avoidance
traffic and asked if the Township could be notified when the traffic study will
occur so people can drive their actual routes instead of avoiding the corner
during that period. Mr. Shaunessey said they don’t want to jeopardize skewing
the results. Supervisor Martin said she wants to be sure that the results are
not skewed the other way because citizens are avoiding the corner. She said she
is only suggesting alerting citizens on Zimmer Road to drive their normal
routes. She is not suggesting she tell them to drive back and forth ten times.
Mr. Shaunessey said he would take her question back to MDOT. Supervisor Martin
said she wanted the public to be aware that the Township has pursued a light at
this intersection many times and the reason it hasn’t happened is because we
aren’t meeting the traffic volume warrants on Zimmer Road.
Brian Jennings, Township traffic committee representative, stated that he would
highly recommend that the Township not publicize the date of the study or give
prior notice of the traffic study because it could skew the results and
potentially set the Township up for a lawsuit. Mr. Jennings said MDOT typically
notifies the Township a month in advance. He added the public should be aware
that, even if the study is done as early as January, results aren’t typically
available for 6 months. Mr. Shaunessey said he thinks MDOT can do better than
that due to the nature of this issue.
Supervisor Martin invited comments from the public. Rick Ash (1365 Bridlewood
Ln.), Pat Apostol (4020 Zimmer Rd.), Jane Pease (3795 Zimmer Rd.), Steve Terry
(4015 Zimmer Rd.), Audrey Goodman (4145 Zimmer Rd.), Floyd Goodman (4145 Zimmer
Rd.), Richard Heiser (1300 Trotter’s Lane), and Nancy McGarey (3875 Zimmer Rd.)
individually stated that Zimmer Road was not constructed with the intent for it
to be used as a primary route or to handle the traffic load that currently
exists or that new development will create. They stated that, although the
Township does not have the authority to upgrade Zimmer Road and the
intersection, it has the responsibility to pressure those who do (ICRC and
MDOT) and to halt further development until the infrastructure is in place to
safely handle the additional traffic burden. They also asked that, when the
traffic study is conducted, MDOT place their cables in a manner to collect
information for all traffic at the intersection, including the avoidance
traffic at the post office, Spagnoulo’s, Independent Bank and the party store.
They also request that MDOT collect data while school is in session and not
during a holiday when people are out of town. Several citizens also thanked Mr.
Kraft for accurately representing their position to the Board during his
presentation.
Supervisor Martin stated that she will contact the Township attorney to verify
if the Township can legally prevent a subdivision from proceeding on the
grounds that proper infrastructure is not in place. She said she believes there
have been several recent cases where this position was disallowed by the court.
She also asked Mr. Shaunessey to maintain communication with the Township
during the traffic study process so that these citizen concerns can be
considered.
Supervisor Martin thanked Mr. Kraft, Mr. Sonneberg, Mr. Shaunessy and the
public for their comments and called for a motion. Trustee Wright made a motion
to table the Board’s decision on Springbrook Subdivision pending further
investigation and to keep the issue at Board level. Motion supported by Trustee
Zaban. Motion passed unanimously.
Cemetery Board Report
Clerk Hiner presented the August Cemetery Board meeting minutes. She said that
Mrs. Betty Honey had decided to resign from the Cemetery Board and she was not
sure when the City planned to appoint her replacement. Supervisor Martin
saidthat she had been told by Mayor Zichi Mrs. Honey’s resignation was not
accepted at their last meeting. Clerk Hiner said she had not been made aware of
this and would contact the City for clarification.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
UNFINISHED BUSINESComplaints
5545 Lounsbury Road
Supervisor Martin asked Building Inspector Walt Aven to provide a status report
for this complaint. Mr. Aven stated that Mr. Witgen had done a significant
amount of work on his building since the last Board meeting. The tarps were now
removed and all Board criteria had been met. Trustee Wright recommended the
Township continue to monitor the property for compliance.
Renovation Update
Supervisor Martin reported that renovation to the Township rental hall area is
in progress and the contractor estimates a completion date of October 15, 2003.
She recommended that the Township plan an Open House so that citizens can tour
the updated facilities and suggested Sunday, August 26th. Trustee Zaban and
Treasurer Fink concurred. Clerk Hiner and Trustee Wright stated they needed to
confirm the date and would let her know.
REPORTS
Personnel Change
Supervisor Martin introduced Mark Tabor who will begin working for the Township
in the position of Caretaker/maintenance on Monday, September 15, 2003. Mr.
Tabor stated that he is looking forward to working at the Township. Supervisor
Martin said that she plans to meet with Mr. Tabor on the Saturday prior to his
start date to take him to the Township properties and explain the tasks he will
perform.
Treasurer-Principal & Interest amounts for Cemetery investment funds
Treasurer Fink presented a report of the status of the cemetery investment
funds (which she also plans to present to the Cemetery Board at their September
3rd meeting). She explained that MTA had provided her guidance on how to handle
past funds that had been donated to the Cemetery Board for purposes of
perpetual care. If funds were donated with specific use requirements provided
by the donor in writing, that money must be invested on the donor’s behalf. The
interest generated from the investment can be used for the specific purposes
itemized by the donor. The principal must remain intact and cannot be accessed
to use for any other purpose at the cemetery.  
Treasurer Fink explained further that if the donors did not specify a use (in
writing) at the time of donation, the Township is free to invest the money and
access both the principal and the interest for general cemetery use. She stated
that everyone agrees it would, under no circumstances, ever be commingled into
the Township’s general fund.
Treasurer Fink stated that, to her knowledge, no past donors provided the
cemetery board with instructions in writing about how their donation should be
used. Therefore, both the principal and interest from these funds can be used
for general cemetery purposes. She said she plans to confirm the fact that no
written instructions exist with the long term members of the Cemetery Board on
September 3rd. She also plans to provide the Cemetery Board with
recommendations for a policy on how any new money accepted for perpetual will
be handled.
NIESA
Trustee Zaban noted that NIESA minutes were included in the Board packet. He
reported that the 3rd draft of the Section 8 agreement was complete and ready
for review by Williamstown Township and said that Chief Kirt Hunt had announced
his plans to retire. NIESA has posted the position for a new Chief on the
websites firehouse.com and firecarriers.com and in the LSJ. They have received
resumes from several highly qualified applicants responding from across the
country. He added that the plan is for the new organizational structure to have
one person at the top rather than a position shared by two chiefs with the same
level of authority.
Parks
Treasurer Fink noted that minutes from the August 20th committee meeting were
included in the board packet. One item of note discussed was the possibility of
purchasing a pull behind sprayer for the tractor-mower. The next park committee
meeting is scheduled for September 17, 2003.
Library
Clerk Hiner reported that the Library Foundation did not have enough members in
attendance at their August 13th meeting to satisfy a quorum the conducted a
workshop meeting instead. The discussion largely centered on possible locations
for Republic Bank to relocate. The next meeting is scheduled for September 17,
at Wheatfield Township at 7 p.m. Trustee Zaban said he is interested in
attending the next library meeting as well.
Other
Legislative Conference
Supervisor Martin summarized information presented at a legislative conference
she recently attended concerning the topics revenue sharing (state budget
implications), Michigan Land Use, Elections (Help America Vote Act) and
Environment (water and waste). She said that the legislators present encouraged
local officials to meet with them once or twice a year to keep them fully aware
of the problems being faced by local governments.
Security Emergency Management
Supervisor Martin presented information she learned at an all day seminar at
Ingham County on Emergency Management and Damage Assessment. Key points she
learned are that Ingham County is the first level of emergency management for
Williamstown Township for the first 72 hours. After that state and federal
government steps in. They also presented information on how to assess local
damage in the event of a disaster and explained the four phases of emergency
management (mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery). She said that the
Township needs to develop a site emergency plans for possible emergencies-
specifically Tornadoes and Blackouts. She added that the need for a security
system in the Township building was also supported at this seminar.
Supervisor Martin asked members of the Board and the audience if there was
anything else that anyone would like have addressed. No additional comments
were offered.
Adjournment
Trustee Zaban made a motion to adjourn supported by Trustee Wright. Motion
passed unanimously. Meeting adjourned at 10:15 p.m.
_________________________________      ______________________________
Susan L. Hiner               Lori A. Pincumbe
Clerk                  Recording Secretary
OCTOBER 7, 2003
PRESENT: Supervisor Mickey Martin, Clerk Susan Hiner, Trustee Steve Zaban,
Trustee Martin Wright and Recording Secretary Lori Pincumbe. (Treasurer Fink
arrived at 7:42). ABSENT: None
CALL TO ORDER
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order at 7:40 p.m. She provided
an overview of the meeting agenda and made a request for changes or additions.
Supervisor Martin added the topics “Building permit fees” and “letter from
Charles Galbraith about MTA Conference” to “New Business”
PLEDGE
CONSENT AGENDA
Supervisor Martin reviewed the items included in the Consent Agenda packet:
September 2, 2003 Regular Meeting Minutes: Trustee Wright corrected the
adjournment wording from “supported by Trustee Martin” to “supported by Trustee
Wright”. Supervisor Martin stated that during the discussion of the wetlands
report from MDEQ for Springbrook Estates, she wanted to clarify her statement
to read, “Supervisor Martin received a preliminary status report from MDEQ
which stated they had received an application…” She also clarified the wording
of the Foote Complaint to explain that Mr. McAlvey can camp on the property but
he cannot have a semi-tractor trailer on-site being used for storage.
September 16, 2003 Special Meeting/Closed Session Minutes: No corrections or
additions were identified.
Treasurer’s Report: Supervisor Martin asked Treasurer Fink why there was
nothing reported on the line item “Right- of-Way Maintenance.” Treasurer Fink
said the money received in September for this category appears in the deferred
revenue item at the top of the report. Treasurer Fink said she would check why
it does not also appear under the line item “Right-of-Way Maintenance.”
Accounts Paid: No questions.
Payroll Report: Supervisor Martin questioned why $37.43 in unemployment was
paid for the Deputy Clerk for Cemetery activity. Treasurer Fink said there is a
longstanding question of who should be paid unemployment at both the State and
Federal level. She added that she has attended conferences where they stated
that all hourly employees, including deputies, should have unemployment paid;
this has not been the Township’s previous practice. Treasurer Fink recommended
the unemployment items be reviewed for all employees. Clerk Hiner stated that
in her recent memo about the Aetna calculations, she also recommended that
somebody review the QuickBooks setup for all employees. Treasurer Fink agreed
that would be an excellent plan. She added that Trustee Wright had previously
suggested that the Township use a payroll service, which is also an option.
Supervisor Martin questioned why $3.63 had been paid to Mark Tabor for mileage
Tabor in both the Cemetery and Township companies. (Clerk Hiner verified after
that reimbursement for equal amounts in both accounts is correct). Treasurer
Fink asked why Rosemary Philip does not have federal withholding deducted and
added this may be due to how she filled out her W-4. Clerk Hiner said that she
has not changed any QuickBooks setup items so payroll checks for this month
have been issued using the same criteria as since the software was installed.
Supervisor Martin noted that unemployment had not been taken out of Terri
Smith’s paycheck. Treasurer Fink said this would also be part of her
recommended unemployment review.
Unpaid Bills Report: Supervisor Martin said that the Allied Office invoices
should be held until she reviews their contract with the Township and the
American Office Solutions invoice for the new copy machine couldn’t be paid
until the budget is amended this evening. Trustee Wright asked if AOS will
remove the old machine. Clerk Hiner said they would and credit applied to the
Township’s account. Supervisor Martin asked why no Murphy Brenton & Spagnoulo
appeared on this month’s report. Clerk Hiner said that their October invoice
was received after the books closed for this month and she did not know why
they had not sent a bill for August and September. Clerk Hiner added that there
is a credit on the Township’s account due to an overpayment in July which may
be a source of the problem; she will check into it. Supervisor Martin requested
the credit appear on the next accounts payable report. Clerk Hiner reminded the
Board that applying credits in QuickBooks has resulted in problems on appearing
on the payable report in the past. Supervisor Martin asked why the monthly
Williamston Storage invoice was not listed. Trustee Wright asked if the
Township plans to keep the American Rentals unit located at the Township over
the winter. He stated he feels it needs to be removed. Treasurer Fink said the
parks committee is also asking for a different unit and it may be time to
explore pricing and service from other vendors. Trustee Wright said the
Township unit is in poor condition.
Trustee Zaban moved to approve the Consent Agenda with changes noted. Motion
supported by Clerk Hiner. Motion passed unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Citizen Katie Lo asked if any decisions had been made about how perpetual care
was going to be handled in the future. Treasurer Fink said that the Cemetery
Board has been charged with the task of making a recommendation on this issue
to the Board and added that the Township will always be responsible for
providing a basic level of perpetual care at the cemeteries. If the Cemetery
Board chooses to continue to offer a second level of perpetual care as a
service, the money will need to be put in trust and the interest generated
accessed for its specified use. Mrs. Lo said that it seems like an excessive
burden for the Township to continue providing additional perpetual care
services. Mrs. Lo also asked how Township checks are generated. Treasurer Fink
explained that the Clerk’s office issues warrants (requests for payment); the
Board of Trustees reviews the warrants and approves them as appropriate (at the
monthly Board meeting); and then the Treasurer’s office issues the final check.
Both Clerk and Treasurer (or their appointed deputies) must sign the check
before it is valid to ensure an internal check and balance. Supervisor Martin
explained that the Board goes through each item to be paid at the meeting as
was done tonight. The Board approval then provides an additional level
oversight.
NEW BUSINESS
ZBA Appointment-Dali Giese 3yr
Supervisor Martin made a recommendation to reappoint Dali Giese for a three-
year term to the Zoning Board of Appeals. She explained that Dali had been
appointed in 2002 when Gerard Fields moved from the Township. Supervisor Martin
said Dali does an excellent job, attends every meeting and makes her site
visits as required.
Trustee Wright made a motion to reappoint Dali Giese to the Zoning Board of
Appeals for a three year term. Motion supported by Trustee Wright. Motion
passed unanimously.
Planning Commission Report
Planning Commission Meeting Minutes
Supervisor Martin explained that the Board had received the Planning Commission
minutes and they require no action by the Board this evening. Supervisor Martin
asked Trustee Wright to clarify two items in the minutes. First, she asked if
John Maier’s rezoning request from Ag-Small Farm to RR includes putting a road
in because, if so, it would be possible to cut more than to parcels from this
property. Trustee Wright said the request did not include a road. Supervisor
Martin questioned the wording under “Zoning Ordinance” that states “...the
decision would be made by the ZBA.” She said she would like to confirm whether
this is appropriate with the attorney and MTA. The BA makes a review when the
applicant asks for a variance and an applicant would not be asking for variance
here. Trustee Wright said this was also a discussion at the Planning Commission
meeting and the planning consultant was investigating. Supervisor Martin
commented that the ZBA is more of a last appeal so this wording wouldn’t really
be appropriate.
Treasurer Fink confirmed that the Planning Commission was not making a formal
recommendation to the Board about accepting additional sewer capacity from the
City of Williamston. Trustee Wright said it was a consensus on the commission
that they did not want any increase in sewer capacity in the Township but they
had not made a formal recommendation to the Board.
Supervisor Martin stated that in the Planning Commission workshop minutes it
says that the mixed-use zone would be residential mixed with business. She said
she likes this concept especially on the east side of town. The wording she is
concerned with states that this type of development be mandatory (p. 1. par.6).
Trustee Wright said he was not present during this discussion but felt the
Planning Commission has several different opinions on this subject which need
to be narrowed and there is more work to be done on this wording. Trustee
Wright said he understands her concern. Supervisor Martin said she would
hesitate to ever use the word mandatory. Trustee Wright said the discussion
issues were more about whether this concept would work on the west side of
Zimmer and not about mixed-use development being a mandatory requirement.
City of Williamston-Future sewer expansion
Supervisor Martin explained that the City of Williamston is drawing up a 30-
year plan for wastewater treatment. She said the City manager had approached
the Township to see if the Township wanted to be included in these long-term
plans and in what way (i.e. do we want the plan to just include the 425
district or do we want sewer to move further into the Township by increasing
the 100 taps we have under the 425 agreement (of which 7 remain available)).
Trustee Wright said the Planning Commission unanimously did not want to see
increase in sewer capacity in the Township except in the 425 area where
providing sewer is already required. Trustee Zaban reminded the Board that the
State Boundary Commission was very happy to give the City everything they
wanted when the 425 area was being identified. Trustee Zaban explained to the
audience that the Township still has zoning control on the 425 area and the
City doesn’t get control of the land for 50 years. Supervisor Martin added that
if a parcel is in the 425 area but the owner doesn’t ask for sewer and water,
the parcel will remain in the Township after the 50 years ends. For example, at
the end of 50 years Springbrook will move into the City. Supervisor Martin said
the idea behind the 425 agreement was to avoid creating fingers into the
Township, which could eventually be annexed into the City. Supervisor Martin
added that the Boundary Commission tends to favor cities on this issue because
they believe that cities need to grow. She said the 425 agreement was good for
the Township because it will limit density in this area to Township
requirements. Treasurer Fink asked if a map of the 425 area could be available
at future meetings for clarification. Supervisor Martin said that every parcel
adjacent to the City is now in the 425 agreement so the Township is protected
from annexation for 50 years. She added that, at the end of the 50 years, the
agreements are renewable. Citizen Katie Lo clarified that the City collects 16
mills and then directs 2 mills to the Township and asked if the Township was
concerned about collecting this money. Treasurer Fink said there is no real
concern because the money is collected each year so it is there for the City to
transfer.
Treasurer Fink made a motion that the Township pass a resolution to recommend
to the City of Williamston that when developing their 30-year plan, they
consider the future sewer needs of the 425 area only and that the Township is
not interested in any additional sewer capacity outside of this area. Motion
supported by Supervisor Martin.
Discussion
Trustee Wright explained that he does not want to see the Township be faced
with another bond issue to pay for the expansion of the wastewater treatment
facility. Treasurer Fink agreed. Supervisor Martin asked if there was any one
in the audience that wanted to see additional expansion into the township. No
one in the audience agreed.
oll Call Vote:
Trustee Zaban      Yes
Trustee Wright      Yes
Treasurer Fink      Yes
Supervisor Martin   Yes
Clerk Hiner      Yes            Motion passed unanimously.
Cemetery Report
Trustee Zaban asked if a new chairperson had been appointed to the Cemetery
Board. Clerk Hiner said the Board met this morning and appointed Conrad
Taschner as Chairman and asked if Deputy Clerk Pincumbe could take future
minutes. Clerk Hiner added that the Board had discussed the future perpetual
care policy and the Board would like to continue to provide this service. She
said they are investigating how other Townships handle this issue before making
a recommendation to the Board.
Supervisor Martin said that if the Deputy Clerk is going to be a compensated
recording secretary for the Cemetery Board than the Township needs to consider
how recording secretaries for other committees (i.e. Park, Traffic, etc…) are
compensated for consistency. Trustee Zaban asked if the recording secretary
would be paid for out of those committee budgets. Trustee Wright said this item
could be discussed at their next Board policy special meeting. Clerk Hiner said
she would record minutes at the next Cemetery Board meeting on December 2, 2003
if no policy is established by then.
Clerk Hiner reported that George Monroe had brought to the meeting a draft
agreement between the Township and the City regarding cemetery management. The
document had been forwarded to the City by the Township’s attorney. Mr. Monroe
said there was some concern on the City’s behalf about that agreement with
regards to a 50% financing of equipment purchases.
Trustee Wright said he understands why the City has an issue with that point.
Supervisor Martin said Lisa Hitchcock was going to draft a response for the
Township to review. Clerk Hiner said she had spoken with Lisa Hitchcock and
agreed to start tracking the proportion of Township and City residents being
buried in Summit Cemetery. Supervisor Martin said Lisa Hitchcock had spent 2
hours at the Township offices discussing this contract arrangement. Trustee
Wright said it would make more sense to him that the City pay a flat fee and
not a percentage of equipment costs as they arise. Supervisor Martin agreed.
Clerk Hiner also reported that the Cemetery Board is also interested in
purchasing a new flag and flagpole before Veterans Day (11/11/03). Trustee
Wright asked for Cemetery Board representative Greg Lammers to prepare a
proposal for the Board to consider and added that he felt the request sounded
reasonable. Clerk Hiner reported that the new cemetery software was received
last week and that the number of actual graves mapped was higher than the
initial estimate. She said that the maps look great and added that the software
consultant had said Summit was one of the three most challenging sites he had
worked on. This is because there have been many different methods used for
laying out different parts of the cemetery over the past 200 years.
Budget Amendment
Trustee Wright moved to transfer $4,000 from the General Fund from
“Contingency” to “Capital Outlay” for purchase of the new copy machine. Motion
supported by Clerk Hiner. Motion passed unanimously.
Supervisor Martin requested that “rollover money from Ingham County Road
Commission” be added to the topic “Unfinished Business.”
Building permit fees
Supervisor Martin explained that a couple of months ago the Board had adjusted
the building permit fee policy because there was inconsistency in how different
parties were calculating their fees. The change was made to base all
calculations on square footage. Supervisor Martin explained that, after working
with the new policy, Inspector Aven had requested that the permit fee rate
schedule be increased to $88 per square foot. These changes are based on
recommendations in the building standards magazine “International Conference of
Building Officials.” She said she doesn’t know what other area Townships are
charging except for Meridian Township because Inspector Aven had provided their
fee schedule for comparison. Trustee Wright said he thinks it is important for
the calculations to be done by square foot. He said he thinks that $55 $50 to
$88 is a big jump. Clerk Hiner confirmed with Inspector Aven that using the $55
$50/sq foot approach results in a big drop in fees from the previous fee
schedule. Inspector Aven said that it does. Trustee Wright said he thinks the
square footage cost needs to be increased but is not sure if it needs to be
increased that much. He would like to see additional information from
comparable municipalities. He said it is appropriate for the Township to be
consistent with Meridian Township and the City of Williamston rather than with
smaller areas like Locke Township. Supervisor Martin said she agrees that the
rate needs to be consistent and fair. Inspector Aven suggested rounding the fee
to $80 to make calculations easier. Supervisor Martin recommended that she and
Inspector Aven work together to collect additional information to present at
the next Township Board meeting.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Springbrook Estates 
Supervisor Martin explained that the plat where Springbrook Estates is proposed
is located in the 425 area. The developer is required to have sewer and water
from the City in order to develop this location. Supervisor Martin said the
Board had been provided with information from MDOT regarding a possible
entrance on Grand River but that they have not provided the Township with a
formal letter of their recommendation. She said this is because they haven’t
received a request to review the issue from Ingham County Road Commission. The
Road Commission is still deciding whether this entrance should be considered.
She added that MDEQ still has not sent formal information regarding the
wetlands issue and that the City also needs to respond regarding City water and
sewer hookup locations with respect to any roadway to access Grand River.
Supervisor Martin said the developer has met the Township requirements
regarding lot criteria, setbacks, and amount of open space. She said this is a
very tentative plat and that one of her biggest issues is the 60’ setback
requirement from wetlands. She said she would require the developer to seek
interpretation from the ZBA about whether a road is considered a structure.
Trustee Zaban asked if the City has enough sewer allocation available.
Supervisor Martin said they do but there will be nothing put in writing
officially by the City until the tentative preliminary plat is approved by the
Township. At that point the developer can submit a request to the City. Trustee
Zaban confirmed that in order for the State or the County to review anything,
there has to be a TENTATIVE preliminary plat approval by the Township.
Supervisor Martin confirmed that this is true. Trustee Wright asked if there is
anything in this tentative preliminary plat that does not meet the Township’s
ordinance. Supervisor Martin repeated that the 60-foot setback issue still
needs to be reviewed by the ZBA. Trustee Wright added that the MDEQ response
would also need to be received to make sure those conditions have been met.
Supervisor Martin said that if there are any significant changes to the plan
during the approval process, the Township can say at any point that the change
warrants that the plan go back to the Planning Commission and start the process
over.
Trustee Wright clarified that at this point the developer has met everything
that the Township requires except for that setback issue. He asked if the Board
should consider a tentative approval now in order to get feedback from the
other agencies that are going to be part of the review process. Trustee Wright
said he believes that if the developer meets the requirements of the ordinance,
he doesn’t believe the Board can hold the process up.
Treasurer Fink said that even though a developer’s calculations may meet the
letter of the calculation for density, the ordinance does not require that the
Board allow the absolute highest possible density on every parcel-especially
when there are extenuating circumstances as exists at the Zimmer Road/Grand
River intersection. She said she does not personally favor that high of a
density on that piece of property without a safer infrastructure in place. She
said she is not willing to approve that density at that location just because
the Board is against the wall. Clerk Hiner said she is not confident that other
groups reviewing this tentative plat will interpret the situation at that
intersection properly. Treasurer Fink said that the letter provided by McKenna
predicts a 13% increase in traffic on Zimmer Road and that this will still not
be enough of an increase to warrant a signal at the intersection. Trustee
Wright said he’s confident that a new traffic study will support a signal if it
is done properly. Trustee Wright said he also believes there needs to be
improvements at this location but the Township will need to defend a decision
based on that criteria legally. Treasurer Fink said there is a provision in the
ordinance that states the Board does not have to approve a plan, even if it
meets the letter of the ordinance, if they feel there is a safety concern that
is a detriment to the citizens of the Township. Clerk Hiner said she agrees
with Treasurer Fink that the plan is too dense. Treasurer Fink said she sees
this density as detrimental to the Township. She added that perhaps this is a
weak area in the Township’s ordinance.
Mrs. Lo asked what density is proposed. Supervisor Martin said the site is 46.4
acres and there are 40 houses proposed. Dave Byers (1325 E. Grand River) stated
that he had not been notified of the increased density and was not aware of it
until the sign went up on the possible roadway site. Supervisor Martin said the
notification list would be checked. Mr. Byers clarified that, if the tentative
plat were approved tonight, there would be a road onto Grand River, into
Victory Meadows and onto Zimmer Road because the last map he saw showed 2
accesses on Zimmer Road. Trustee Wright said that, based on discussion at the
Planning Commission, it is probably unlikely that an access onto Grand River
will be added.
Mr. Byers said he is concerned with the wisdom of putting an access onto Grand
River with current traffic conditions. He also questioned the formula for
density on this parcel. Treasurer Fink explained this plat is being developed
under the R.O.S.E. Plan which requires that 50% of the parcel be designated as
open space IN ORDER TO DEVELOP AT THIS DENSITY. Supervisor Martin said the
calculation for an R-1-S parcel allows for one house every 40,000 sq. ft. (an
acre is 43,560 sq. ft.).
Mr. Byers said the original plan he had seen called for 24 to 26 homes. He said
he had asked Mr. Hilty about buying this property years ago. At that time Mr.
Hilty was working on having the City annex the property so it could be
developed with an even higher density. Mr. Byers said they had fought that
strongly at the time and it looks to him like Mr. Hilty has done an "end run"
around the density question. Supervisor Martin said if it had been annexed into
the City, Mr. Hilty could have put closer to 80 homes on the property so the
425 agreement did limit density to a point. Supervisor Martin said that the way
the R-1 or R-1-S area density is calculated (using the Rose formula) is 1 unit
for every 0.92 acres. She said the proposed open space on this is parcel is
23.63 acres. Mr. Clark of Kebs Engineering said that with a 46-acre site, the
Rose calculation requires preserving 50% of the site as open space. Lots,
roadways, wetlands, and storm water detention areas are all taken from the 23
acres not designated as open space. He added that the open space is dispersed
entirely across the site on the proposed plat.
Steve Terry (4015 Zimmer Road) asked that, in the future, the Township require
the developer to provide handheld size copies of the plan for the audience to
review to improve the conduct of the meeting. Tom Grover (4090 Zimmer Road)
said he has attended several of the meetings regarding this topic and it is
apparent that a couple of the Board members and most of the audience are
concerned about safety on Zimmer Road. He said he had borrowed a radar gun from
his worksite at MSU and proved that much of the traffic on Zimmer was traveling
70 mph. He asked how we could let this plan move ahead with an access onto
Zimmer Road with the traffic conditions that exist. Trustee Wright said that,
unfortunately, people drive 70 mph everywhere in the Township. Trustee Wright
said he doesn’t think that anyone on the Board is heavily in favor of this
development. He said he’s only in favor of considering approval of the
TENTATIVE PRELIMINARY plat tonight so that some of the other agencies can start
providing input.  
Mr. Terry said if this tentative plat is sent on to the County, the Township
will get no reaction from MDOT. Supervisor Martin agreed. Mr. Terry said the
plat will get the same response from ICRC because they aren’t concerned about
the safety. He suggested the Township approve the tentative plat with a
condition that the developer provides an access onto Grand River so that it
will at least force MDOT and ICRC to have to consider the safety issue and
provide input. Supervisor Martin said she couldn’t recommend adding an access
onto Grand River because she doesn’t believe it would be safe to have one
there.
 
Floyd Goodman said that if the Board’s opinion is that the tentative plat is
not appropriate for approval, the Board should just not approve it. Mr. Goodman
said that it is his understanding that if the citizens of the Township request
it, the site plan can be revisited. He added that he feels there should be a
moratorium on all development until the whole process is revisited. That way
the citizens could request that there be no lots of less than 2 acres-
irregardless of green space. He said that if Township residents really want to
have a rural community, than the Planning Commission should take those things
into consideration so that we can have a safe rural community.
 
Supervisor Martin said she agrees that we want a safe rural community. She said
that the 425 agreement was made to help the Township secure its boundary. She
said it sounds like Mr. Goodman is saying the citizens now feel the allowed
zoning density is too high. She said the only way to change the density is to
change the zoning. Trustee Wright said that couldn’t be done while a tentative
plat is on the table. Mr. Byer asked if this parcel has always been R-1S.
Supervisor Martin said it has been R1-S as long as she can remember. She said
that any property adjacent to the City has the densest zoning and then the
density decreases as you move out into the rural areas. Supervisor Martin said
that if the citizens say they don’t want rezoning, then the master plan will
not be changed. Supervisor Martin said the Township has denied all rezoning
requests with the exception of 2 parcels of 10 acres that someone wanted to
take off their family farm.
 
Mr. Terry said that a street is already in place on Grand River near the
proposed location. He said that if safety is a concern, he has to respectfully
disagree with Supervisor Martin’s objection to a Grand River access for safety
reasons because safety is already an issue.
 
Mr. Timmerman (3848 Zimmer Rd) said he lives at the point where the road will
access Zimmer Road. He said he would like to see a cul-de-sac put in and an
access onto Grand River added. He said if you open those roads up, the
subdivision will be used as a cut-through by post office traffic. Supervisor
Martin said she understands his concerns and agrees that a cut-through will be
formed. Mr. Timmerman added that with that high of a density, there would be 80
more cars added to the traffic load. Clerk Hiner said the memo from McKenna
implies there would be little impact by a Zimmer ingress/egress and she doesn’t
agree. She thinks that traffic coming east out of the City will be
traveling at a lower speed and that traffic turning into the subdivision will
be moving even slower. However there is no reason for traffic to slow down on
Zimmer at the location of the road easement so cars will be traveling by that
access point at a high speed.
Inspector Aven asked if it would be possible for the Board to approve the
tentative plat with a requirement that the County lower the speed limit.
Supervisor Martin said the County isn’t responsible for lowering the speed
limit. Supervisor Martin said there could only be requirements placed that the
developer can accomplish and he can’t accomplish a lower speed or a signal at
the intersection.
Supervisor Martin said she sees two options for proceeding. The first option is
that the Board can go forward with approval of this TENTATIVE preliminary plat
and see what the other agencies have to say (she said she has a list of 7
conditions she would put on her approval). She said she realizes some Board
members have a safety issue but court cases do not uphold denials based on this
issue and she doesn’t want to put the Township into a legal situation where
there is a definite possibility of losing. She second option is to send the
tentative plat back to the developer and tell them we want to see them cut out
some lots. The developer can agree or disagree. Treasurer Fink said the Board
would need to send any revised tentative plat back through the Planning
Commission. Supervisor Martin said the tentative plat would eventually have to
go before the other agencies.
Supervisor Martin said that what is really stopping her from making a decision
is the wetlands question that needs to go before the ZBA. She said that another
option could be that the Board requires the 60’ setback question go before the
ZBA before any decision is made because significant changes to the plat may be
required based on their decision. Trustee Wright asked how this option would
affect the time constraints. Supervisor Martin said that the Board response
could be that the tentative plat goes back to the ZBA. She said the developer
can say yes and take it before the ZBA or decline review by the ZBA and proceed
from there. Supervisor Martin said if the ZBA decides a 60’ setback is
required, the developer would have to justify a variance by showing a hardship.
She said she doesn’t believe the ZBA has ever looked at this setback question.
She added that she doesn’t believe the Township can call a moratorium on
reviewing all plats. The Township can re-look at zoning as a whole but this
request is already on the table.
Tom Grover said he was familiar with a similar situation in Howell where the
developer was required to put screening in to limit the noise and views for the
houses surrounding the new roadway. Treasurer Fink said this has been required
on other projects within the Township also.
Mr. Clark stated that one option not discussed completely would be granting
this TENTATIVE PRELIMINARY plat (along with sending it to ZBA for
interpretation) in order to receive input from the other agencies. Supervisor
Martin said the ZBA decision may change the plat significantly and she’s
concerned that, if the Board approves this plat, ICRC gets the message that the
Township likes this development. Treasurer Fink said that a tentative
endorsement will give the other agencies a perceived endorsement by the
Township. The agencies may just say “if the Township thinks it looks fine, than
so do we” and approve it without comment.
 
Trustee Zaban said he wants to see the setback question go before the ZBA
because this issue may change the whole plat. He said he had originally
considered approving the TENTATIVE preliminary plat so the Township could get
feedback from the other agencies but has now changed his mind. Supervisor
Martin said the Board could also ask Mr. Clark to go back to the developer and
voluntarily suggest they voluntarily reduce the proposed number of lots.
However, even if the lot number was reduced, it will not make any difference on
whether a road goes in by Mr.Timmerman’s house and possibly by Mr. Byers’.
Supervisor Martin said she doesn’t believe the Board can deny a subdivision
altogether. Mr. Timmerman said he’s not saying people should not be allowed the
opportunity to live there but they should be allowed to have space to move. He
said the reason he is here tonight is because he doesn’t want to see a road
exit onto Zimmer Road. Mr. Timmerman added that if roads beside his house and
on Grand River are going to be opened, why can’t the developer open the second
roadway on Zimmer and make one a one-way entrance and the other a one-way exit
to eliminate traffic cutting through the subdivision. Mr. Clark said that would
be as ineffective as the one-way setup that currently exists at the post
office.
Trustee Zaban made a motion not to approve the tentative plat this evening and
to recommend the applicant go before the ZBA for interpretation of the 60’
setback requirement and whether a road meets the requirement of a structure.
Motion supported by Clerk Hiner. Motion passed unanimously.
BREAK
Supervisor Martin reported that during the break she was able to confirm that
Mr. Byers was included on the Planning Commission mailing list.
Complaints
5545 Lounsbury Road Blight-Witgen
Constable Dahlstrom reported that the blue tarps are now down on Mr. Witgen’s
property and half of the west roofline is shingled. The east and north sides of
the roof is open but there are no tarps up. There are still tarps covering
materials on the ground. He said that there have been significant improvements
to the site. Inspector Aven concurred and said Mr. Witgen has accomplished a
lot of work.
 
1438 E. Grand River Zoning Violation-Mossholder
Constable Dahlstrom reported that Mr. Mossholder’s zoning violation still
exists. He has repainted the black marks so they are 9.5’ instead of 6’ wide
but the signs are still up which causes a blockage problem. Supervisor Martin
explained that the Township had sent a letter to Mr. Mossholder notifying him
of the zoning violations. In his response letter, Mr. Mossholder requested an
allowance of 60 days so he can make an application for a special use permit to
be included on the next Planning Commission agenda to be considered.
 
Treasurer Fink asked if Mr. Mossholder would be allowed to remain in violation
during that 60-day period. Supervisor Martin said the Board could allow that.
Mr. Mossholder confirmed that he could have his application in to the Planning
Commission by November 4, 2003 in order to meet the 2-week prior deadline but
added that he has no experience submitting this type of application. Supervisor
Martin suggested he meet with the Township planner on Tuesday or Thursday and
offered her assistance as well. Trustee Zaban said he appreciated the
improvements Mr. Mossholder has made to his building. Trustee Wright said that,
in light of those improvements and his willingness to conform to the zoning
requirements, the Board should allow him to continue his business in violation
until he meets with the Planning Commission.
Constable Report-Other
Constable Dahlstrom reported that he had checked on Mr. Hoffman’s property
since there was a timeline previously discussed on this issue and the property
is still torn up. Supervisor Martin said she needs to forward information on
this complaint to the attorney if there has not been compliance.
Constable Dahlstrom also reported that Mr. Ciolek is living in the barn at his
former residence again. Supervisor Martin stated that this again puts Mr.
Ciolek in violation of the zoning ordinance.
Trustee Wright made a motion that the Township to go forward with court action
against Mr. Ciolek and Mr. Hoffman. Motion supported by Trustee Zaban with the
request that Constable Dahlstrom’s reports be submitted for documentation.
Motion passed unanimously.  
Renovation Update
Supervisor Martin reported that there are several issues that still need to be
resolved including the flooring in the rental hall area. She added that
asphalting the parking lot is scheduled for next week. Trustee Wright said he
would coordinate recycling with Mark Tabor.
Supervisor Martin said the open house is still scheduled for October 26th  but
the Township is not allowed to fund refreshments. Swanson Design has donated
$50 and Virginia Taschner has volunteered to donate cookies. Treasurer Fink
suggested a sign-up sheet. Supervisor Martin said Board members could
individually approach businesses in the Township to invite them to the open
house and also to ask if they would consider donating
refreshments.
ICRC Rollover Money
Supervisor Martin stated that she needs to fax the Township’s request to ICRC
by tomorrow indicating where we want our rollover money directed. She
recommended that the Township use the money to improve Sunrise Drive, which is
the next public road on the list. She said the Township also has the right to
use the money to repair a damaged road if necessary. Trustee Zaban reminded the
Board that Maple Shade and Golfview were recommended for crack filling and that
task has not yet been completed. Supervisor Martin clarified that ICRC had
originally allocated $30,000 and have used $12,000 to complete all projects
except the crack-filling. Trustee Zaban estimated a cost of $2,000-$4000 will
still be deducted from the remaining $18,000 to do this task.
Trustee Wright made a motion supported by Treasurer Fink that the Township
request that ICRC use the Williamstown Township’s remaining rollover money to
complete the next road on the priority list which is Sunrise Drive and that the
Township include in the notification to ICRC that the we retain the right to
change this request to a different location if its determined necessary at a
later date. Motion passed unanimously.
Reports
Personnel-Recording Secretary Planning Commission
Supervisor Martin reported that Deb Shultz had resigned her position as
recording secretary for the Planning Commission. Supervisor Martin asked Lori
Pincumbe if she was interested taking over the position. Lori agreed to record
minutes on an interim basis while they search for a replacement for Ms. Shultz.
Supervisor Martin said it would be best for the Township to have more than one
recording secretary for various Township meetings to cover for vacations, etc…
NIESA
Supervisor Martin commented that in last month’s NIESA minutes there is a
statement in the section discussing the building that concerns her. She
explained to the audience that the property that the NIESA building is on is 2’
over the boundary line into the Township ADJOINING LOT. NIESA’s attorney is
stating that, since the building has been in place for 15 years, NIESA owns the
building. She said that there have been at least 2 other similar issues in the
Township where someone built on neighboring property and, in both cases; they
had to buy the property or tear the building down so she disagrees with Mr.
Adams on this point.
Supervisor Martin asked Trustee Zaban how NIESA was able to adopt a deficit
budget-do they have money in reserve? Trustee Zaban said that the finance
committee made a $130,000 reduction in expenditures to cover the deficit. He
explained that this is actually just a projected deficit. Supervisor Martin
added that Township law does not allow us to pass a budget in the red unless
there is money in reserve. Trustee Zaban said he would check into it.
Trustee Zaban reported that NIESA has hired 3 of the total of 6 people they
plan to add as daytime staff. These individuals will be cross-trained as both
EMS and fire safety personnel; there are 8 applicants for the Chief position;
the ambulance reported about 35 runs less than last year; and that Kirt Hunt’s
open house is scheduled for Saturday, October 7. Trustee Zaban said he would be
unable to attend. Trustee Zaban asked if a letter had been sent to NIESA
regarding the contract. Supervisor Martin said that the attorney didn’t see a
great advantage to the contract and that the Board should discuss the contract
at the upcoming workshop.
Parks
Treasurer Fink said she was unable to attend the last park meeting but the
details of the meeting are in the minutes.
Supervisor Martin noted that a reference to using herbicide is made in the
minutes again which the Township is not allowed to do because we are not a
licensed applicator (required on public property). Treasurer Fink said they
plan
to cut not spray. Supervisor Martin stated that Mark Tabor had cut the pathways
as recommended in previous minutes and has been asked to clean the kiosks.
Treasurer Fink said the Park Committee is meeting tomorrow night. She added
that she and Betty Challis had attended an annual prescribed burn workshop,
which was very interesting. Two gentlemen who conducted the Township’s burn
were both there as presenters. She and Betty asked one to make a proposal for a
preparing a plant inventory and a management plan for how to cut different
areas and enhance certain areas with plantings in order to achieve the
Township’s goals.
Library
Clerk Hiner reported that the minutes for the Library Foundation’s August
workshop are in the Board packet. The September minutes are not available and
the October meeting is cancelled.
Other
Supervisor Martin said the entrance to the park should be paved next week and
if anyone wants to purchase gravel, the contractor is interested in selling
what remains. She said the Township would be doing a final walk through once
the work is complete.
Meeting Review
Supervisor Martin said she would notify Dali Giese of her reappointment and
notify the City of our input for their sewer plan. Clerk Hiner will update
QuickBooks with the budget amendment. Supervisor Martin asked the Board to
start preparing their budgets for next year with consideration for the new
police officer position. Mr. Mossholder will be sent an excerpt of the Board
minutes noting reporting dates. Trustee Wright will post a signup sheet for
open house refreshments and Trustee Zaban will approach local businesses for
support. Inspector Aven and Supervisor Martin will collect fee schedules from
area municipalities and work together to adjust the fee schedule policy.
Supervisor Martin will contact the attorney regarding violation litigations.
Adjournment
Trustee Zaban made a motion to adjourn supported by Trustee Wright. Motion
passed unanimously. Meeting adjourned at 11:11 p.m.
_________________________________      ______________________________
Susan L. Hiner               Lori A. Pincumbe
Clerk                  Recording Secretary
NOVEMBER 4, 2003
PRESENT: Supervisor Mickey Martin, Clerk Susan Hiner, Treasurer Nancy Fink,
Trustee Steve Zaban, Trustee Wright and Recording Secretary Lori Pincumbe.
ABSENT: None
CALL TO ORDER
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order at 7:37 p.m. She provided
an overview of the meeting agenda and made a request for changes or additions.
Supervisor Martin added the topics “Blake Mossholder” to Unfinished Business
and “Truck for snow plowing” to Reports-Other. Trustee Wright added “Security
System” to New Business (if time allows) and Trustee Zaban added “Citizen of
the Year” to Reports-Other.
PLEDGE
CONSENT AGENDA
Supervisor Martin reviewed the items included in the Consent Agenda packet:
1)   Regular meeting minutes of 10/7/2003 Board meeting: Supervisor Martin
noted the following corrections: under the topic Building Permit Fees (p. 4)
correct $55 to $50; under the topic Tentative Preliminary Plat Approval -
Springbrook Estates (par. 5, sen. 2) insert the phrase “in order to develop at
this density;” insert “tentative” in front of “preliminary plat” wherever it
appears; under the topic Mossholder delete “…or Thursday;” and under Reports-
NIESA change “into the Township” to “into the adjoining lot.”
2)   Special meeting minutes of 10/14/03: Add statement that Supervisor Martin
will research the use of the hall by all non-profits.
3)   Special meeting minutes of 10/21/03: Correct phrase “presented a bid” to
“presented a requisition form.”
4)   Treasurer’s report: Treasurer Fink commented that the Vanguard Capital
Improvement Account established 1995 was closed on 10/16/03 and the money
($97,918.36) moved to the general fund to cover renovation expenses. Trustee
Zaban asked if payment for the renovation was now complete. Treasurer Fink said
there are more expenses to be paid and a decision will need to be made about
which account the money will be moved from to cover these costs.
5)   Building permits report: No comments
6)   Accounts paid report: No comments
7)   Accounts payable report: Trustee Wright asked if a spending limit had been
set on the park benches. Treasurer Fink said Eagle Scout candidate Eric
Schultink purchased the benches based on approval by the Park Committee and
then turned in a receipt for reimbursement before she had explained the Board’s
invoice authorization/approval process. Supervisor Martin requested asked that
the Williamston Storage invoices be held until the account balances for the two
storage units are verified. Clerk Hiner explained that the Murphy, Brenton &
Spagnuolo invoice was never sent to the Township last month because the vendor
had applied a credit to the Township’s balance and, since the amount due was
then zero, they didn’t issue the invoice. They have been contacted and will
issue all invoices (whether a credit has been applied or not) in the future.
8)   Payroll item detail and payroll liability reports: Supervisor Martin noted
that Dan Kraft’s paycheck should be recalculated because he did not attend the
October Board meeting. Supervisor Martin questioned Terri Smith’s paycheck
because her timecard only records 40 hours including 8 hours of holiday pay and
not 48 total hours. Clerk Hiner explained that Terri Smith had worked 8
additional hours preparing for the open house but had not recorded these hours
on her timecard. Treasurer Fink asked for her timecard to be corrected to
include these hours. Trustee Wright said he will follow up with Terri Smith.
Trustee Zaban moved to approve the Consent Agenda with changes noted. Motion
supported by Trustee Wright. Motion passed unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Citizen Al LeBlanc presented the Board with Pebblebrook Subdivision’s most
recent newsletter. He also commented that he had attended the open house and
felt it was a very nice event.
NEW BUSINESS
Library-Jeff Bartrem & John Brazier
Mr. Bartrem and Mr. Brazier did not attend tonight’s meeting as planned. Clerk
Hiner explained on their behalf that the Library Foundation is pursuing
purchase of the Republic Bank building. The foundation representatives had
planned to report the status of this purchase and determine if there was Board
support for their decision. Trustee Wright asked if they were planning to
request money from the Township. Clerk Hiner stated that they did not plan to
do that this evening but they are aware that there are other entities that the
Township publicly and financially supports like Red Cedar Recreation and
Williamston Community Pool. Trustee Zaban said Ed Noonan had told him that he
still hopes that donors will step forward to help fund the library. Katie Lo
(290 Sherwood) asked how much funding support the Township provides to Red
Cedar Recreation. Clerk Hiner said the Township pays $5 per student per
activity. Mrs. Lo said she feels the library should be at least equally funded.
Treasurer Fink said the library may be a similar situation to the pool and she
imagines the Library Foundation will approach the Township with a specific
proposal requesting funds at some point.
Planning Commission Report
Planning Commission Meeting Minutes
Trustee Wright reported that a public meeting was held during the October 18th
Planning Commission meeting for a rezoning request made by Jonathon Maire (1345
E. Sherwood Road). Trustee Zaban asked if citizens were generally in favor of
his request. Trustee Wright said there was concern expressed by surrounding
property owners as well as written requests for denial. Mr. Maire also provided
a copy of an informal petition with the names of several citizens supporting
his request. He said the Planning Commission plans to make a decision at next
month’s meeting. Trustee Wright said the Commission had also planned to discuss
a revised tentative preliminary plat for Windybrook Subdivision but the
developer submitted a new revision during the meeting so discussion was tabled
until the planning consultant had adequate time for review. The topic will be
re-addressed at the November meeting.
Complaint-986 Gulick Road
Supervisor Martin explained that this complaint was made because the property
owner had placed a storage trailer on the site which is not allowed by the
zoning ordinance unless there is also a building on the property. The property
owner has stated that he plans to build a home on this site and has submitted
an application for a building permit. Trustee Wright reported that there had
been a meeting with the property owner this evening and he indicated that he
still has a few more things to complete in order to comply with the ordinance.
He added that the owner has been able to get permits from the Health
Department, Drain Commission and Road Commission. However, he has made some
changes in the actual house plans that have resulted in delay. The owner stated
that he is prepared to finalize his house plans within the next 1-2 weeks and
that the intent for the trailer is to use it for storing building materials and
tools once the project begins. Trustee Wright said once the building permit has
been authorized, the ordinance allows for the storage trailer to remain on-site
with Building Inspector approval. Trustee Wright said there is an understanding
with the property owner that he will have a permit in place before the December
2, 2003 Board meeting, adding that it is the property owner’s intention to be
in the new home by June 1, 2003. Supervisor Martin said the Building Inspector
can put a stipulation on the building permit stating how long the storage
trailer can remain on site. Supervisor Martin asked the Board if they agree
with the owner’s request for a thirty (30) day extension.
Treasurer Fink made a motion to allow the property owner at 986 Gulick Road
thirty (30) days to complete a building permit or remove the trailer from the
property. Motion supported by Trustee Zaban. Motion passed unanimously.
Trustee Wright requested that a letter be sent to the property owner informing
him of this motion.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
(Supervisor Martin requested that the Tentative Preliminary Plat Approval of
Springbrook Estates be discussed out of order with consideration of the
audience attending tonight’s meeting with interest in this topic.)
Tentative Preliminary Plat Approval - Springbrook Estates
Supervisor Martin reported that it was determined by the ZBA that a road is a
structure. The applicant was granted a variance to cross the Suttell Drain and
a variance to connect to Belmont Street. Supervisor Martin stated that the ZBA
recommended that the applicant bring a revised plat plan back to the Planning
Commission for tentative preliminary plat approval. She added that the
developer has waived his 90 day approval requirement.
Supervisor Martin asked for questions from the audience. Alan Timmerman (3848
Zimmer Road) asked if notice will be given to surrounding property owners
before the Planning Commission discusses this topic. Supervisor Martin said she
will request notifications be sent to the same list of property owners as
previously notified. The developer has stated that their new plan will be
delivered to the Township office on Wednesday, November 5, 2003 so the topic
will likely be placed on the November 18th Planning Commission agenda. She
added that Mr. Clark no longer works at Kebs.
Stephen Terry (4015 Zimmer Road) commented that at the last Board meeting he
had requested that the developer be asked to provide handheld copies of the
tentative preliminary plat for the audience. Supervisor Martin said that his
suggestion was a good one had already been implemented. Handheld copies will be
available from now on. Mr. Timmerman asked what happened to the proposal for a
road onto Grand River. Supervisor Martin said Ingham County Road Commission
hasn’t completely denied an access onto Grand River but they will not make a
final comment until a tentative preliminary plat is approved by this Board and
submitted for their review.
NEW BUSINESS
Board Policies
The Board discussed the content and wording of several policies developed at
the last workshop. Treasurer Fink recommended that each policy under
consideration be reviewed tonight, edited, and then final consideration of them
all be made at one time at the next Board meeting.
Mail Distribution
The Draft Mail Distribution Policy states:
1.   A log of mail will be kept. Clerk will provide the log to Board members on
a monthly basis to coincide with Board meetings. All Board members can review
the log at any time to ascertain that they are comfortable with the information
that is being forwarded to them.
Discussion: Clerk Hiner said she will begin recording mail received in a
handwritten notebook kept at a central location. She said she also plans to
give a copy of the log to the Board monthly to coincide with Board meetings.
2.   The Clerk will forward for review copies of bills that require review to
the most appropriate person. Bills will be made available for review the Monday
preceding Board meetings.
Discussion: Supervisor Martin asked that this item also be included under the
bill payment policy. Clerk Hiner clarified that she will provide a payable list
to the Treasurer on Friday for her checks and balance review so that the final
payable report is available for Board members on Monday.
3.   Mail that is specifically directed to one person will be disseminated as
such. Copies will be made as directed by notations.
Discussion: Trustee Zaban asked whether it had been verified whether mail that
is addressed to a specific person can be opened by another individual. Clerk
Hiner said that her research had verified that it was appropriate for the Clerk
to open and distribute specifically addressed mail. She read from the court
case McKim vs. Green Oak (document provided by Catherine Mulhupt at MTA to
clarify this issue) that states that, “According to the U. S. Postal Service,
mail forwarded to a government agency is not personal mail and may be opened as
directed by the …approval official.” The approval official, according to the
McKim rule, is the Clerk. Clerk Hiner added that historically, all mail has
been opened prior to distribution at the Township office.
Treasurer Fink asked that a file be kept in a central location for all mail for
which the Clerk doesn’t know where or who to distribute it to.
4.   The Clerk’s office will keep originals for Township files as required by
law, where appropriate, i.e. Contracts, Attorney correspondence, etc…
Discussion: Treasurer Fink said the Clerk needs to file information in a
central location that everyone can access.
5.   Mail will be processed promptly and whenever possible disseminated within
1 hour of receiving it in the office.
Zoning information
The Draft Zoning Information Policy states:
Disseminating Ordinance Information-All ordinance information requests beyond
copying are to be directed to the Supervisor or our Planning Consultant. If the
request is for copies of parts of an ordinance for information all staff may
give it out.
Discussion: Supervisor Martin pointed out a copy of the proposed Information
Request Form. There was discussion that the form be completed by the customer
for all requests for information made at the counter (not just ordinance
related requests). The request form can be put on the appropriate person’s desk
for response. No changes to the Draft Zoning Information Policy were
recommended. Supervisor Martin stated she would prefer that all phone messages
go into her voice mail and instead of being recorded on a phone message record.
Purchase/Requisition forms
Excerpted from October 14, 2003 Workshop minutes:
“Treasurer Fink would like to see a policy requiring the use of Purchase
Requisition forms that are then reviewed and then are approved or rejected.
Trustee Wright asked who would be responsible for the review of these forms.
Supervisor Martin said she would be willing to do this. The board agreed to
adopt this policy.”
Bill Review Procedure
The Draft Bill Review Procedure Policy states that:
“The Township policy that all bills (with the exception of payroll, taxes,
utilities, those bills which would incur a penalty and those deemed necessary
to the welfare of the Township approved by the Supervisor or other Board member
in the absence of the Supervisor), must be approved at the Township Board
meeting. In addition to those exceptions, invoices from consultants and bills
for supplies whose inventory must be verified will be distributed to the Board
member or office staff most able to verify the statement. The clerk, being the
receiver of mail will direct these invoices to the appropriate individual,
before preparing the warrant for final Board approval. Bills will be available
for review the Monday before Board meetings.”
Discussion
Supervisor Martin requested the new policy be rewritten using the number format
used in the previous bill review policy. Supervisor Martin recommended adding
the statement, “ The Treasurer will review invoices scheduled for payment on
Friday before the Board meeting and the Clerk will generate the Unpaid Bills
Detail Report to be available for review the following Monday.”
Board Agenda Policy
The Draft Board Agenda Policy states that:
“The Supervisor will have the agenda prepared by the Tuesday prior to the
regularly scheduled board meetings. Any agenda items for the board meeting
should be in for inclusion by 4 p.m. on said Tuesday.”
Discussion: Supervisor Martin stated that, in order for her to finalize the
agenda by 4 p.m., she needs any Board input by 10 a.m. Tuesday morning.
Board Packets
The Draft Board Packets Policy states that:
“Board packets will be mailed the Friday prior to the regularly scheduled Board
Meetings. Board Packets may not include reports like Treasurer’s Reports and
Unpaid Bills Detail, Payroll Item Detail, which are date sensitive.”
Discussion: Trustees Wright and Zaban stated that it is not necessary to mail
their packets. They will take responsibility for collecting them at the
Township office. Supervisor Martin stated that Mr. Kraft’s packet should still
be mailed. There was discussion that the Supervisor and Deputy Clerk review the
agenda for Board packets on Wednesday prior to the Board meeting and that any
Board packet information unavailable for distribution on Friday (primarily time
sensitive Treasurer and financial reports) be distributed to Board members’
mailboxes as soon as it becomes available.
Annual insurance audit
The draft Annual Insurance Audit Policy states that:
“The Township will annually review all insurance policies to ascertain the
Township is adequately covered, that coverage’s are up-to-date and to ensure
that the Township is getting good value for the public. Reviews will take
place…”
Discussion: There was discussion that the Clerk will audit the Township’s
insurance policies annually prior to December 15th of each fiscal year. Trustee
Wright stated that a total investigation and review of all current insurance
coverage should also be done as soon as possible.
Requisition Snow Blower
Supervisor Martin presented a purchase requisition in the amount of $350 for a
new snow blower. Trustee Wright confirmed that the Township was making this
purchase and not the Cemetery. Supervisor Martin stated that this was a
Township purchase only and it will be used for maintenance of the building
entryways, sidewalks, etc… Trustee Wright said he felt this purchase made good
sense.
Trustee Zaban made a motion to approve the purchase requisition for a new snow
blower in the amount of
$ 350.00. Motion supported by Trustee Wright. Motion passed unanimously.
Complaint - Mossholder
Supervisor Martin reported that Mr. Mossholder is working toward a solution on
this complaint. Planner CHRIS DOOZAN Jim Breuckman (McKenna Associates) sent a
letter to Mr. Mossholder today informing him of what remains to be done. Mr.
Mossholder has requested another 30-day extension to complete these tasks.
Clerk Hiner made a motion supported by Trustee Wright to allow Mr. Mossholder
another thirty (30) day extension to resolve the complaint. Motion passed
unanimously.
NIESA Proposed Service Agreement
Trustee Zaban asked if the Board was satisfied with NIESA’s new proposed
service agreement and said, if so, he would like to take it with him to the
NIESA Board meeting on Thursday. Supervisor Martin said the only thing she
would like to see changed is the fifteen (15) year requirement. Treasurer Fink
recommended it be changed to five (5) years. Trustee Wright commented that if
the Township changes the agreement duration to five (5) years, the contract
could be used as leverage when NIESA is considering where new services are
going to be located. Clerk Hiner pointed out that even if the Township
terminates its contract agreement with NIESA after five (5) years, the millage
will still be applied to Township citizens for the duration of the fifteen (15)
year millage period. Clerk Hiner stated that she will confirm that the
Township’s Hazmat agreement is current.
Supervisor Martin stated that she will revise the proposed agreement to state
five (5) years instead of fifteen (15) years and provide a copy for Trustee
Zaban to submit at the next NIESA Board meeting once a motion has been
approved.
Trustee Zaban made a motion to accept the NIESA proposed service agreement with
the agreement period reduced from fifteen (15) years to five (5) years. Motion
supported by Trustee Wright. Motion passed unanimously.
Trustee Zaban asked that the contract be signed for him to deliver to NIESA on
Thursday, November 6, 2003.
Reports
Drains –Heath
Supervisor Martin reported that work on the Heath Drain has begun. The Township
has until next year to look for a grant to purchase the drain wetland area
included in the two (2) buildable lots that will also be created or the Drain
Commission will sell the lots. Supervisor Martin confirmed for Al LeBlanc (4720
Jadestone) that the Heath drain is located on Grand River where construction is
currently under way.
NIESA
Trustee Zaban reported that he had been unable to attend the last NIESA Board
meeting but the minutes have been included in tonight’s Board packet. He added
that he had attended a retirement party for Kirt Hunt at the Brookshire last
Saturday and it was a nice event. He also provided the Board copies of two
recent newspaper articles about other municipalities that have recently
expanded their fire safety facilities. He reiterated that it is his personal
goal to have a facility located in the Township within the next 3 years. He
expects to learn more about the status of NIESA’s search for a new chief at the
Thursday meeting.
Treasurer Fink asked about NIESA’s policy for charging Township residents for
runs made. Trustee Wright noted that Item 9 of the proposed contract states
that funds provided by property tax revenues will be used for “readiness to
serve.” Treasurer Fink asked whether Board members agree that NIESA should
charge extra when they respond to a call. Trustee Zaban said this has been an
ongoing issue at NIESA. Trustee Wright said our representative on the NIESA
Board should be able to provide input to the Township Board and to NIESA about
what fees are applied and when. Trustee Wright commented that not charging for
responses will result in taxes going up to cover the revenue loss.
Parks
Treasurer Fink noted that minutes of the most recent Park Committee meeting are
included in the Board packet. Supervisor Martin recommended that the Park
Committee keep a list of requests made by Boy Scouts, etc… Clerk Hiner stated
that she is familiar with Eagle Scout project requirements and there is not an
expectation for those projects to be funded by the Township. The scouts are
expected to approach other funding sources as well. Treasurer Fink said she
will explain this to the Park Committee at their next meeting. Trustee Wright
recommended the Township use a policy of “matching at a minimum” rather than
paying for a project entirely. Treasurer Fink stated there has also been
communication with the prescribed burn consultant about preparing a proposal
for developing a landscape plan for the park and the committee is considering
landscaping options along Grand River.
Other
Digital Orthophotography
Supervisor Martin said she attended a recent Drain Commission meeting and it
appears the digital orthophotography project is coming along. She added that
the maps look fantastic and said that Williamstown Township was commended at
the meeting for our timely response to this project.
Methanphetamine Labs
Supervisor Martin reported that she and Building Inspector Walt Aven had
attended a recent informational meeting about methamphetamine labs and the
toxic residue that is generated by them as a by-product (which is often dumped
along the side of rural roads). Methanphetamine is easy to formulate from basic
grocery store supplies and anhydrous ammonia used by farmers for fertilization.
Other
Supervisor Martin reported that Gerald Gorton has continued to contact her
asking for his job back. She said she has told him the position has been
filled.
Supervisor Martin said Constable Dahlstrom is investigating purchase of a truck
for the snowplow to be used this winter. The carpeting vendor will be replacing
molding tomorrow and will also conduct a moisture test on Friday and Saturday
in the rental hall area to determine why the floor tiles have failed.
Trustee Zaban suggested that the Township develop a “Citizen of the Year” award
and post a plaque recording each recipient on the small conference room wall.
He said there are a number of people in the Township who have spent many hours
volunteering and/or otherwise supporting the Township. The other Board members
agreed that this was a good idea. He recommended soliciting nominations for the
first Citizen of the Year award in the next newsletter.
Trustee Zaban reported that MTA had held a highly productive meeting about the
upcoming met last Thursday to discuss their annual meeting and accomplished a
lot. The annual meeting is going to take place January 27-30 at the Lansing
Conference Center. The banquet is scheduled for Wednesday night and the trade
show will take place on January 28, 29, and 30, 2003.
Supervisor Martin scheduled a workshop meeting for November 18, 2003.
Meeting Review
Supervisor Martin will send a letter to Mr. McAlvey summarizing tonight’s
discussion and the Clerk’s office will forward an excerpt of the relevant
minutes from tonight’s meeting to Mr. Mossholder.
Adjournment
Trustee Zaban made a motion to adjourn supported by Trustee Wright. Motion
passed unanimously. Meeting adjourned at 10:46 p.m.
______________________________      ______________________________
Susan L. Hiner               Lori A. Pincumbe
Clerk                  Recording Secretary
DECEMBER 2, 2003
PRESENT: Supervisor Mickey Martin, Clerk Susan Hiner, Treasurer Nancy Fink,
Trustee Steve Zaban, Trustee Martin Wright and Recording Secretary Lori
Pincumbe. ABSENT: None
CALL TO ORDER
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order at 7:30 p.m. She provided
an overview of the meeting agenda and made a request for changes or additions.
Supervisor Martin added “Alarm System” and “McKenna Fees” to “Reports-Other.”
PLEDGE
CONSENT AGENDA
Supervisor Martin reviewed items included in the Consent Agenda packet:
1) Regular Meeting Minutes of 11/14/03: Under the topic “Mossholder” (p. 5),
Supervisor Martin changed “Chris Doozan” to “Jim Breuckman” and Trustee Wright
changed “Trustee Martin” to “Trustee Wright;” 2) Special Meeting Minutes of 11/
18/03: No changes identified.
Treasurer Fink made a motion to pass the consent agenda contingent on her
review of the Treasurer’s Report and those financial reports normally reviewed
by the Treasurer. Motion supported by Trustee Wright.
Discussion
Supervisor Martin stated that Tim Ellis of Delta Builders has requested a
refund of his building permit fee because he has severed his contract with the
homeowner. She asked Inspector Aven how much should be retained to cover
inspector costs incurred and added that the secretary also has one hour of time
accumulated on the project. Inspector Aven stated that the foundation had been
inspected so typically 20% would be retained. Clerk Hiner will reduce the
refund by 20% to cover inspection costs and 1 hour of labor for secretarial
time.
Supervisor Martin stated that it appears that the Swanson invoice ($533.30) is
a final invoice since project completion is stated on the invoice as 100%. She
recommended the invoice be held until clarified because there are several items
that still need to be completed. If it is a final invoice, Trustee Wright
recommended it be held until the project is truly 100% complete.
Building Inspector Report – No changes made.
Motion passed unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Frans Wilbrink (4701Zimmer) asked what was going to happen to the baseball
field in back of the Township Hall now that the playing field has been altered
by the parking lot. Trustee Zaban stated that meetings are held at night so the
parking lot should not interfere with games. Supervisor Martin stated that
there had originally been a berm proposed but it was removed to ensure the
field would have as much room as possible. The architect advised that it would
still be a playable field. She said they will have the architect come out and
take some measurements and if it turns out it is not a playable field, the
Township may need to make some alterations. Mr. Wilbrink asked if the drain
pipe running under the parking lot was going to be crushed under the heavy load
of the recycling and garbage trucks. Trustee Wright stated that the asphalt
people, the contractor and the architect agreed the drain pipes were being
constructed properly and if there are any problems they will be contacted under
the warranty.
Katie Lo (290 E. Sherwood) stated that she had three (3) points she would like
to comment on: 1) with regards to the Springbrook development, it seems to her
that there should only be 20 lots allowed if only 50% is useable instead of 40
lots allowed just because the property is 40 acres; 2) with regards to the
snowplow discussed at the last meeting, she asked if it wouldn’t be better to
retain a private contractor for snowplowing instead of the Township purchasing
a truck and then dealing with breakdowns and repairs; and 3) with regards to
the letter she received from the Township stating that tax payments received
after 2/17/03 with an earlier postmark would be considered late. She asked why
that statement was included and added that she felt it seemed confrontational.
Treasurer Fink responded that there have been historical problems with
postmarks because postmark machines can be altered. She said that County
Treasury had recommended that the Township consider date received only and not
consider postmarks at all. This is also their policy.
Supervisor Martin explained that the Township now has a full-time maintenance
man. With the Township Hall, both cemeteries and the park requiring
maintenance, it was more cost effective for the Township to purchase a vehicle
that could be used for both snowplowing and moving mowing equipment from one
location to the next. The truck is currently parked at the Township Hall. She
added that it was used today to remove an abandoned couch that had been dumped
at the park. Trustee Zaban commented that the snowplowing contractor cost about
$4,000 per year and the truck was $10,800 so, after 3 years, the Township
should be financially better off by making this purchase. Trustee Zaban
explained that the truck was purchased used but it has never plowed and the
plow is nearly new so it was a good buy.
Supervisor Martin explained that, under the Rural Open Space Environment
(R.O.S.E) Plan there is a calculation that allows the developer to get one unit
per every 0.92 acres in an R-1S zone. Wetlands can account for 25% of the 50%
open space requirement. The R.O.S.E. Plan allows for 50% open space and 50%
used space (which includes roads and lots). It trades the set aside for open
space with the allowance for clustering on smaller lots in one area or pockets
of areas. Treasurer Fink clarified that, in the case of Springbrook, the
developer has been allowed 39 lots because that property is in the 425 area so
it has sewer. That many lots wouldn’t have been allowed if septic was being
used. Trustee Zaban stated that the Planning Commission has not approved this
plan yet and has asked the developer to reduce the number of lots. Supervisor
Martin added Steeplechase and Williamston Estates were also designed under the
R.O.S.E. Plan. She said that the State requires that every township have a
clustering option available and the R.O.S.E. Plan is the cluster option this
Township has adopted.
NEW BUSINESS
John Kane-Hotel Tax
Mr. Kane explained that a 1975 law requires that a 5% hotel tax be collected on
all rooms in the county each time they are rented. The law reads that the money
can be used for four items: 1) to finance convention facilities; 2&3) to pay
current or future rent for convention facilities; and 3) to promote and
encourage tourists and convention business in Ingham County. Randy Schaffer,
Board of Commissioners, has told Mr. Kane that the first 20% of all money
collected goes to promoting the Ingham County Fair Board. He said the other 80%
is currently going to the Lansing Convention Bureau and this is where he has a
problem. He would like to see the money contributed by Williamston business
returned to the Williamston community. The money could then be used for
promotion of the Light Parade, the Jubilee Festival or something new like
having Civil War re-enactors come to the park, promoting Williamston’s
whitewater rapids or advertising Williamston in antique magazines. He explained
that he collects $3-4,000 per year on his eight (8) rooms alone and Williamston
Inn will probably collect the same. This is not a significant amount for the
Lansing Convention Bureau to lose but it would have a huge impact on our local
community. Mr. Kane requested the Board pass a resolution to request that this
room tax money come back to the Williamston community. He proposed that
representatives from the Township and the City of Williamston form a board to
decide how the money is spent. Treasurer Fink asked if a law must be passed
before money could be redirected and Mr. Kane said it would not. He provided a
document to Clerk Hiner explaining the tax collection/disbursement process. The
County Treasurer currently collects the tax money and the Board of
Commissioners decides where it goes. He’s sure Randy Schaffer would love to see
this money funneled back to the outer communities. Mr. Schaffer has explained
that the Convention Bureau gets the entire 80% because nobody else has really
pushed for it. Mr. Kane stated that Lisa Hitchcock (Williamston City Manager)
saw the benefits of this proposal immediately and is very supportive.
Supervisor Martin said that the Township is supportive of Mr. Kane’s proposal.
Trustee Zaban stated that he would be willing to attend a meeting with Mr.
Kane, Randy Schaffer and the County Board of Commissioners. Treasurer Fink
recommended asking the County Commissioners to return 100% of the tax locally
as a negotiation starting point instead of 50%.
Treasurer Fink made a motion to support the concept of re-directing the hotel
tax collected from Williamston WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP businesses by the County
Treasurer back to the Williamston WILLIMASTOWN TOWNSHIP community for tourist
promotion and to support John Kane’s efforts to make this happen. Motion
supported by Trustee Zaban. Motion passed unanimously.
The Board recommended adopting a formal resolution once they have reviewed Mr.
Kane’s information and spoken with Randy Schaffer at the County Board of
Commissioners.
Planning Commission Report
Planning Commission Meeting Minutes
There were no questions from the Board and no Planning Commission items to
report due to a request by Carl McIntosh, representing the applicant, to table
discussion of the Maire rezoning request until January.
Rezoning request 1345 Sherwood Ag-SF to RR, PC recommendations
Supervisor Martin read a letter submitted by Mr. Carl McIntosh on 12/2/03,
representing applicant Jonathon Maire, and requesting the discussion of this
topic be tabled until the January 6, 2004 Board meeting.
Trustee Zaban made a motion to table discussion of the Maire Rezoning request
until the January 6, 2004 Board meeting as requested by the applicant. Motion
supported by Trustee Wright. Motion passed unanimously.
Supervisor Martin read another letter submitted by Mr. McIntosh in which
requested the Township maintain a website so that public information could be
more readily accessible. Supervisor Martin said she is looking into that right
now and said domain name Williamstown.com has been reserved. She stated that it
will be a sizeable investment for the Township. There is a $50 monthly fee for
Williamstown.com and then there will be labor costs to keep the site updated.
Mr. McIntosh said several other Townships have websites. Trustee Zaban asked
what size those Townships were. Deputy Clerk Pincumbe stated that MTA has
created a master website for Townships to use as a portal to establish their
own website. Supervisor Martin responded that there is a $60 fee for this
service also. Supervisor Martin said she will find out more about this and
about e-mail options when the computer consultant comes in on Wednesday.
Complaints
986 Gulick Road
Supervisor Martin explained this complaint had been originally been made by a
neighbor because the owner has a commercial trailer stored on his property
which is not allowed by the zoning ordinance since there is no building on the
property. She stated that Mr. McAlvey has come in for his building permit but
has been delayed because he is waiting for building materials PLANS to arrive
from out-of-state Trustee Wright commented that it looks like he is making
every effort to stay on track with his timeline. The Board recommended allowing
Mr. McAlvey another 30-day extension and to revisit the issue at the January 6,
2004 Board meeting.
423 Grand River
Supervisor Martin reported that Inspector Aven had visited this property rented
by Mr. Duke Snelson twice this month. Mr. Aven reported that the property was
originally red-tagged but the renter is now in compliance on everything except
use of a wood burner in the garage (which Inspector Aven has turned over to the
State) and the storage of vehicles in his back yard. Supervisor Martin stated
that storage of these vehicles has been an ongoing issue for neighbors and the
Township and the attorney is involved.
1436 E. Grand River
Supervisor Martin reported that Mr. Mossholder came in today to file his
paperwork for site plan review so he has met his 30 day review requirements.
Supervisor Martin also reported that she had met with Mr. Hofmann and Mr.
Franks this morning and they came to some kind of a resolution of their
dispute. She will be writing up a summary of their discussion and then the
attorney will formally write it up as a permanent injunction before Friday’s
court date. She added that this agreement is a much better solution for
everyone concerned than going to court.
Flags
Supervisor Martin reported that the Modern Woodsmen Auxiliary League had
presented the Township with a new indoor flag and a new outdoor flag. Two
mothers and their three children came in to make the presentation. Trustee
Wright recommended including a write up of this donation in the next Township
newsletter.
Budget Amendment
Supervisor Martin made a request to move $10,825 from budget item “Contingency”
(890-965) to “Building and Grounds Capitol Outlay” (265-980) for purchase of
the new truck.
Trustee Wright made a motion to move $10,825 from budget item “Contingency” to
“Building and Grounds Capitol Outlay” for the purchase of the truck. Motion
supported by Trustee Zaban. Motion passed unanimously.
Supervisor Martin noted that she had also included a copy of the cut that the
Township will see from the State in the amount of $20,250.72 effective 10/1/03
for the 2003/2004 year. She said she will need everyone’s budget requests by
12/9/03 so the budget can be discussed at the January 6, 2003 Board meeting.
Trustee Zaban commented that
there has been more discussion in the news about the State collecting more
money from mobile and modular home units. Currently mobile home owners pay pad
fees only. Frans Wilbrink (4701 Zimmer Road) asked if the owner of
the trailer park could be taxed for personal property for all of the trailers
they own and rent. Supervisor Martin said she doesn’t believe so but will
investigate.
Library Appointment
Supervisor Martin read a letter submitted by the Library Foundation stating
that Jeff Bartrem’s library appointment is scheduled to expire. Mr. Bartrem has
stated that he is eager to be reappointed. Trustee Wright and Supervisor Martin
said that Mr. Bartrem has worked very hard for the Township in this role.
Trustee Wright made a motion to reappoint Jeff Bartrem to the Williamston
Library Foundation. Motion supported by Clerk Hiner. Motion passed unanimously.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
None
Reports
Development Rights
Supervisor Martin reported that the Township’s first agricultural land owners,
the Peltons, have granted the development rights for their property to
Williamstown Township for $1. The owners were given the rights to splits for
the parcels they wanted to retain which is allowed when the owner preserves at
least 50% of their property (the Peltons preserved significantly more than
50%). Supervisor Martin said the farm is located on the north end of Shoeman
Road and it is a beautiful piece of property. She added that this is a
wonderful milestone for the Township. Treasurer Fink explained that this is an
option in our zoning code but this is the first farmland owner to exercise the
right to use it. She added that grant funding may also be available to help the
Township purchase development rights in the future.
NIESA
Trustee Zaban reported that he had delivered the Township’s agreement and they
weren’t happy with the time limit the Township placed on it but NIESA accepted
it anyway. He added that there are six (6) new NIESA employees and they are
interviewing new fire chief candidates. Trustee Zaban said that paragraph A
Section 5 was deleted so NIESA will no longer be charging residents for fire
runs. Trustee Zaban explained that NIESA was billing for homeowner fire runs
with hopes that insurance would pay for it. There was discussion that policies
are sometimes cancelled once a homeowner reports a fire and NIESA felt that it
wouldn’t be fair to put residents in this position since they are paying for
NIESA through taxes. Therefore, they will no longer bill residents. Trustee
Zaban said NIESA has also pulled billing back in-house. The City still hasn’t
donated or rented their half of the building which is affecting NIESA’s
strategic planning. He explained that the Township donated its half of the
building to NIESA three years ago. Once a new chief comes on board, he will
also be instrumental in this process. Trustee Zaban added that the fire
department will be selling trees at the Fire Station by City Hall this year.
Parks
Supervisor Martin reported that she had done a final walk thru of the park now
that construction is complete. The contractor installed a new entrance and
asphalted about 200 feet into the park instead of just the 50 feet originally
proposed. The two soccer fields need more cover and the contractor will reseed
them in the spring. The engineer determined the soccer fields should not be
used until next fall at the earliest. The entrance to the new parking lot has
been blocked with equipment because it is too wet for use. The engineer and
Jerry Fulcher were both very pleased with the contractor’s work. The Township
gained a $20,000 entrance, two (2) soccer fields, a multi-purpose field, and a
new parking lot as a result of the agreement the Township made with MDOT to use
the property as a staging area for the past two years. It turned out to be a
win-win situation. She stated that the contractor will finish up in the spring
and she felt both the contractor and engineer did a great job on this project.
Supervisor Martin questioned Item 2 in the Parks Committee Meeting Minutes
which states the committee plans to use Round-Up. Treasurer Fink said that the
committee had JERRY FULCH HAS SAID HE HAS a document that states volunteers can
spot spray Round-Up without a permit. She said she hadn’t seen the handout and
would check into it. Trustee Wright said he would like to see the handout
because there is some spot spraying that could be done with pre-mixed, over-
the- counter products around the Township Hall if it is allowed without a
permit. Treasurer Fink reported that they are still investigating the tree
species they want to plant and the placement of those trees.
Other
PC Recording Secretary
Supervisor Martin reported that Lori Pincumbe has indicated that she is willing
to serve as permanent recording secretary for the planning commission. She has
recorded the last two meetings on a temporary basis and is familiar with the
requirements. Supervisor Martin stated that other Townships have been contacted
and they use their own secretary or clerks. The Board agreed that Lori be
appointed to this position.
Harold Powell Memorial
The Township provided flowers for Harold Powell’s funeral and will refund the
full hall rental amount will be refunded to the family. Supervisor Martin asked
if the Board would like to do something else as a memorial for Mr. Powell for
his years of service. There was discussion that Harold Powell be considered as
the first “Township Citizen of the Year”. Trustee Wright suggested checking
with the City of Williamston and the Williamston Jubilee Committee for
guidelines to establish criteria and procedures for the Citizen of the Year
award. The Board agreed that Harold Powell should be declared Citizen of the
Year for 2003/2004.
Board of Review
Supervisor Martin reported that the December Board of Review is scheduled to
meet on Tuesday, December 9, 2003.
Alarm System
Trustee Wright reported that installation of the alarm system is underway. The
staff should plan to attend a training session with the contractor on
Wednesday. He also recommended checking with the insurance agent so see if the
Township is now eligible for a discount. Trustee Zaban suggested putting window
decals up warning that a security system is in place. Trustee Wright stated
that Terri Smith will cross-train anyone unable to attend the training. The
alarm will ring into Central Security and they will in turn contact the police
if there are any unauthorized entries. The fire alarms will also ring into
Central Security. Central Security has guaranteed their rates for 3 years.
Katie Lo (290 E. Sherwood Road) asked the cost of the system and Trustee Wright
explained that the Township is spending a little over $1000 for installation
and then monthly monitoring fees of about $22.
Computers-Virus
Supervisor Martin reported that the computers in the office area had been re-
checked by the computer consultant and the “I Spy” virus as well as others were
detected and cleaned up. Clerk Hiner stated that the High School clears their
computers of viruses daily.
McKenna Fees
Supervisor Martin reported that McKenna has requested a 2.6% increase in their
fees due to their increased operating costs (they listed increases in health
insurance, professional liability insurance, etc…). Trustee Wright asked when
their fees had been last increased and Supervisor Martin said they were
increased by 2% a year ago at about this same time. Frans Wilbrink (1701 4701
Zimmer) commented that we should explain to them that the State is cutting the
Township’s income so they should consider holding their fees- times are tough
for everybody. Trustee Wright said the consultant is doing a good job and it
would be expensive to change. He added that the way the Township could reduce
costs is by controlling the tasks we assign to the consultant. Trustee Zaban
pointed out that we are spending about $23,000 per year with McKenna (which is
less than the cost that the City pays to have a planner on staff) and a lot of
those fees are passed on to the developers. Trustee Zaban said he feels the
Township “gets a lot of bang for the buck” with this consultant. The Board
agreed that McKenna’s request be honored.
Supervisor Martin recommended purchasing a space heater for the small
conference room (formally the hall) because the temperature in this room is
controlled by the rental hall thermostat which is kept at 60 degrees when not
in use. Treasurer Fink said she would bring a catalog with the unit she would
recommend at a cost of approximately $120.
Supervisor Martin scheduled a Workshop meeting for December 6, 2003.
Meeting Review
Supervisor Martin will send letters to Mr. Bartrem and Mr. McAlvey and will
prepare an item for the newsletter about the flag donations. Treasurer Fink
will locate a copy of the Park Committee pamphlet. Trustee Zaban will follow-up
the Citizen of the Year award. Clerk Hiner will review the Hotel Tax document.
Board members need to submit budget recommendations by 12/9/03. Supervisor
Martin will continue to work on the e-mail situation with the
computer consultant. Trustee Zaban reminded the board that the national
convention for MTA is January 27-30, 2004 and registration is required by the
end of this month to get a reduced rate.
Adjournment
Trustee Wright made a motion to adjourn supported by Trustee Zaban. Motion
passed unanimously. Meeting adjourned at 9:37 p.m.
______________________________      ______________________________
Susan L. Hiner            Lori A. Pincumbe
Clerk                  Recording Secretary
2004 Meeting Minutes
JANUARY 4, 6, 2004
PRESENT: Supervisor Mickey Martin, Clerk Susan Hiner, Treasurer Nancy Fink,
Trustee Steve Zaban, Trustee Martin Wright and Recording Secretary Lori
Pincumbe; ABSENT: None.
CALL TO ORDER
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order at 7:34 p.m. She provided
an overview of the meeting agenda and made a request for changes or additions.
No changes were made.
PLEDGE
CONSENT AGENDA
Supervisor Martin reviewed the items included in the Consent Agenda packet:
Regular Meeting Minutes 12/02/03: Supervisor Martin changed “building
materials” to “building plans” (Complaints, p. 3, sen. 4) and deleted
“…workshop scheduled for December 6” (Other, p. 5 ). Treasurer Fink changed
“Williamston …” to “Williamstown Township community and businesses” (John Kane-
Hotel Tax, p.2) and “Treasurer Fink said there is a document stating volunteers
can spray…” to “Jerry Fulcher said…” (Reports-Parks, p. ). Frans Wilbrink
corrected his address from “1701 Zimmer” to “4701 Zimmer.”
December Treasurer’s Report-Township & Cemetery – No comments.
Accounts Paid, Accounts Payable and Payroll – Payment to “Swanson Design” was
held until work is 100% complete. The “Foster, Smith” invoice is for
correspondence on the 457 Plan and the “Sloan” invoice was higher because we
have two septic tanks and bother were pumped.
Building Inspector Report – No comments.
Treasurer Fink made a motion to accept the Consent Agenda contingent on her
review of the Treasurer’s Report and those financial reports normally reviewed
by the Treasurer. Motion supported by Trustee Wright and passed unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS - No comments.
NEW BUSINESS
Planning Commission Report
Meeting Minutes
Supervisor Martin recommended that because the proposed Mixed-Use Overlay
District contains so many significant changes to the ordinance, it would be
appropriate to notify all property owners in the district area of the proposed
changes before making a final recommendation to the Board. Chairman Kraft
agreed and suggested notification be taken one step further by publishing the
complete wording for the proposed Mixed-Use Overlay District in the Enterprise
before it is presented at a public meeting. Treasurer Fink asked Mr. Kraft for
clarification of the term “R&D” and the phrase “excepting boarding facilities”
with regards to veterinarian offices boarding animals in their care. Mr. Kraft
explained that R&D refers to research and development facilities and suggested
the term “boarding” be clarified further in the text to address boarding by
veterinarians.
Maire Rezoning Request (1345 Sherwood Road) from Ag-SF to RR Chairman Kraft
explained that the Planning Commission had deliberated towards their decision
on this request by considering each of the ten (10) criteria for rezoning
specified in Section 27.06.C.4 of the Williamstown Township Zoning Ordinance.
He pointed out a clarification to the October 21, 2003 Planning Commission
minutes provided by Chris Doozan of McKenna Associates in a letter dated
December 2, 2003 which confirms that if this rezoning is approved, it will be
possible to divide the property into four (4) lots. Mr. Kraft reported that the
Planning Commission had determined that the Maire rezoning request was not in
the interest of the health, safety and welfare of the Township’s residents and
it was their recommendation to the Township Board to not grant this request.
Trustee Zaban asked Mr. Kraft how many parcels the property could have been
divided into if the applicant had requested rezoning one step down to RE. Mr.
Kraft stated that it would have allowed the property to be divided into two (2)
lots. He added that the property is also within 1/20th of an acre (200 square
feet) of eligibility to split in its current Ag-Sf zone under the open space
criteria (a variance would still be required). This gives the applicant two (2)
options in place of rezoning to RR. The calculation for splitting under the
open space criteria requires that the size of the property be at least 5.25
acres multiplied by the number of lots it will be split into (in this case 2).
This parcel would need to be 10.5 acres to divide under the open space criteria
which it nearly meets because it is 10.46 acres. The applicant would be
required to get a variance for the remaining 1/20th of an acre. Mr. Kraft
reviewed that a public hearing on this rezoning request had been held in
October, it had been deliberated in November, and was planned for
recommendation of denial at the December Board meeting but delayed until the
Board’s January meeting at the request of the applicant.
Supervisor Martin reviewed the Planning Commission’s findings that: the request
is not consistent with the Master Plan; uses are available to the applicant in
the property’s current zone; adequate RR properties are already available in
the Township; and no errors have been made in the past that would justify
granting this request. Mr. Kraft stated there was a great deal of concern by
the Commissioners that granting this Ag-SF rezoning request could potentially
change the character of the Township because it sets a bad precedent for any
parcel north of Sherwood to jump two (2) zones. Trustee Zaban asked why the
applicant hadn’t requested a one step rezoning to RE. Mr. Kraft said the
developer was asked that question but did not explain. He added that the only
way the applicant can divide into more than two (2) lots under RR is by tearing
down the historical home on the property which would be unfortunate. Supervisor
Martin reviewed the documents pertaining to this request that had been received
by the Board in their packets: original application (8/26/03); McKenna review
letter (10/13/03); rebuttal letter from Mr. Maire (10/16/03); support petition
for Mr. Maire’s request (submitted by applicant 10/21/03; letters of concern
from citizens presented at Planning Commission 10/21/03 meeting from Donald &
Francis Schmidt, Constance Kowalk, William Young, Mary Miller, the estate of
Charles Tadgerson, and Floyd and Audrey Goodman.
Carl McIntosh (1145 Wild Cherry) addressed the Board on behalf of the
applicant. Mr. McIntosh explained that Mr. Maire could not attend tonight
because he is wintering in Savannah, GA but had relayed his comments to him and
they both believe that this petition has merit and is provided for in Section
27.06 of the Zoning Ordinance. He said the Master Plan is not mentioned
anywhere in 27.06 but was referred to frequently by the Planning Commission
during their discussion of the criteria. Mr. McIntosh’s main argument points
were that it is not financially feasible for a 10 acre parcel to be used for
agricultural purposes and pointed out that no 10 acre parcels in this area of
the Township are being used this way (more than half of this property is
covered with trees that would need to come down and he doesn’t believe the
Township wants to see this property used for an agricultural operation); if
rezoned, the parcel would be consistent with the Kampe farm across the street;
their request does not create unlawful exclusionary zoning; the property would
be compatible with surrounding properties in most instances; and the request is
consistent with the purposes of the ordinance with regards to size, etc…. He
said that he doesn’t agree Mr. Maire’s questions posed in consideration #9 of
his rebuttal letter have been answered by the Commission.
Mr. McIntosh said it concerns him that most of the discussion in support of
denying this request revolved around the fear of setting a precedent but by
definition, you don’t establish a precedent until there is a like situation. He
said he has reviewed the Township map and doesn’t see any like situations where
an Ag-Sf property is surrounded by small parcels. If a like situation did
occur, he argued that each parcel has to be considered on its own merits. There
is already an RR zoning line on the south side of the Maire property and they
are just asking that the line be moved to the north side of the parcel. This
would restore the zoning on this parcel to RR as it was on the previous Master
Plan. Supervisor Martin stated that she had checked the records and the owner
had not objected to the rezoning when this change to the Zoning Ordinance was
made in the early 1990’s. Mr. McIntosh said he did not say there was an
objection at that time but there was a comment made by a Board member that the
applicant had benefited from a lowered assessment after this rezoning but it is
his understanding that assessments have nothing to do with zoning and are based
on market value. Supervisor Martin agreed that assessments are made on market
value and not on zoning. Mr. McIntosh said that the Master Plan and Zoning
Ordinance are documents that need to be occasionally revisited and tweaked. He
pointed out that the Commission is doing just that with its proposed Mixed-Use
Overlay District discussed tonight. Mr. McIntosh restated his and Mr. Maire’s
request that their rezoning request be approved tonight by the Board.
Don Schmidt (4550 Zimmer Road) stated that his property abuts the Maire
property and asked whether someone purchasing the two (2) ten acre parcels next
to his property would be able to request a similar rezoning. Supervisor Martin
said that it is possible. Mr. McIntosh said those parcels cannot legally be
split because they don’t have 330’ of road frontage. Supervisor Martin agreed
they could not be split as they exist but could be if the owner was willing to
put in a public road.
Supervisor Martin pointed out that the applicant is not limited to an
agricultural use but is entitled to apply any use listed in the Zoning
Ordinance from Section 11.02 down. She also agreed that the Board does
occasionally make changes to the Zoning Ordinance. However, they do not
necessarily make every change requested. Trustee Zaban commented that if this
request is denied, the applicant can still pursue the two (2) other options
discussed tonight.
Trustee Zaban made a motion that the Board accept the Planning Commission’s
recommendation for denial of the Maire rezoning request based on the criteria
they provided. Motion supported by Treasurer Fink. Motion passed unanimously.
Windybrook Tentative Preliminary Plat
Chairman Kraft identified Windybrook Subdivision on the Township Zoning Map.
The proposed subdivision is 35.2 acres with 16 lots and 52% dedicated open
space. Mr. Kraft reported that at the December Planning Commission meeting, the
Commission had recommended tentative preliminary plat approval subject to the
developer satisfying six (6) conditions set forth in McKenna’s recommendation
letter dated 12/11/03 and the conditions that they place seedlings around the
McGarey property and install bollard type lighting at the subdivision entrance.
Mr. Kraft reported that since the Commission’s December meeting, the developer
has resubmitted a corrected plan which addresses many of the concerns. That
plan has been reviewed by McKenna Associates and they summarized their
recommendations in a letter dated 12/29/03. There are two (2) remaining
conditions: approval by all other agencies with jurisdiction over subdivisions
of this type; and Township approval of the subdivision’s covenants and
restrictions.
Dennis Forsberg (T.A. Forsberg) stated that they had worked hard with the
Planning Commission over the past couple of years. Supervisor Martin asked for
clarification of hatching marks on the new plan and Maynard Beery (T.A.
Forsberg) said they identify places where seeding mixtures will be spread to
prevent ragweed, etc…from sprouting since this is former farmland. Tom Grover
(3790 Zimmer Road) expressed concern about potential “track-out” of mud as
construction vehicles go in and out of the development. Supervisor agreed this
is a concern and said the Township usually asks developers to clean tires on
their vehicles before leaving a construction area. The Building Inspector
notifies the contractor when trackout becomes a problem and citizens are
encouraged to report problems they see to the Township. Treasurer Fink asked if
there was any existing drain tile in the old farm field. Maynard Beery
responded that the area north of the main tree line running north south may
have had drain tiles at some point but he doesn’t believe that it was ever
systematically tiled. Chairman Kraft pointed out that the Commission’s
requirement for 100 conifer seedlings around the McGarey property is subject to
Drain Commission approval. He noted that this item was not included in the 12/
29/03 McKenna letter but still exists. The Drain Commission will probably not
have a problem with trees because they will improve drainage. Trustee Wright
stated that this condition has actually been met because the trees are now
included on the plan and it is only their placement that will be at the
McGarey’s discretion. Chairman Kraft concurred.
Trustee Wright made a motion to approve the tentative preliminary plat for
Windybrook Subdivision with the two (2) conditions listed in the McKenna letter
dated 12/29/03. Motion supported by Clerk Hiner and passed unanimously.
Hideaway Woods No, 5 - Extension of Tentative Preliminary Plat with Conditions
Chairman Kraft reported that the Planning Commission recommends the Board grant
a one year extension of the Hideaway Woods No. 5 tentative preliminary plat
subject to the existing conditions. The Commission makes this recommendation
with recognition that the applicants have been working hard with the City of
Williamston to resolve their sewer issues and the fact that they have already
met two (2) of the original six (6) conditions.
Mr. Carl McIntosh (McNeer) summarized his position on the status of the six (6)
remaining conditions by stating: there is still disagreement whether sanitary
sewer has been allocated to Mr. Perkins; the Township has control over review
condition and he asked if the review has been done so it can be removed; the
Health Department has completed their review; and the cul-de-sac condition has
been met. He said that in his opinion the only issues remaining are the sewer
condition and the covenants and restrictions document which cannot be completed
until the sewer decision has been made. He said the court date on this issue is
scheduled for February 6, 2004.
Trustee Wright made a motion to extend the tentative preliminary plat with
existing conditions for Hideaway Woods No. 5 for one (1) year. Motion supported
by Clerk Hiner and passed unanimously.
Supervisor Martin told Mr. Kraft that she would like to ask the Planning
Commission to look at the R.O.S.E. or Open Space Overlay District because when
she looks at a plan like Mr. Forsberg’s she doesn’t see any benefit to the
Township. It appears that both RE and RR zoning get 2.07 units per acre. She
questioned the benefit of R.O.S.E. to the Township in the RE district (which
has a 5 acre minimum lot size). Without R.O.S.E., the developer would have only
been allowed 7 lots but with R.O.S.E they were able to create 16 lots.
Supervisor Martin said that developers of RR properties get a benefit because
they can cluster the homes on the good soils. Without R.O.S.E. they might not
get as many lots because they can’t build on the poor soil areas. With R.O.S.E.
they can set poor soil areas aside as open space and cluster more lots on the
good soil areas. Chairman Kraft said the benefit to the Township of a developer
using R.O.S.E. stops at the RR district. Supervisor Martin favors developers
getting a benefit in the RE district for setting aside open space, just not
such a big one (one unit for every three or every 4 acres would be more
appropriate). That way the developer still gets a bonus and the Township has
some benefit also. Chairman Kraft said he will put this issue on the Planning
Commission agenda. Treasurer Fink commented that she endorses the Planning
Commission’s plans (stated in their minutes) to consider requiring that open
space under R.O.S.E. be contiguous.
Complaints
986 Gulick Road – McAlvey
Supervisor Martin said she has left messages for Mr. McAlvey but he has not
responded. Trustee Wright explained that the Township is still waiting for
plans and the Board had given Mr. McAlvey a one month extension last month.
Treasurer Fink recommended writing Mr. McAlvey a letter stating the Board needs
the required information by a specific date or will be forced to require the
trailer be removed. Supervisor Martin agreed to forward this letter.
Building Permits – Newspaper
Supervisor Martin reported that the Lansing State Journal (LSJ) had contacted
the Township to request copies of all building permits be provided for
publication in the newspaper. She said she told them that building permits have
always been considered public information by the Township and are available for
review at the Township office. The previous Board had made a policy not to
publish this information in LSJ due to resident complaints and because it takes
unnecessary time for Township staff to do so. She told LSJ they are welcome to
review permits at the Township office any time. Trustee Wright said he sees no
benefit to the Township with providing LSJ with this information; Inspector
Aven agreed.
The Board agreed to continue with the Township’s existing policy.
Charity Match - Capital City Rifle Range
Supervisor Martin reported that Capital City Rifle Range would like to hold a
charity match with proceeds donated to the Township. Trustee Wright said any
donated money would be useful at the park or possibly to update the baseball
field and said as long as there is no legal reason preventing the Township from
accepting their donation the Township should agree.
Budget
Supervisor Martin explained that she had prepared a draft budget for both the
Township and Cemetery and asked for Board input. She said that money is getting
harder to come by. She has broken down some categories so they can be monitored
closely and asked the Board to identify any other areas where they would like
to see more detail.
Supervisor Martin said she plans to provide the City with a copy of the
Cemetery budget and ask them what their financial commitment is going to be for
next year. Supervisor Martin said that the Cemetery Committee had met with her
recently and made a recommendation that the Township spend up to $25,000 on a
new building with 3 bays to store existing equipment and a half bay for use as
a workshop area. This item has been included in next year’s budget. Trustee
Wright recommended the building have electricity, plumbing for a bathroom and
heat. Frans Wilbrink (4701 Zimmer) said that the cost of the building the Board
is talking about could be higher than $25,000 if a drain field is required.
Trustee Wright said that if costs become unreasonable a portable may be used
instead of installing a bathroom.
Supervisor Martin explained that the Board needs to call for a February public
hearing on the budget so recommended the budget be further worked on at the
January Workshop meeting. The Board agreed to call for a February public
hearing at the January workshop instead of tonight so they have additional time
to provide input.
Frans Wilbrink asked if subcontracting the assessing job to an outside assessor
had been looked into to see if it would save money. Supervisor Martin said that
when she first joined the Board she requested a proposal from Assessment &
Valuation Services. The proposal was $22,000 per year to do “all of it” but
only included twelve (12) office days. Mr. Wilbrink commented that many
surrounding communities use outside assessors and it might be good for the
Township to seek proposals from other consultants for comparison. Trustee Zaban
pointed out that surrounding townships all have lower SEVs so they have a
smaller assessing workload than Williamstown - for instance Williamstown has an
SEV three times larger than Wheatfield. Supervisor Martin said that when she
started, the assessor salary was set at the same level it had been for Norm
Obst.
Mr. Wilbrink asked why the Supervisor’s salary is budgeted for a 10% increase
and no other Board member shows an increase. Supervisor Martin explained that
she had asked Treasurer Fink and Clerk Hiner if they wanted an increase and
both had declined. She said she has requested an increase because she works
more hours than anyone else. Treasurer Fink said that anything related to the
physical plant tends to be handled by Supervisor Martin because she lives
closer. Roger Philip (5353 Barton Road) asked what percent increase other staff
in the office were being given and Supervisor Martin said they are getting a
1.5% raise based on the Consumer Price Index. Mr. Philip said her increase
seems high when compared to that standard increase. She said that she has not
had a raise in four (4) years and will be willing to cut back her hours to 12
or 18 if that is what the citizens prefer. She said it is up to the Board to
decide whether to allow the increase. Mr. Wilbrink asked if it was also
possible for employees to get merit raises so that good employees can be
retained. Supervisor Martin said that she will be recommending a merit raise
later in this meeting.
Development Rights – Split Fee Waiver
Supervisor Martin stated that, since the Peltons gave the Township development
rights to 95 acres of their property, she is requesting that the Township grant
them a waiver of the $125 fee on the property split they are currently making
for their grandchildren.
Trustee Wright made a motion to waive the split fee for the Peltons for one
split due to their granting the Township the development rights to 95 acres.
Motion supported by Trustee Zaban and passed unanimously.
Abandon Request for Idlewood Street
Supervisor Martin reported that the Township had received a petition for
abandonment of Idlewood Street located on Zimmer Road next to the Hilty
property. It is landlocked and not being proposed as an access point. Tom
Grover (3790 Zimmer Road) has asked to acquire the property once abandoned. Mr.
Grover explained to the Board that Bob Hilty has asked him to send a copy of
the complete letter from the Road Commission and he will have his attorneys
review the document before he signs off. Mr. Grover said that he currently
maintains the property and plans to plant some trees on it for screening.
Trustee Wright asked if there was any other interested party. Mr. Grover said
his neighbor is not interested in the property and has signed the petition.
Supervisor Martin said a similar transfer was done previously for Francis
Street in Meadowdale Subdivision. She said that if Mr. Grover does take over
the property, he will be given a new legal description and taxes will be
collected on the former easement property.
Trustee Zaban made a motion to notify Ingham County Road Commission that the
Township Board is in favor of the petition for abandonment of Idlewood Street.
Motion supported by Trustee Wright and passed unanimously.
Supervisor Martin said she would forward a letter to Ingham County Road
Commission. Mr. Grover said he expected Bob Hilty to respond within the next
few weeks.
Federal Poverty Guidelines
Supervisor Martin explained that the Township is required to adopt poverty
guidelines at the start of each year. At this point there is only one person in
the Township that uses this option and they are well qualified for it.
Trustee Wright made a motion to accept the federal poverty guidelines as
follows:
“FEDERAL POVERTY GUIDELINES FOR 2004 ASSESSMENTS
The following are the federal poverty guidelines as of 12-31-03 for use in
setting poverty exemption guidelines for 2004 assessments. Please see STC
Bulletin No.5 of 1995 for additional information regarding the use of these
guidelines.
Size of Family Unit             Poverty Guidelines
1                               $8,980
2                               12,120
3                               15,260
4                               18,400
5                               21,540
6                               24,680
7                               27,820
8                               30,960
For each additional person. Add 3,140
 
IMPORTANT NOTE: PA 390 of 1994 states that the poverty exemption guidelines
established by the governing body of the local assessing unit SHALL also
include an asset level test.”
Motion supported by Treasurer Fink and passed unanimously.
Supervisor Martin explained that, along with poverty guidelines, the Township
must also annually set asset limits. Current limits allow the property owner to
own one vehicle and one home. Frans Wilbrink asked what would happen if the
owner marries and the spouse brings another vehicle to the home. Treasurer Fink
said that becomes a credibility issue. Supervisor Martin explained that a
homeowner can only make less then $8980 per year to qualify. Treasurer Fink
added that social security is not included in the calculation because it is not
taxable income.
Trustee Wright made a motion that the Township set the asset level so that the
applicant can own one house and one automobile.
Discussion
Treasurer Fink said she would like to see the Township allow some leeway so
that exceptions can be made for exceptional situations. Supervisor Martin said
she was not sure if this was legally possible. Treasurer Fink questioned if
there was a provision for the Board of Review to make considerations.
Supervisor Martin will investigate the issue with State Treasury. Motion
supported by Trustee Zaban and passed unanimously.
Street Lights
Supervisor Martin read an e-mail from Robert Mayer to Ingham County Road
Commission (ICRC) and their response. The Mayer e-mail requested street lights
at the Meridian/Haslett and Haslett/Shoeman intersections. ICRC responded that
intersection lights are the Township’s responsibility. Supervisor Martin stated
that Mr. Mayer has not contacted the Township directly but historically the
Township has put one street light at the corner of Rodeo Trail and Sherwood. In
this situation, the Township pays the electric bill and then is reimbursed by
the Rodeo Trail residents with a special assessment. Trustee Wright said he
would like to know what a streetlight costs for one year of use. Supervisor
Martin stated that there are homes at the Shoeman/Haslett intersection so a
light would affect those property owners. There is currently no home at the
Haslett/Meridian intersection. Treasurer Fink commented that George Durak had
also previously requested a light at the corner of Newman and Meridian.
Chairman Kraft suggested a reflector be installed instead of a streetlight
because installing streetlights opens the Township up for requests that every
street be lighted. Supervisor Martin agreed that reflectors would be a good
option. Treasurer
Fink and Trustee Zaban expressed concern about long term maintenance of
reflector signs. The Board decided to wait until Mr. Mayer contacts the
Township before considering the issue further.
Cemetery Minutes
Treasurer Fink stated that the GMAC Bond investment recommended by the Cemetery
Committee does not meet the Township’s Investment Policy requirements.
Supervisor Martin reported that she had informed the Cemetery Committee of this
fact and they had asked that the Treasurer instead transfer $100,000 to an
interest generating fund that she determines acceptable. Treasurer Fink agreed
with Deputy Jennings suggestion that the Cemetery’s General Fund be moved to a
money market account with check writing privileges (similar to the Township’s
General Fund). Treasurer Fink said a minor CD also exists for the Cemetery that
has not been included on the Treasury Report because no statement has been
received for it yet but will be added once the annual statement is issued. She
noted that the Cemetery Committee had also recommended discontinuing flower
placement since funds have been depleted so Grand River Floral needs to be
notified. Supervisor Martin said that she would like the families’ responsible
for the original flower fund donations notified that flower placement is going
to be discontinued. Treasurer Fink and Trustee Wright agreed. Treasurer Fink
said she has also asked the Cemetery Committee to prepare a policy for handling
future perpetual care donations. Supervisor Martin stated that, in response to
the Cemetery Committee’s recommendations, the staff will clean up the front
area along Beeman Road. Supervisor Martin said they had also requested that
signs be moved from the front gate to the building at Summit. Treasurer Fink
said that when she had attended a recent Cemetery Committee meeting they
expressed concern about the existing signs being intrusive. The Board agreed
that signs be moved to the building. Clerk Hiner reported that she had
contacted a company proposed by Mr. Taschner for costs for a new flag and
flagpole and they had quoted $1,000. She also stated that Connie Taschner had
dropped off a purchase requisition for veterans’ markers. Supervisor Martin
said that she had told George Monroe at her recent meeting with him that he did
not need to ask the City to contribute to the cost for veterans’ markers.
Treasurer Fink recommended she ladder invest the $100,000 proposed for
investment by the Cemetery Committee so the investments will come due at
different times.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Building Permit Fee Increase
Supervisor Martin explained that Building Inspector Walt Aven had submitted a
revised building permit fee schedule. Recommended changes have been made based
on comparison to fee schedules from surrounding communities and Mr. Aven’s
experience with applying the existing fees.
Trustee Zaban made a motion supported by Trustee Wright to accept the revised
building permit fee schedule as proposed. Motion passed unanimously.
John Kane-Hotel Tax
Clerk Hiner reported that she had contacted Mr. Moeller at the County Board of
Commissioners. He suggested that the first step for Williamstown Township to
take is to meet with Lee Ladke at the Lansing Convention Center so he can
explain all that they do for our community. Clerk Hiner said she and John Kane
are scheduling a meeting with Mr. Ladke. Trustee Wright stated that it sounds
like it is unlikely Mr. Ladke is going to relinquish control of hotel tax
revenues collected from Township businesses.
Baseball field
Supervisor Martin read a memorandum dated 12/12/03 from Tim Howell of Swanson
Design which recommends that “the alignment of the field could be rotated
slightly so that the foul line would avoid the dumpster, if necessary.” Trustee
Wright said this suggestion should be explored and adjustments can be made in
the spring if necessary. He suggested that Red Cedar Recreation advise the
Township on the existing layout of the baseball field and make recommendations
for improvement since they are the organized group using the fields and also
that Mark Tabor could plant some bushes in the spring.
Septic System
Supervisor Martin reported that she and Trustee Wright had met with the
architect and contractor and they both confirmed that protection over the
septic system pipes running under the parking lot is adequate to withstand the
load of heavy equipment used for recycling and waste removal. Supervisor Martin
reported that the septic tanks had been recently pumped and, given their
condition, it will be important to pump it on a regular basis in order for it
to function properly. The condition of the septic field may need to be
addressed by the Board in the future.
Schoolhouse
Supervisor Martin reported that Mr. Grabarczyk contacted her to say that he
still wants to donate the Branch Schoolhouse to the Township for its relocation
to the park. Treasurer Fink said she has concerns about the foundation
stipulation he made previously. She added that the Park Committee wasn’t
enthusiastic about accepting this donation when it was originally offered
because they think the building will be a magnet for vandalism. Trustee Wright
recommended contacting Jeff Bartrem to relook at the issue since he did the
original investigation of the building. Trustee Wright said he is not opposed
to spending some amount of Township money to move the building
and do some restoration but he agrees with Treasurer Fink’s concerns about the
foundation stipulations. Supervisor Martin requested that Treasurer Fink ask
the Park Committee for their recommendation.
Mitchell Road Speed Limit
Supervisor Martin read a response dated 12/2/03 from Ingham County Road
Commission (ICRC) responding to the Township’s request that the speed limit on
Mitchell Road be reduced from 45 mph to 35 mph. Their response stated that an
engineering study must be performed before a reduction can occur. They said the
State Police had conducted a speed study on August 30, 2001 using a handheld
detector and determined that the speed limit is correctly set at 45 mph. ICRC
said Mitchell Road will be placed on the list for an engineering study to be
conducted next spring. Trustee Wright suggested the Township request that the
speed study not be conducted right before or right after school since the
students tend to drive too fast and the speed calculation will be skewed.
Trustee Zaban volunteered to respond to the ICRC letter. Trustee Wright asked
if volume of traffic is considered in a speed study. Supervisor Martin said not
directly but traffic generally slows down when volume increases. Trustee Zaban
said that he is pleased that at least Mitchell Road is back on the traffic
study list.
REPORTS
Library
Supervisor Martin stated that Jeff Bartrem said that the Library Foundation had
met in December but had not made any significant progress.
NIESA
Trustee Zaban reported that NIESA had narrowed the candidates for fire chief to
three. He reiterated that NIESA plans to add six positions for cross-trained
personnel and reported that NIESA still hasn’t received a $2,000 payment for
the recent fire at the Webberville fuel oil company. Trustee Wright asked how
NIESA responded to Mr. Jansen’s statement about resigning if a decision for
chief isn’t made from this round of candidates. Trustee Zaban said that Mr.
Jansen was an interviewed candidate and he was not happy with the interview
process. There is one group within NIESA that feels they need to hire from
within and others that feel they need to hire from outside.
Parks
Treasurer Fink reported that there was no Park Committee meeting in December
and that she has been unable to locate the “volunteer spray” document. She said
that she contacted the MDNR and they explained that pesticide/herbicide
application is actually under the jurisdiction of the Department of Agriculture
but summarized that if you are applying them as an employee, you must be
certified. The State sometimes pays their regular park volunteers to become
certified. MDNR said that homeowners can apply over the counter chemicals at
their discretion but employees can only spray “under supervision” of a
certified applicator. Trustee Wright suggested that the certification process
may be a simple one and perhaps Mark Tabor could become certified. Treasurer
Fink said she would follow up to determine what’s involved. Supervisor Martin
reported that All-Terrain had repaired the deep ruts at the base of the sliding
hill at a minimal cost.
Other
Personnel Review
Supervisor Martin reported that she and Trustee Zaban had conducted a personnel
review with Mark Tabor in December. She considers him an exemplary employee
because he continues to try to improve his productivity. Mark recommended that
the Township purchase a cement mixer and was in favor of a building at Summit
for storing equipment. He did not believe it was necessary to purchase a mower.
She added that Mark has already done 15 funerals. Supervisor Martin recommended
the Board approve a $1/hour pay increase retroactive to the date of his review
on December 4, 2003.
Trustee Wright made motion to increase caretaker Mark Tabor’s pay rate by one
dollar per hour. Motion supported by Trustee Zaban. Motion passed unanimously.
TDR
Supervisor Martin reported that she had received notification from MTA that TDR
(transfer of development rights) has been passed by the State Senate and House
and now only needs to be signed by Governor Granholm. The Township will next
need to amend the Zoning Ordinance to designate receiving zones for where
transfers will go. Treasurer Fink said the receiving zones are obvious on the
Master Plan so will be easy to locate.
Alarm System
Supervisor Martin reported that the Sheriff’s office has sent the Township a
letter stating they can only respond to false alarms from the security system
twice and then they will need to charge a penalty.
Signs
Supervisor Martin said she had not received the information yet for this topic
so she will present it to the Board at another time.
Other
Trustee Zaban reminded the Board that the MTA State Convention is January 27-
30., 2004. Attendees will be the first to receive the newly minted Michigan
quarter. Supervisor Martin reported that pest control had sprayed the building
for ants this week because there was a problem over the weekend in the rental
hall area.
Meeting Review
Supervisor Martin will send letters to Mr. McAlvey, Capital City Rifle Range,
and ICRC regarding Idlewood; and will contact Jeff Bartrem. Board members will
provide feedback on the proposed budget for the workshop. Clerk Hiner
will contact Grand River Floral and notify families that flower placement will
end. Trustee Zaban will respond to ICRC’s Mitchell Road letter. Supervisor
Martin scheduled a Workshop meeting for January 20, 2004 at 5 p.m.
Adjournment
Trustee Wright made a motion to adjourn supported by Trustee Zaban and passed
unanimously. Meeting adjourned at 11:02 p.m.
______________________________            ______________________________
Susan L. Hiner                  Lori A. Pincumbe
Clerk                        Recording Secretary
FEBRUARY 3, 2004
PRESENT: Supervisor Mickey Martin, Clerk Susan Hiner, Treasurer Nancy Fink,
Trustee Steve Zaban, Trustee Martin Wright and Recording Secretary Lori
Pincumbe; ABSENT: None.
CALL TO ORDER
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order at 7:32 p.m. Supervisor
Martin added the topic “Zoning Violation – Mammoth Video” and deleted “Cemetery
2/3/04 Meeting” and “Public Hearing Budget” from the agenda.
PLEDGE
CONSENT AGENDA
Regular Meeting Minutes 1/6/04: Supervisor Martin corrected the meeting date
from “1/4/04” to “1/6/04.”
Workshop Meeting Minutes 1/20/04: Trustee Zaban corrected the statement “the
Board was advised by our attorney“ to “the Board was advised by MTA’s attorney
that we can pay and/or donate money to the arbitrator for services received
over a five (5) day period” under the topic “Dispute Resolution.” Supervisor
Martin corrected the wording under “Update on Complaint” from “Supervisor
Martin moved” to “Supervisor Martin made a motion supported by Trustee Wright
and approved unanimously”; Supervisor Martin inserted the following statement
to the “Budget” discussion: “The Supervisor had asked the Clerk and Treasurer
for their budgets and to indicate if they wanted raises and both had said that
they did not.”
December Treasurer’s Report -Township & Cemetery – No comments.
Accounts Paid, Accounts Payable and Payroll – Board members will review these
reports upon their completion.
Building Inspector Report – No comments.
Treasurer Fink made a motion to accept the Consent Agenda with corrections to
the minutes as stated and contingent on review by each Board member of the
accounts paid, accounts payable and payroll reports. Motion supported by
Trustee Wright and passed unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Al Leblanc (4720 Jadestone) recommended the Township newsletter identify the
elected Board members in each issue and routinely include a brief description
of what duties each of the Township’s boards, committees, commissions,
etc…perform. He also suggested the newsletter include a description of what
activities require a building permit. Supervisor Martin agreed and will follow
up.
NEW BUSINESS
Planning Commission Report
Meeting Minutes -1/20/04
Supervisor Martin asked the status of the Mossholder request and Chairman Kraft
stated the Commission will be deliberating on it this month.
Zoning Ordinance & Subdivision Control Ordinance Revisions – Board Approval/
Denial
Chairman Kraft explained that the Planning Commission typically makes annual
revisions to the various ordinances. This year, the Commission has made
recommendations for revisions to seventeen (17) sections of the Zoning
Ordinance for Board consideration tonight. Many changes are typographical or
the result of practical issues that arose throughout the year. The Commission’s
revision process took place over several meetings with recommendations provided
by McKenna Associates. There was no opposition to these revisions at the public
hearing.
Chairman Kraft pointed out that the Commission’s recommendation for change to
“Section 1.03 of the Zoning Ordinance- Definitions of Commercial Vehicles and
Equipment” was mistakenly omitted from tonight’s recommendation information. He
said at the last meeting there was a question raised because the top half of
the definition is inconsistent with the definition on the bottom half. The top
half refers to “motor vehicles and equipment used for transportation of
passengers for hire or constructed or used for transportation of goods, wares
or merchandise and/or all motor vehicles designed and used for drawing other
vehicles.” He commented that this part of the definition is fairly narrow in
scope. The bottom half of the definition would also include sprayers,
excavating equipment, front loaders, etc…
Chairman Kraft recommended the following language to correct this discrepancy:
“All motor vehicles and equipment constructed or used for transportation of
goods, wares, materials, passengers, merchandise and/or all other motor
vehicles and equipment designed and used for drawing other vehicles or used in
construction or landscaping including but not limited to: dump truck, stake
truck, tank truck, flat bed truck, step van, panel truck, wrecker, car hauler,
truck tractor, construction and landscaping vehicles and equipment, sprayers,
excavating equipment, logging vehicle, bulldozer, backhoe, front loader, bus,
hearse, ambulance, or limousine. The determination whether other vehicles or
equipment not specifically listed satisfy the definition of “Commercial
Vehicles and Equipment” shall be made on a case by case basis by the Township
Board.” Supervisor Martin agreed but asked that the phrase “all motor vehicles”
be replaced with “all power vehicles” in both places it appears. Chairman Kraft
agreed and noted that his wording recommendation also corrects “Township
Supervisor”to “Township Board.”
Treasurer Fink asked how a pick-up truck or passenger car could fit into this
description. Trustee Wright clarified the intent was to determine what the
vehicle is being used for and the Board can make a decision based on whether a
vehicle is truly a personal vehicle or whether it meets the criteria of this
definition on a case by case basis. Treasurer Fink said the definition appears
to be very broad and Chairman Kraft said that that was the Commission’s intent.
Supervisor Martin questioned the Commission’s change to “Section 2.03 –
Location of Accessory Buildings”. She is concerned that the wording the
Planning Commission proposed would allow a building that is 4000 ft or greater
in the front yard and it was her understanding that the Township wanted
buildings that large to always be in back. Mr. Kraft stated that he recommends
deleting this item from tonight’s consideration and have the Commission take
another look at it. He also noted that there is a discrepancy between the quote
stated in McKenna’s letter dated 12/19/03 and the current revision of the
ordinance.
Supervisor Martin questioned the use of the term “bonified farm” in “Section
18.02-Principal Permitted Uses in the AG-C District. She pointed out that there
is no definition of “bonified farm” anywhere in the ordinance. She said she
would prefer not to include this revision until a definition exists. Chairman
Kraft agreed and recommended this item be omitted from consideration tonight
and reviewed further by the Commission.
Clerk Hiner made a motion that the Board accept the Planning Commission’s
recommendation for changes to the Zoning Ordinance and Subdivision Control
Ordinance with the change to Section 1.03 recommended by Chairman Kraft and
with omission of the revisions to “Section 2.03-Location of Accessory
Buildings” and “Section 18.02-Principal Permitted Uses in the AG-C District.
Motion supported by Trustee Wright. Motion passed unanimously.
Brookstone Subdivision Tentative Preliminary Plat Extension – Board approval/
denial
Chairman Kraft stated that the Planning Commission recommends the Board grant
approval of the one (1) year extension requested by Mr. Carl McIntosh to the
Tentative Preliminary Plat approval for Brookstone Subdivision subject to the
existing conditions.
Trustee Zaban asked Mr. McIntosh for an update of the legal situation regarding
sewer hookup to the City. Carl McIntosh (1145 Wild Cherry) explained that
Brookstone Subdivision is not part of the court issue involving Hideaway Woods
#5. He explained that last November a judge granted Mr. Perkins ten (10)
connections to the sewer and they have been unable to get any cooperation from
the City since that time. A court date was scheduled for February 6, 2004 so
the judge could award damages. Mr. Perkins will then have to wait to see if the
City is going to honor the court order and identify ten (10) connections.
Chairman Kraft said that the Planning Commission meeting minutes include a
request from Mr. McIntosh for the Township to take a more active role in
enforcing their 425 agreement with the City on this issue.
Trustee Zaban made a motion to grant an extension of the tentative preliminary
plat approval for Brookstone Subdivision with existing conditions. Motion
supported by Trustee Wright and passed unanimously.
Sprint Spectrum – Site Plan Board approval/denial
Chairman Kraft explained that Sprint Spectrum submitted a site plan to
collocate one antenna on the existing tower located on the corner of Meridian
Road and Grand River Road. He reported that the Planning Commission recommends
the Board grant approval of their site plan with five (5) conditions (the 6th
condition recommended by McKenna (which required a brick building) was
eliminated by the Commission).
Supervisor Martin noted that Michael Schira of Sprint Spectrum submitted a
letter dated January 29, 2004 in which he agrees to fulfill the obligations
stipulated by the Commission at their January 20, 2004 meeting.
Supervisor asked the radius of coverage the new tower will provide. Mr. Schira
said it would provide very strong coverage for a radius of 2.5 miles but the
actual coverage area varies depending on land structures. Supervisor Martin
pointed out that his map is incorrect because it has an extra road indicated.
Mr. Schira commented that the only lighting that will be installed is one
shielded light (pointing downward) that will be used when emergency service is
required at night. Supervisor Martin said she believes this antenna will
provide a good service to the Township and appreciates that the antenna is
being collocated on an existing tower.
Trustee Wright made a motion to approve the site plan submitted by Sprint
Spectrum with the conditions stated in the 1/20/04 Draft Planning Commission
minutes with the correction to Condition #6 (to change “remove the tower” to
“removal of their equipment”) and Condition #1 (to add “using native evergreen
species”) as follows:
1.    Landscaping – Section 5.02(E), item 2 requires that equipment be screened
on at least three (3) sides USING NATIVE EVERGREEN SPECIES.
2.   Condition #2 eliminated by Planning Commission
3.   Fencing – Section 8.02(X), item 3(a)(10) requires that black or green
vinyl-coated chain link fence be used to enclose the facility.
4.   Exterior Lighting – The location of all proposed lighting must be clearly
indicated on the site plan, or a note included stating that no exterior
lighting is proposed.
5.   Maintenance – A plan for the long term, continuous maintenance of the
facility must be submitted.
6.   Removal – The applicant must submit an agreement indicating that Sprint
Spectrum LP will be responsible for THEIR EQUIPMENT FROM THE TOWER, along with
some type of security posted upon issuance of a building permit to further
ensure removal of THEIR EQUIPMENT.
Motion supported by Treasurer Fink and passed unanimously.
Zoning Violation – Mammoth Video
980 E. Grand River
Supervisor Martin presented a zoning violation notification letter she will be
sending to Mammoth Video located on Grand River Road because they have a road
side sign advertising adult videos. Trustee Wright clarified that video stores
are allowed to carry this type of material as long as these materials total
less than 10% of their inventory. Supervisor Martin said adult videos qualify
as an adult regulated use and she has recommended in her letter that they
contact Jim Breuckman or Chris Doozan with questions due to the complexity of
this portion of the ordinance.
Public Hearing Budget-General & Cemetery
Supervisor Martin rescheduled discussion of this topic to a Workshop Meeting on
February 24, 2004 at 5 p.m. Clerk Hiner will publish notification in Lansing
Community News. Clerk Hiner asked if there was information from the City
regarding their level of participation in the Cemetery. Supervisor Martin said
the City’s budget is considered in June and they have verbally stated that it
is their intention that their contribution will remain the same.
John Kane-Hotel Tax
Clerk Hiner reported that she has been unable to reach Mr. Ladke to set up a
meeting with the Lansing Convention Bureau but she will continue to try to do
so.
REPORTS
Library
Joann Hegedus had said she would forward the minutes of the most recent Library
Foundation minutes by e-mail to Supervisor Martin on Monday 2/2/03 but they
were not received. Clerk Hiner said she attended the meeting and their
discussion focused on seeking to learn if there was public support for them to
take over the Republic Bank building. She added that there a meeting was also
held on 1/29/04 with Republic Bank present and she has attempted to contact Ed
Noonan for information about that meeting. Supervisor Martin stated that the
Township has not yet responded to the letter sent by the Library Foundation
requesting our declaration of support because there has not been sufficient
information provided. Clerk Hiner said what they want is a letter from the
Township that says the Township supports the Library Foundation going forward
with an appraisal of the Republic Bank Building. Clerk Hiner said Republic Bank
had asked the Library Foundation to determine if there is support from the
community before they start the process. Trustee Wright said he thinks the
Library Foundation is not communicating well with the City or the Township and
recommended one of their representatives address the Township Board at an
upcoming meeting. Treasurer Fink recommended the Township send them a letter
stating that we would like to include them on the agenda to answer questions
from the Board. Clerk Hiner said there’s a meeting next Wednesday at 7pm at the
Township office. Frans Wilbrink (4701 Zimmer) said they should be keeping the
Township informed and Trustee Wright said that once they ask for money,
communication will be demanded.
NIESA
Trustee Zaban provided a copy of NIESA’s projection plan Proposed Projection
Plan for the next 4-5 years. He reported that NIESA had recently acquired some
used equipment at a good price from a hospital that is closing down. He also
said that Ken Zicchi had attended the most recent Fire Board meeting and as a
result, the City has prepared a proposed lease agreement for their half of the
building for $1. NIESA has hired 4 of the 6 full time people. Trustee Zaban
said the candidates for fire chief have been reduced to two and the decision is
on hold for another month. Supervisor Martin reviewed the recommendations
prepared by the NIESA Strategic Planning Committee Meeting as stated in their
minutes of January 21, 2004. Trustee Zaban commented these recommendations
still need to go before the Fire Board. The Committee’s preliminary plan
includes construction of a new sub-station west of the City or north of
Williamston; construction of a new station at 627 E. Grand River; and three
options for short term solutions to the space problems at the Williamston
location.
Parks
Supervisor Martin reported that the Park Committee will meet next on February
11, 2004. Treasurer Fink reported that the Park Committee had reviewed a
proposed budget at their most recent meeting. She noted that their budget
includes some tasks that they have not actually decided to proceed with yet.
They are expecting plans for another Eagle Scout project to construct trails
from Ethan Goodman. They are also considering landscaping needs at the entrance
of the park and plan to contact LCC’s landscape architect department to see if
they have interest in having their students propose competitive designs for the
entrance. There has also been discussion about having potable water available
at the park using a hand pump but this suggestion is still at the “brain-storm”
stage. Supervisor Martin reported that the new soccer field and base of the
sliding hill were damaged again recently by four-wheeled vehicles. Treasurer
Fink said the Committee is considering barrier hedging or fencing to protect
certain areas. Supervisor Martin asked if the Committee is pursuing any grants.
Treasurer Fink said it was brought up but they have limited manpower to pursue
them. She said the Committee would like Mark Tabor to become certified for
pesticide/herbicide application
Other
Signs
Trustee Zaban said he met a person at the recent MTA conference representing
Michigan Industries. They will be visiting the Township office to inspect the
award wall location in order to prepare a cost proposal. They also indicated
they can help the Township with any other type of sign needs.
Other
The office will be closed Monday, February 16, 2004 for President’s Day.
Supervisor Martin has tentatively scheduled Township Attorney Vince Spagnoulo
to attend the next Board meeting to report on some new Township issues that may
affect Williamstown Township
MTA
Trustee Zaban and Supervisor Martin reported that they had attended MTA’s
annual conference at the end of January. They were able to meet many
legislators and attend several informative seminars including topics such as
mobile homes, budget, revenue sharing, etc… They both felt that the conference
was very helpful.
Adjournment
Trustee Wright made a motion to adjourn supported by Trustee Zaban and passed
unanimously. Meeting adjourned at 9:31 p.m.
______________________________            ______________________________
Susan L. Hiner                     Lori A. Pincumbe
Clerk                        Recording Secretary
MARCH 2, 2004
PRESENT - Supervisor Mickey Martin, Clerk Susan Hiner, Treasurer Nancy Fink,
Trustee Steve Zaban, Trustee Martin Wright and Recording Secretary Lori
Pincumbe; ABSENT: None.
CALL TO ORDER
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order at 7:28 p.m. and reviewed
the agenda.
PLEDGE
CONSENT AGENDA
Regular Meeting Minutes of 2/3/04: Trustee Zaban changed “NIESA’s Projection
Plan” to “NIESA’s Proposed Projection Plan”(pg. 4).
Special Meeting Minutes of 2/11/04: Supervisor Martin struck the sentence
“People have been interpreting our wording poorly…”
December Treasurer’s Report-Township & Cemetery – Treasurer Fink provided a
letter to the Board regarding the status of the Treasury Report. No comments.
Accounts Paid, Accounts Payable and Payroll – Treasurer Fink stated that the
Drain Commission has requested payment in full of their drain maintenance
invoice this month rather than holding Board approval until the end of the
Township’s fiscal year. She said she will also investigate a drain related
invoice regarding a pond in Cherry Valle and asked that payment be held until
clarification is made. Supervisor Martin asked that payment to Kamminga &
Roodevets continue to be held until the work is completed this spring.
Treasurer Fink also requested authorization to pay Tri-County Regional Planning
for NPDES permit fees.
Building Inspector Report – No comments.
Trustee Wright made a motion to accept the Consent Agenda with corrections
stated. Motion supported by Clerk Hiner and passed unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Susan Jennings (2359 Hiddenview Lane) stated that she had brought an issue to
Trustee Wright’s attention which he said he would look into and get back to
her. He has not responded up to this time so she is bringing it before the
Board tonight. She asked the Board to explain how the Annual Meeting minutes of
March 4, 2003 meeting fulfill the requirements of Michigan’s election law
Section 168.358 subsection 4 which states in part, “that the township board of
a township having a population of 5000 or more or having 3000 or more qualified
electors (which we met both of those requirements) shall cause the question of
electing additional trustees to be voted on at the first general November
election or annual meeting following the Township’s qualifying for additional
trustees.”
Ms. Jennings stated that this Board addressed this issue according to the
wording taken from their approved minutes of the March 4, 2003 meeting:
“Supervisor Martin stated that at this time the Board can decide to add two (2)
trustees. She noted that there would be an additional expense for the Township
and she asked the Board for questions or input. Treasurer Fink asked whether
the vote tonight was to put on the ballot if the public wanted two (2)
additional trustees or if two (2) additional trustees would automatically
appear on the next ballot. Supervisor Martin responded that the Board’s
decision tonight would be to include or not include two (2) additional
candidates on the next general election ballot. Treasurer Fink made a motion
that the Township shall continue to have only two (2) trustee positions on a
general election ballot. Trustee Zaban supported the motion and the motion was
passed unanimously.”
Ms. Jennings stated that her reading of the law is that it is not the Board’s
decision to make, it is the Township’s and the public has been robbed of its
right to vote. Treasurer Fink asked if there was attendance at that annual
meeting and Deputy Clerk Pincumbe responded that the sign-in sheet for each
meeting is kept on file with a copy of each month’s board packet. Supervisor
Martin responded that we acted upon our attorney’s letter and his opinion that
we could deal with this at an annual meeting. Susan Jennings said that what was
held last year does not qualify as an annual meeting. Treasurer Fink asked why
and Ms. Jennings responded that for one thing the public didn’t vote, the Board
voted. Treasurer Fink stated that she did not mean to exclude the public from
voting at that meeting. She said she’s agrees with Ms. Jennings and is not so
sure that the public understood that they could vote. She said she has also
spoken to someone who was at the annual meeting and he did not understand that
he could vote either so she agrees that this was not accurately represented to
the public that they could vote most likely. Possibly the Clerk or the
Supervisor or somebody should have given an instruction to the public that they
could vote in that election. Ms. Jennings stated that the public record
repeatedly states that the Board makes this decision.
Supervisor Martin said “if we conducted our annual meeting different than other
Boards that’s fine, we can re-conduct it. The Board had never had an annual
meeting before. The old Board stopped having annual meetings because no one
attended.” She said she is quite sure there were only two (2) people in
attendance at that meeting. Treasurer Fink said she remembers wondering why
Frans Wilbrink was not present at the annual meeting because he had attended a
previous meeting that evening. Supervisor Martin said she will take it up with
legal council, he has already written an attorney opinion on it. If a mistake
was made then the Board will make every attempt to correct it. She said they
will act on his guidance. Treasurer Fink asked if the meeting had been posted
properly. Supervisor Martin said that she presumes that it was. Trustee Wright
recommended that the question be brought to the attorney.
Katie Lo (121Sherwood Road) reported that three (3) deer have recently died in
their neighborhood but have not been removed. Supervisor Martin stated that
Animal Control and the Sheriff’s office have indicated they are understaffed
for handling the number of recent animal carcasses. Constable Dahlstrom agreed
that the agencies are overwhelmed. Ms. Lo said her primary concern is whether
the deer died from collisions or disease.
NEW BUSINESS
Planning Commission Report
Meeting Minutes -2/17/04 and 2/24/04
Planning Commission Chairman Dan Kraft presented a summary of the Planning
Commission regular and special meetings held in February:
Windybrook Final Preliminary Plat-Board Approval/Denial
Chairman Kraft identified Windybrook Subdivision on the Township Zoning Map for
the audience and explained that the developer (T.A. Forsberg) has proposed
sixteen (16) lots. Mr. Kraft reported that at their February 17, 2004 meeting,
the Planning Commission voted to recommend granting approval of the Final
Preliminary Plat for WindyBrook Subdivision with a number of conditions. Since
that time, the developer has submitted additional information. Supervisor
Martin read the conditions itemized in the Planning Commission’s February 17th
regular meeting minutes:
“1)    Digital Format - The applicant must submit a copy of the plat in digital
format (this can be delayed until approval of the final preliminary plat is
obtained);
2)    Preliminary Engineering – Preliminary engineering is required at this
stage of review. In particular, information regarding street lighting and
stormwater runoff calculations must be provided on the plans. A sheet
containing details of the proposed bollard lights at the subdivision entrance
has not been submitted, and stormwater runoff calculations have not been shown
on the final preliminary plat.
3)   Declaration of Restrictions – Document must be submitted by the applicant
with McKenna’s four (4) recommendations considered. [ 1) Section 2.4-revise so
that the Common Areas are to be conveyed to the Association not later than
January 1, 2006; 2) Section 7.10-It is the Developer’s responsibility to
complete all of the improvements on the plat. Any responsibilities passed onto
the Lot Owner would have to be covered by a performance guarantee submitted by
the Developer; 3) Section 12.4.1-A copy of the Association Bylaws must be
submitted for review; and 4) Page 16-Ownership of the development must be
resolved (Pinehill Estates, L.L.C.) and made consistent in all documents and
plans].
4)   Health Department Approval – Mr. Breuckman pointed out that Supervisor
Martin has also provided Commissioners with a memo stating the Health
Department has not been able to formally approve the mound system because Mr.
Gruener is out of the office until March 2, 2004.”
Supervisor Martin stated that Bruce Gruener had delivered a letter from the
Health Department to the Township which states their approval of the
developer’s proposed mound system. The Township also received a revised plan
from the developer on 2/24/04 with copies of the Declaration of Restrictions,
ByLaws, and Consent of Partners of Pinehill Partnership. This information has
been reviewed by McKenna Associates and Jim Breuckman stated that all
conditions have now been met with the exception of the developer providing
plans in digital format. Mr. Dennis Forsberg of T.A. Forsberg agreed that they
had addressed all of the Township’s concerns and will forward the plan in
digital format immediately. Supervisor Martin told Mr. Forsberg that T.A.
Forsberg also has an outstanding invoice from the Township which must be paid.
Chairman Kraft stated that another issue he recalls that may have fallen
through the cracks is that there was a condition on the tentative preliminary
plat approval that 150 seedlings be planted around the McGarey property at
their discretion and pending Drain Commission approval. The Drain Commission
has since stated that they did not want trees planted on their easement.
However, the McGareys may still want those trees planted on their property to
provide future screening. Mr. Forsberg responded that he had spoken with Mr.
McGarey by telephone and told him of the Drain Commission’s position. He
offered to plant the seedlings on the McGarey’s property instead. Supervisor
Martin stated that the final preliminary plan does indicate that 150 seedlings
will be placed on the property with the McGarey’s approval. Mr. Kraft stated he
thought the notation previously identified 200 mixed evergreens but now states
150 blue spruce. Mr. Kraft said he is comfortable with the plan as stated as
long as the developer is working with the McGareys. He explained that the
developer had made this concession at their last Planning Commission meeting
when the McGareys were not present so he wanted to make sure that this issue
didn’t fall through the cracks.
Constable Dahlstrom asked if the Ordinance addresses tree removal by property
owners. Supervisor Martin said that these proposed seedlings will be located in
common areas or on the McGarey property so property owners will not be able to
remove them. Mr. Kraft pointed out that there are also numerous trees
identified on this plan that will be planted on private lots and that is why
the performance bond has been added as a guarantee. The decision of where those
trees will be placed will be made by the future property owners. However, the
performance bond will guarantee that they are eventually planted. Mr. Forsberg
added that they have proposed tree placement along the road easement in a
manner similar to how they’ve planted in their other subdivisions. Mr. Forsberg
also pointed out that the Covenant of Restrictions document is typically turned
in again before final plat approval so there will be another opportunity for
the Board to review their project before the plat is signed. Supervisor Martin
stated that Jim Breuckman had told her this afternoon that there is nothing
outstanding.
Trustee Zaban made a motion to accept the Planning Commission’s recommendation
for Final Preliminary Plat approval for WindyBrook Subdivision subject to the
following remaining conditions: Submittal of the plan in digital format,
payment of T.A. Forsberg’s outstanding invoice and McKenna’s review of the
Declaration of Restrictions. Motion supported by Trustee Wright and passed
unanimously.
Glenn Brown – Special Land Use Permit for Home Occupation
Supervisor Martin read two (2) letters received after the public hearing from
Mr. John Walton (5220 Zimmer Road) and Mr. Richard Johnston (1600 Barry Road).
Both letters requested the Township not grant this special land use permit.
Chairman Kraft reported that the Planning Commission voted to recommend denial
of the special land use permit for home occupation requested by Mr. Glenn
Brown. He summarized that a public hearing was held for this request in January
where there was vocal opposition. The public hearing was then reopened at the
Planning Commission’s February 17th regular meeting. A motion was made to
recommend approval but the vote was tied 3-3. The Commission voted to table a
revote until their February 24th special meeting when more commissioners were
expected to be present. Mr. Kraft explained that the applicant does not
currently own the property in question. They will submit a bid to purchase the
property only if they are granted a special land use permit. The Ordinance
allows a home occupation in an accessory building with a special use permit.
The addition proposed by the Browns meets the accessory building requirements
of the Ordinance. Chairman Kraft reported that, at their February 24th meeting,
the Commission voted to recommend denial by a 6-3 vote. The Commissioners had
several concerns including: the proposed special use does not fit with the
Master Plan, the proposed use stretches the limits of the definition of home
occupation, once the business is established in the accessory building, there
is no requirement in the Ordinance that the owners live there; and, if the
Browns sell the property to a third party, it would be sold with an established
business in the accessory building.
Supervisor Martin stated that the Board has read the minutes for each meeting
where this issue was discussed. She invited the public and applicant to make
any additional comments.
Glenn Brown (Okemos, MI) - (Mr. Brown gave the Board a copy of his comments in
writing). Mr. Brown explained to the Board that he would like to work from his
home somewhere in this area and this property seemed an ideal location because
it is well sheltered so his business would have a low impact on the surrounding
community. He explained that the existing outbuilding is located 600 feet from
the road and is nearly invisible. Trees would block the view of parked cars
from the road. If the concern is that the building is located too close to the
neighboring property, he would be willing to rotate the building. Two dense
lines of trees already exist between the two properties. Mr. Brown said that it
appears everyone has different perceptions about what he does. He explained
that he has been in business for 33 years. The business has been located in the
Coral Gables plaza since 1991 (with no sign). He said he would like to relocate
to a quieter location with no commercial traffic. He has never had complaints
from neighbors about noise, even though his current studio is not very well
soundproofed. He explained the different types of services he provides and said
he is also a consultant for construction of sound proof buildings so he is
qualified to ensure adequate soundproofing in the proposed accessory building.
He said that his customer traffic is low and provided a list of the number of
people who came to his business during the past two months. His work is moving
more towards mastering soundtracks which are mailed to him. Mrs. Brown said
there would be no sign at the road and all customers are seen by appointment.
They are charged by the hour so don’t linger. Mr. Brown said they have great
interest in wildlife and would strive to maintain an attractive property. They
would be conscientious neighbors and an asset to the community (for instance to
churches, etc… that might need their service). He said he doesn’t own the
building he currently works from so he cannot upgrade the soundproofing to his
standards. Treasurer Fink commented that there is an airstrip next to this
property that will have low flying aircraft – especially on MSU game days. Mr.
Brown said his soundproofing will eliminate this noise. Mrs. Brown said they
definitely will be living on the property. Mr. Brown said this request does not
set a precedent because each home occupation is decided on a case by case basis
and weighted on its own merits. There were no questions from the Board for Mr.
Brown. Supervisor Martin clarified that the Ordinance does not require that the
owner live at the home occupation. Treasurer Fink said she would like to see
this clarified in the Ordinance because it seems to her that living in the home
would be a requirement for a home occupation.
Katie Lo (121 Sherwood Road) asked if bands come to their business to record
music. Mrs. Brown said they do, but it is not the “rowdy studio” situation that
some might imagine.
Robin Cleveland (5221 N. Zimmer Road) stated that her position that the
Township not grant this special use permit request has nothing to do with the
Browns’ character or what Mr. Brown does for a living, it is simply a matter of
adhering to the Township’s Master Plan. She said the Master Plan represents a
plan for growth in the Township that has been voted into place by the
Township’s citizens. The property being discussed is zoned AG-Small Farm on the
Master Plan and the special use being proposed is not identified as a permitted
or accessory use in the Ordinance and is not similar to any allowable use for
this zone. She said this request opens the door for rezoning the Township one
parcel at a time which goes against the Master Plan. Approving this request
will promote urban sprawl. The Agricultural Small Farm section of the Ordinance
(15.01), Statement of Purpose, par. 1, states “…In contrast with the rural
estate district, the AG-SF district provides for lower density development,
thereby providing for greater opportunity to preserve agricultural uses.” In
the same section par. 2 states, “…The standards of this district are intended
to assure that permitted uses peacefully coexist in the low density setting
while preserving the rural like features and characters so important to the
Township.” Par. 3 states, “…It is further the intent of this district to permit
a limited range of residentially related uses and to prohibit multiple family,
office, business, commercial, industrial and other uses that would interfere
with the quality of residential life in this district.” She said you wouldn’t
put a farm in a commercial district because the neighbors wouldn’t want it
there and, by the same reasoning, you shouldn’t put a commercial business in a
farm district. She stated that one planning commissioner had said during
discussion that they should look at both the spirit and the intent of the
Ordinance when making a decision and she agrees. She said she does not believe
this request qualifies as home occupation because of the large addition to the
pole barn (she added that 2400 sq. ft. is larger than her house) and the
applicant is requesting five (5) parking spaces when the Ordinance only permits
two (2). The applicant has stated they plan to pave but it is her understanding
that paving isn’t allowed for a parking lot created specifically for a special
use. In the original application the Browns indicated a personal recording
studio when in fact their recording studio is a business currently located in a
commercial district in East Lansing. She said she sees no need to bring this
business into this part of the Township. In the original plan, the Browns
indicated the building would be sound insulated (not sound proofed). However,
the Township’s Noise Ordinance is virtually non-enforceable and leaves
neighbors with no recourse. She said the impact this request will have on the
enjoyment of their property is important to them. They have incurred a lot of
expense encouraging wildlife which this business may chase away. They have
owned their property for 18 years and their neighbors are also longstanding
residents with a lot invested. They don’t want to see their property values
decline. A 30-year veteran real estate agent reviewed the details of this
application for them and determined that this special use would negatively
impact the value of their property. With at least three (3) immediate neighbors
who voted on the current Master Plan opposing this request, she believes their
wishes should be of the utmost importance to the Township’s planning staff.
Supervisor Martin asked Mr. Kraft whether the Planning Commission had
considered the general requirements for home occupations which states they may
be permitted in an accessory building with special land use permit but the
appearance of the structure may not be altered. Mr. Kraft said the provisions
in the Ordinance were discussed and it was general consensus that this request
doesn’t quite fit into the home occupation definition. Supervisor Martin
pointed out that the general requirements also state a home occupation cannot
increase any utility by more than 10% and she presumes this use would increase
electricity usage by some degree.
Supervisor Martin summarized that the Planning Commission has held their public
hearing and listened to comments. She added that she thinks the Ordinance has
done what it’s supposed to do by triggering the need for a special use permit
process. This required the Township to notify neighbors of intent so they could
provide input and allowed the applicant the opportunity to present his
proposal.
Clerk Hinder moved to accept the Planning Commission’s recommendation for
denial of a special use permit for home occupation to Glenn Brown. Motion
supported by Trustee Zaban.
Discussion
Treasurer Fink said that in the past, the Board has been sympathetic to mixed-
use requests but also envisions them in a more appropriate zoning. She said she
personally likes the idea of mixed-uses but this request seems to be
compromising to the neighbors (at least to their perception). Trustee Wright
said he is torn on this request because he believes this business would have a
very low impact. However, the surrounding property owners strongly oppose the
request and they have been longtime residents and taxpayers. He said if the
Browns were looking at a parcel next to his property he wouldn’t have a problem
but he has to oppose the request based on the neighbors’ opposition.
He added that this was also a difficult vote for the Planning Commission.
Supervisor Martin said her concern is that the request is not in compliance
with the Master Plan. Motion passed unanimously.
Mrs. Brown thanked the Board for their time and stated that she appreciates the
Board’s feedback - especially that this request may be acceptable on a
different piece of property.
2004/05 Meeting Dates
Supervisor Martin presented the proposed meeting dates for 2004/05. Trustee
Zaban noted that August 3rd is an election date and suggested the meeting be
moved to August 10th. Trustee Wright recommended moving the August Workshop to
the 24th.  Supervisor Martin changed the December Workshop to Tuesday, December
21st.
Trustee Wright made a motion to accept the 2004/05 meeting dates as proposed
with three (3) changes: hold the August Regular Board meeting on August 10th,
the August Workshop meeting on August 24th, and the December Workshop meeting
on December 21, 2004. Motion supported by Treasurer Fink and passed
unanimously.
2004/05 Holidays
Supervisor Martin presented a list of the Holidays designated by Ingham County
(the Township traditionally follows the same schedule). Treasurer Fink
commented that there are some conflicting dates with tax season but the
Township will need to alter deadlines to accommodate the holiday schedule
followed by the general population.
Cemetery Committee
Clerk Hiner reported that the Committee would like Building Inspector Walt Aven
to attend their next meeting to provide input on their plans for a storage
building at Summit Cemetery. Supervisor Martin said she had received some
information from the Health Department stating that they felt a “pump and haul”
bathroom would be the best choice because it will avoid the need for a mound
system. Trustee Wright asked if chains at Summit would be removed and Clerk
Hiner said that Mark Tabor intends to remove them once he has the proper tools.
Supervisor Martin stated that Mr. Tabor has also been investigating the
purchase of a used cement mixer for preparing foundations. She said that City
Manager Lisa Hitchcock has a draft Cemetery Agreement for the two (2)
municipalities that should be received soon. There does not need to be a formal
agreement in place in order to approve the 2004/05 cemetery budget.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Insurance Audit Report
Clerk Hiner reported that she had met with insurance representative Dale Sheets
in early January to review the Township’s current coverage. She had originally
contacted three (3) insurance agencies to review a bid but they were not
willing to do so until 45 days from renewal because until then the numbers are
meaningless. Mr. Sheets reviewed the Township’s existing policies and stated
that the Township appears to be well insured. He said there a couple of places
where the Township does not have enough liability coverage. Liability coverage
should be for the dollar amount that comes through the Township in one tax
season. Treasurer Fink said she has investigated the bonding issue and the
Township’s Treasury Department is fully covered. The Township carries $100,000
in coverage and the County also has bonded all the money that goes to all other
jurisdictions. Treasurer Fink said she will request documentation of this
information for the Township’s file. Clerk Hiner said that Mr. Sheets’ two (2)
other recommendations were that office furnishings/computer equipment be
covered by class instead of by piece. It is less cumbersome than updating an
equipment list each time a purchase is made. He also recommended that the
Township meticulously track how employees use their time because when the
insurance company performs their annual audit, if there is any question they
will assign employees to the category that has the highest insurance cost. For
instance, if Mark Tabor doesn’t document the percentage of time he performs
lawn care and snow removal activities, the insurance company will assign him to
this category (which has the highest insurance cost) for 100% of his time
unless we can prove otherwise. Mr. Sheets said that everything in these
policies are points for negotiation. Clerk Hiner said that Mark Tabor’s time is
currently tracked by task so can be easily negotiated with our insurance
company.
Budget-General & Cemetery Deliberation
Supervisor Martin reported that changes discussed at the Board’s Workshop
meeting have been made. She said that the “Drains-at-Large” budget has been
increased from $9,000 to $83,500 based on cost information for the upcoming
year forwarded by the Ingham County Drain Commission. The Drain Commission
charges for cleanouts and repairs to drains located throughout the Township and
then charges the Township after the fact. Right now the Township also has an
additional financial responsibility of approximately $75,000 (15% of the total
cost) for the new drain being constructed on the west end of Grand River (with
a total cost of $489,978.25). Treasurer Fink stated that she and Supervisor
Martin were shocked when they were told of the cost at this morning’s meeting
with the Drain Commission. In the future, the Township will request preliminary
financial information in advance. She added that they have also requested a
spreadsheet showing where specific costs went on this project. Supervisor
Martin clarified that the Drain Commission has authority to proceed without
Township authorization and the drain being installed is extensive. She stated
that impacted homeowners have been attending meetings regularly and it is
important that a Township representative attend future Drain Commission
meetings. Treasurer Fink said they are looking into spreading payments for the
drain out over multiple years. Supervisor Martin said the entire amount has
been included in this year’s budget because there hasn’t been confirmation that
payments can be made over time. The bottom line is that the drain had to be
fixed but the cost was a shock.
Supervisor Martin proposed that the “Contingency” budget item be reduced from
$43,300 to $30,000 (the amount it was previously in 2003/4) which would reduce
the budget’s net negative balance from $68,900 to $55,500. Trustee Wright and
Treasurer Fink agreed.
Trustee Wright made a motion to approve the budget for by each department class
as outlined in the proposed budget document prepared by Supervisor Martin with
the changes of reducing the budgeted amount for “Contingency” from $43,3000 to
$30,000; the addition of $83,000 to “Drains-at-Large” and the addition of
$1,000 to “NPDES Permit.” Motion supported by Clerk Hiner and passed
unanimously.
Supervisor Martin recommended that a “Contingency” fund be established for
unanticipated cemetery costs. The Board agreed to set a “Contingency”fund of
$7500. This creates a Cemetery budget deficit of $17,006.
Trustee Zaban moved to approve the proposed Cemetery Budget for 2004/05 as
prepared by Supervisor Martin with the change of adding a “Contingency” amount
of $7500. Motion supported by Trustee Wright and passed unanimously.
John Kane – Hotel Tax
Clerk Hiner reported that she had spoken with Mr. Ladke and he told her that
the two (2) hotel/motel properties in Williamstown Township generate a total of
approximately $1500 each year. The 1% that the County receives is used to
support the Center for the Arts, the Ingham County Fairgrounds and to cover
administration costs. The rest of the money goes to the Greater Lansing
Convention Board. Mr. Ladke said that Williamston likely doesn’t benefit to the
extent that others do but he would be willing to meet with the Board to discuss
how their money is spent. Clerk Hiner said it would still be good for John Kane
and her to meet with Mr. Ladke but it isn’t going to change how this money is
being spent. Trustee Wright said he doesn’t think the Township Board needs to
pursue the issue any further and should instead put Mr. Ladke in touch with
John Kane.
REPORTS
Library
Supervisor Martin reported that she attended the Library Foundation meeting
held in February (2/11/04). Minutes are not available for either their January
or February meetings yet but will be forwarded once approved. A complete set of
minutes has been provided to the Township through December 2003. Supervisor
Martin reported that there had been a meeting with Republic Bank and they did
not give the Library Board the go ahead to do an appraisal on the building. The
Library Board doesn’t feel this is a dead issue but Republic Bank isn’t in a
position right now to say they are willing to give up their building. They
don’t want their customers or employees to think they are going somewhere or
that jobs are in jeopardy. The Library Board still hasn’t come up with a plan
or a dollar amount for the new library. They plan to look further into the Howe
property (currently a gravel parking area at the corner of High and Putnam).
Supervisor Martin said the Community Center was also suggested now that the
daycare is moving to the Elementary School. Treasurer Fink said the librarian
has voiced concerns about supervising a two (2) story location. Supervisor
Martin said she told the Library Board it would be good for them to make a
presentation to the Township’s Board.
NIESA
Trustee Zaban reported that the City is going to put to ballot the issue of
turning their half of the NIESA building over to the Fire Board for $1. Once
the City turns over their half, NIESA will go forward with a strategic plan.
NIESA will be holding special meetings to address concerns voiced by Locke
Township. Leroy Township owns the fire hall in Webberville so NIESA is going to
have to address ownership of that building also. They no longer plan to hire a
fire administrator to oversee both fire halls because there is considerable
opposition. Six (6) full time people have now been hired which has improved
response time. Trustee Zaban pointed out that Township citizens currently pay
more in taxes to Capital Area District Library than to NIESA. He said some
volunteers are having problems when they leave work to attend a fire (they only
get paid $10 per hour when they work a fire).
Parks
Treasurer Fink reported that the Park Committee held a very productive meeting
on February 11th. She noted a correction to the park minutes regarding fencing
along Grand River. The committee actually discussed installing a split rail
fence (instead of a picket fence) with a landscaping screen behind it to
delineate the park. An article was submitted to the Enterprise about “dog
scooping” and the recent ATV abuse at the park. Treasurer Fink also intends to
include similar information in the next newsletter. Treasurer Fink said that
ATV damage from this winter may have
occurred in the parking area rather than on the soccer fields or in the
multiuse area. The new sign has not been installed. Treasurer Fink said she has
drafted a list of projects that might be good community projects to consider
for volunteers or future eagle scouts.
Other
Workshop - Supervisor Martin scheduled a Workshop meeting for March 16, 2004.
Trustee Zaban said he will be unable to attend.
ICHD-Recycling – Supervisor Martin reported that the Township has been asked to
notify citizens that the Williamston High School Chemistry Club will be
sponsoring a hazardous materials collection. She will post this information on
the Township’s bulletin board and attempt to include it in the next newsletter.
Trustee Wright said the County holds these collections occasionally but they
are usually in Lansing.
New Employee - Supervisor Martin introduced Cindy Davis and explained that she
has been hired as her assistant.
Newsletter - Supervisor Martin said that a newsletter is planned for the end of
March and asked for Board input.
Board of Review – Supervisor Martin reported that the Board of Review had held
an organizational meeting. Descriptions have been updated so that all Right-of-
Ways have been taken out of the taxable category. About 1/5 of the Township’s
properties have been reassessed. Board of Review dates have been set for Monday
and Tuesday, March 8th and 9th. Only ten (10) people have scheduled
appointments up so far.
Road Commission – Supervisor Martin reported that she has received a letter
from the Road Commission for road work to be performed in 2004/05. She
suggested that chip sealing may be a good recommendation for Barry Road. There
is a $95,000 budget including both Township and ICRC contribution and including
the 2003 holdover so the Township could do a fairly large project. Trustee
Zaban commented that this budget will cover the cost for about two (2) miles of
road work. Supervisor Martin stated that the Traffic Committee will need to
begin discussions so that decisions can be made by June.
Meridian Township Agenda-Supervisor Martin commented that Meridian Township
lists all letters received during the month on the back of their agenda. She is
going to start doing the same on the back of Williamstown Township’s agenda.
Quickbooks Training – Supervisor Martin reported that she, Treasurer Fink, and
Trustee Wright had attended a two (2) day course for the Quickbooks software
program which was very informative.
Meeting Review
Supervisor Martin will write letters to T.A. Forsberg and Glenn Brown and will
bring the matter presented by Susan Jennings to the attorney. Clerk Hiner will
contact John Kane regarding the hotel tax information she collected.
Adjournment
Trustee Zaban made a motion to adjourn supported by Trustee Wright and passed
unanimously. Meeting adjourned at 10:36 p.m.
______________________________            ______________________________
Susan L. Hiner                     Lori A. Pincumbe
Clerk                        Recording Secretary
APRIL 6, 2004
CALL TO ORDER
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order at 7:32 pm , and reviewed
the agenda and added Road Work to Unfinished Business.
PLEDGE
ROLL CALL
Trustee Martin Wright, Supervisor Mickey Martin, Trustee Steve Zaban, Treasurer
Nancy Fink
CONSENT AGENDA
Supervisor Martin advised there were minutes for March 2nd and March 16th to be
approved, but there were no minutes for the March 31st meeting. They will be
approved at the next meeting.
Regular Meeting Minutes of 3/2/04: Treasurer Fink changed “she agrees with Ms
Jennings and is not so sure that the public understood that they could vote.”
to “she agreed that possibly the public did not understand that they could
vote.” (Pg 1, par 3) Treasurer Fink added: “Sue Jennings said something to the
effect that ‘ the minutes were public record’.” Treasurer Fink was not
disputing the minutes as public record, but the formatting did not look like
the board’s normal minutes. (Pg 1, par3) In any case, she stated the minutes
may have been formatted differently at that time. For example there may have
had a new clerk at that time, but the minutes did not look normal.” Supervisor
Martin changed Mr “Gruener” to “Gruner” (Pg 2, par 8 & 9). Supervisor Martin
changed: “Mr. Richard Johnson (1600 Barry Rd).” to “Mr. Richard Johnson (1600
Barry Rd) into the public record.” (Pg 3, par 3). Supervisor Martin changed:
“She added that she thinks” to “She added that she believes” (Pg 4, par 4).
Supervisor Martin changed: “Clerk Hinder” to “Clerk Hiner” (Pg 4, par 5).
Treasurer Fink changed: “more appropriate zoning”to more appropriate zoning
district.” (Pg 4, par 6). Treasurer Fink requested: the Board investigate how
items read into the public record should be handled.
Workshop Meeting Minutes of 3/16/04:
Supervisor Martin reviewed the 3/16/04 minutes stating that the Township needs
a way to secure the minutes of all their meetings. Treasurer Fink changed:
“Supervisor Martin further went on to explain that he was able to recall” to
“Supervisor Martin further went on to state that the consultant was able to
locate” (Pg1, par 5).
March Payroll Activity: No Comment
Accounts Paid/ Payable: Supervisor Martin asked that payment to Kamminga &
Roodevets continue to be held. Supervisor Martin requested an explanation of
the Tri-County Regional Planning Commission bill for $571.00. She asked if it
was a membership. Treasurer Fink was not sure, she will research it. Supervisor
Martin asked about the Williamstown Township (drain) bill for $24.18. Treasurer
Fink indicated that it was the Township’s at large payment. Supervisor Martin
disagreed. Treasurer Fink will investigate further.
Williamstown Twp Cemetery Payroll/ Account Payable: Supervisor Martin
questioned the two payments for Accident Fund. Supervisor Martin asked
Treasurer Fink to check the two payments to make sure they were appropriate.
Treasurers Report: Will be prepared for the April 20th workshop meeting.
Building Inspector Report: No Comments
Trustee Zaban made a motion to accept the Consent Agenda with the corrections
stated. Motion supported by Trustee Wright and passed unanimously.
SCOTT MCDONALD / DRAIN COMMISSIONER CANDIDATE
Not present at the meeting
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Frans Wilbrink (4701 Zimmer Rd) stated that he received a letter from NIESA
stating that his burning permit from them had been revoked. NIESA stated that
the Township had requested that no more burning permits be issued through
NIESA. Since they are the fire authority he wanted to know why the township had
made this request. He stated it is not always convenient to get a permit from
the township. Supervisor Martin responded: by Township ordinance they are the
only ones that can give out burning permits from the Township. Mr. Wilbrink
asked for clarification as to where in the ordinance it states that the
Township had to issue and activate the permits. Supervisor Martin read the
section of the Burning Ordinance that applied.
Supervisor Martin advised Mr. Wilbrink that if he felt the ordinance should be
changed, he could put his recommendations in writing. The Township reviews the
ordinances every year.
Frans Wilbrink (4701 Zimmer Rd) commented that the packet included letters from
Trustee Zaban and Daniel Kraft, but his letters of interest were not present.
Supervisor Martin apologized but advised she does not assemble the packets.
Sue Hiner ( 1326 James ) commented on her job as clerk.
Roger Philip (5350 Barton Rd) commented on employee changes.
NEW BUSINESS
Planning Commission Report
Meeting Minutes - 3/16/04
No report given.
Cemetery Committee
Meeting Minutes 3/10/04- Building Proposal
Greg Lammars (Cemetery Committee Representative) presented need for a storage
building at Summit Cemetery.
Mr. Lammars stated that they are proposing a larger building than originally
discussed, because the cemetery needs additional storage for machinery, larger
work area and flexibility for future additions . An office is included in the
plan to accommodate meeting with clients. Considering all that is proposed,
they increased the size of the building to 36' x 38'. Mr. Lammars stated that
the additional cost is estimated at: increased building size ($10,000),
electrical service hook up ($5,000 or more), Well ($3,000), Septic System
($3,000), and the office with a handicapped accessible bathroom ($3,000). Total
cost approximately $50,000. The Cemetery Committee is requesting the Board to
allocate the additional funds from the cemetery excess fund and approve moving
forward. Treasurer Fink will run a report updating all of the accounts and
provide him with information on the amount in the cemetery fund.
Mr. Lammars turned the presentation over to Mark Tabor (Maintenance Department)
for specific building details. Mr. Tabor stated that four bids had been
obtained from local companies who obtain lumber form either Carter or MPC. One
bid is from a Williamston builder, the other three are from Webberville
builders. A site plan for the location of the building at the cemetery, and a
floor plan of the interior of the building was reviewed.
Mr. Tabor stated they could not run water from the current well back to the
building, they would have to drill a new well. Treasurer Fink asked why they
could not use the current well. Mr. Tabor indicated that the lines are only one
foot underground and are drained every fall. Also the current well is from 1956
and has never been repaired. They don’t know if it could handle the additional
usage.
Mr. Tabor stated that the proposed heating system would be base board electric
and they will be putting the bathroom on the inside wall utilizing the heat
from the office to protect the plumbing. The approximate size of the bathroom
is 8' x 8', and the office is 22' x 12'. Treasurer Fink asked if all cemetery
business would be conducted at that location. Mr. Tabor felt it could be.
Trustee Zaban asked what the old storage building would be used for. Mr. Tabor
indicated they could use it for several items, such as awnings, and smaller
equipment.
Mr. Tabor indicated that all four bids are within the same ballpark. He had
four bids for the shell, and three bids on the finished building. The average
bid was $55,327 for a finished project, lighting, heating, construction, and
aprons. Mr. Tabor also advised the Board that the one thing the bids do not
include is landscaping around the building.
Mr. Tabor indicated that the Cemetery Committee had approved the purchase of a
new cement mixer. He distributed specifications of the model he purposed they
purchase and asked for approval of the purchase. Supervisor Martin asked which
Cement mixer they were looking at. Mr. Tabor indicated that the 5.5 horse
power, 6 cubic foot. Supervisor Martin indicated it was in the budget and they
would move forward with the purchase.
Supervisor Martin stated that she appreciated the information gathered and the
work the Cemetery Committee had done. She suggested that they ask Treasurer
Fink to see if the funds are available. Supervisor Martin suggested this be
discussed further at the next Workshop meeting, where they could thoroughly
review the detailed information and the detailed bids.
Treasurer Fink feels this is a excellent idea, and appreciates all of the work
done on the project. She thinks it would be an excellent thing to have a
central office to handle the cemetery business, and she thinks they are sorely
in need of this space.
Board Resignation
Supervisor Martin read into the public record a letter of resignation from
Trustee Zaban.
Trustee Wright made a motion to accept Trustee Zaban’s letter of resignation
effective at the time the motion is passed. Motion supported by Treasurer Fink
and passed unanimously at 8:45 pm.
Board Appointment
Supervisor Martin read into public record a letter from Mr. Zaban requesting to
be considered for appointment to the position of Township Clerk.
Trustee Wright made a motion to appoint Steve Zaban as clerk to fill the term
immediately until the next election.
Treasurer Fink pointed out that they also had a letter from Mr. Wilbrink
applying for the position of clerk. Supervisor Martin read into the public
record a letter from Mr. Wilbrink applying for open position of township clerk,
and if there is a shift of personnel he would like to be considered for any
other open positions.
Motion supported by Treasurer Fink and passed unanimously.
ZBA Appointment
Supervisor Martin stated that Al LeBlanc has resigned his position on the ZBA
to pursue his new appointment as Deputy Treasurer. She thanked him for his
service to the ZBA.
Supervisor Martin recommended Kurt Guter as a replacement for Mr. LeBlanc
through the remainder of his term on the ZBA. She indicated in the past he has
provided the Board with valuable service on the Phase II watershed and Aquifer
issues, and would be a valuable asset to ZBA.
Supervisor Martin made a motion to appoint Kurt Guter to fulfill Mr. LeBlanc’s
position on the ZBA, until his term expires in September 2004. Motion supported
by Trustee Wright and passed unanimously.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Windybrook Final Preliminary Plat -Board approval/ denial
Supervisor Martin advised that the preliminary plat was approved last month
with some conditions. She indicated there is a letter in the packet from T.A.
Forsberg indicating that “It belatedly came to our attention that we overlooked
the Michigan Department of Transportation..” Forsberg has received MDOT
approval, however our ordinance requires that we re-approve the preliminary
plat that now includes the information from MDOT. When a development is within
500 feet of a state highway it is required to apply to MDOT for their approval.
Supervisor Martin indicated that the letter from MDOT states “The captioned
preliminary plat has been reviewed and approved. The final plat will be
approved upon submission. The Region Utility Permits comments revealed that
there will be no impact on drainage or traffic and safety. On the signature
block for MDOT, please use the title of John S Polasek, Director, Bureau of
Highways - Development.” It was signed Winston L Stebbins, Engineer of Design
Services.
Supervisor Martin went to a pre-construction meeting last Friday, for
Windybrook and the construction meeting on Monday. To connect to the storm
drain on Zimmer Road the closest connection point is south of 3781 Zimmer Rd.,
which will require them to cross two individual’s properties in the right of
way. This is outside of the platted area. These individuals need to be
notified: letters were sent. Supervisor Martin stated that it is her
understanding that Forsberg needs to have a signed contract with the two
homeowners of what they are going to do and the impact it will have on the
property and have that back to the Ingham County Road Commission before they
commence work in the road right of way.
Mr. Forsberg stated that he had spoke with Mrs. Pease and she had no problem.
He advised her that what they disrupted would be replaced and they would give
her notice of when they are going to do construction. He stated that he left a
letter in the Sureyak’s door. He does not foresee a problem with the Sureyak
approval.
Supervisor Martin stated that in addition to notifying the Pease’s and
Sureyak’s, he also needs to obtain a signed contract. If he has any questions
regarding these contracts he should contract Franco at the R.C.
Trustee Wright made a motion to approve the final preliminary plat plan for
Windybrook based on the March 4, 2004 letter from MDOT. Motion supported by
Clerk Zaban and passed unanimously.
Election Consolidation
Supervisor Martin presented an informational letter from the Ingham County
Clerks office regarding the Election Consolidation Package for the 2005 school
year. All school district, intermediate school districts or community college
elections will be administered by Michigan’s county, city and township clerks.
Road work
Supervisor Martin stated that last month we saw the ICRC proposal of road work
recommendations. We also received a request at the annual meeting from two
individuals on Barry Rd that want the gravel portion paved. Supervisor Martin
spoke with the road commission regarding chip and seal. They gave her an
estimate for that mile of $108,000.
Supervisor Martin provided the Board with a sample letter to the residents on
Barry Rd asking them if they want their road paved and would they be willing to
pay part of the cost. We are not sure if everyone wants this done. Clerk Zaban
indicated that it should go to the Transportation Committee for review. He
indicated that the Transportation Committee looked at this last year.
Supervisor Martin wanted to at least get the letter out to the residents. Clerk
Zaban suggested the letter be revised to indicate that some residents on Barry
Rd have requested that the road be paved, so the individuals know it is not the
Board requesting the paving.
Clerk Zaban will take this request to the Transportation Committee. Supervisor
Martin asked that Clerk Zaban get the Transportation Committee to meet, so they
can decide on what roads they want to recommend for repair to be presented in
June.
REPORTS
Library 3-24-04
Supervisor Martin stated they met on March 24th at the township hall. Republic
Bank is no longer a possible location for relocation. They have two more sites,
one is the Wood Building, and the second is at the Community Center. The
Community Center existing building could be used as a temporary location for
the library until property is obtained. They are continuing their fund raising
efforts.
NIESA Minutes
Clerk Zaban reported that the DDA agreement with the City of Williamston has
been put to bed, and we are both in agreement and the contract has been signed.
The City of Williamston is still working on ballot language for giving us their
half of the building. We are hoping it will come together, we think it will and
we are pretty positive about it. But as the chair of the Strategic Planning
Committee, we are really looking at the empty lot across the street and
building something there rather quickly. We are really jammed up at the
station, with needing space for people to sleep and the equipment. We are
looking at that as a temporary building, because his goal is to get some kind
of fire service closer to the Township.
Supervisor Martin stated that there was an incident in the township where the
EMS crew responded, unfortunately the individual passed away, but the family
was very appreciative of howNIESA responded and appreciated everything that was
done.
Parks
Treasurer Fink reported that they had a fairly lengthy meeting. They are going
to upgrade the bulletin boards at the park so they have a good seal and plan on
putting some education material in them. They have also ordered some jack pines
from the conservation sale and they will be planting them at the park. At the
present time they plan on planting the pines across the front of the park. They
are looking at more formal ways of dealing with the landscaping.
She talked about the American Legion regarding a pavilion for the park. They
discussed the possibility of two smaller pavilions instead of one large. They
are looking at putting together a proposal for the Legion. However they are
very concerned about security.
They will also be putting together a list of community projects for the park
for individuals that want to volunteer their time. They are also talking about
mowing a dog walking area to try and get dogs off the people trails. Also a
split rail fence for the front is being discussed.
Williamston Area Beautification Fund-
Supervisor Martin indicated that the committee is now sending the Township a
copy of their minutes.
Other
Workshop - Supervisor Martin scheduled a workshop meeting for April 20th at 6:
00 pm. They will address the trustee appointment and the cemetery building.
Maintenance Position -Supervisor Martin and Clerk Zaban held a review regarding
the maintenance position with Mr. Tabor. Supervisor Martin indicated he is
doing a wonderful job. She proposed that Mr. Tabors position be made a salary
position, it would make his schedule more flexible. In the recommendation he
would go on salary, he would still keep a very accurate log of what he has
done. Rather than a raise he has requested additional vacation time. He
currently receives two weeks vacation, and is requesting an increase to three
weeks.
Supervisor Martin suggested an annual salary of $27,492 with 3 weeks of paid
time off and that it take effect immediately. She also stated that this change
would be reviewed again in September.
Clerk Zaban made a motion that the maintenance position be switched to a salary
position with a pay as indicated, and 3 weeks of paid time off, effective
immediately. Motion was seconded by Trustee Wright and passed unanimously.
Meeting Review
Supervisor Martin will contact Scott McDonald and see why he was not present.
She will also send Forsberg another letter regarding Windybrook. Clerk Zaban
will take the road work issue to the Transportation committee. Trustee Wright
will obtain and review additional information on the cemetery building project,
and Treasurer Fink will run a report summary on the cemetery funs for the
workshop
Adjournment
Clerk Zaban made a motion to adjourn supported by Trustee Wright and passed
unanimously. Meeting adjourned at 9:37 pm.
Steven Zaban                  Paula M Curtis
Clerk                     Recording Secretary
MAY 4, 2004
CALL TO ORDER
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order at 7:34 pm, and reviewed
the agenda. PLEDGE
ROLL CALL
Trustee Daniel Kraft, Trustee Martin Wright, Supervisor Mickey Martin, Clerk
Steve Zaban, Treasurer Nancy Fink
CONSENT AGENDA
Regular Meeting Minutes of 4/6/04: No comments.
Workshop Meeting Minutes of 4/20/04: Clerk Zaban changed "QBF" to "QVF" (Pg 1,
par 4). Workshop Meeting Minutes of 3/31/2004: No comments. Minutes Meeting of
4/26/04: No comments.
February Treasurer's Report: Treasurer Fink reported that the report was for
February only. She indicated they are in the process of exporting the
Quickbooks data to the auditors. There is a discrepancy between the bank and
Quickbooks. Several of the discrepancies have to do with the payroll liability
payments that were electronically paid. Treasurer Fink stated that she has
reconciled the Cemetery account for March, and has hand reconciled the account
through April 2004.
Accounts Paid /Payable: No comment.
Building Inspector: No comment
Trustee Wright made a motion to accept the Consent Agenda with the corrections
stated. Motion supported by Clerk Zaban and passed unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin advised that members of Boy Scout Troop #63 were present to
observe the meeting.
NEW BUSINESS
Planning Commission Report
Meeting Minutes - 4/20/04 - Mr. Kraft reported that the revisions for "Bona
Fide Farm," and "Detached Accessory Building Location" will be going to public
hearing. They will also be forwarded to the attorney for review.
Supervisor Martin commented on the revision of the wording under the "Detached
Accessory Building Location" regarding the RMI districts. For information
purposes the wording they are proposing to remove (pg 4 par 7) "in the front
yard of a single family residences in the RM 1 district" was specifically added
to the ordinance because they do have private residences where it applies.
Supervisor Martin suggested that the Planning Commission may want to revisit
that specific revision.
Site Plan Robert Barkham, 181 Haslett Board Approval / Denial
Supervisor Martin reported that Mr. Barkham has applied for site plan approval
to remove a portion of a building and adding a 30'x 48' addition to an existing
building. Previously he was given site plan approval by the Planning Commission
with conditions. The conditions were; lightning needed to be added;
identification of the neighboring properties and location of houses; and
landscaping issues. Mr. Barkham had provided a new site plan with the additions
requested.
Trustee Kraft made a motion to approve the site plan submitted by Mr. Robert
Barkham for 181 Haslett Road as revised on the condition that all of the non
incandescent, and low sodium outdoor lighting must be fully shielded, and
downward directed. Motion supported by Trustee Wright and passed unanimously.
Cemetery Committee
Meeting Minutes - 4/27/04- Building Proposal
Mr. Taschner (Cemetery Committee Chairman) reported that the Cemetery Committee
reviewed the building proposal. They would like to move forward with obtaining
a scaled drawing of the proposed building, and letting bids for the project.
Their goal is to have the building up this year.
The Board discussed scaling back the building before obtaining bids. Clerk
Zaban suggested obtaining bids for the proposed building, and if necessary once
the bids are in scale back the project.
Trustee Wright asked if the Cemetery Committee had discussed the option of
locating the maintenance building at the Township hall. It would make more room
within the current cemetery building by moving some of the equipment. The need
for an office and bathroom would be eliminated, and the electrical installation
would be less expensive. Also the funds to build the building would come from
the Township.
Mr. Taschner is willing to bring the option to the Cemetery Committee, but at
the present time most of the Committee wanted the building located at the
cemetery.
It was decided to move forward with the building project. The Cemetery
Committee will obtain a scaled drawing of the purposed building and obtain bids
for the project, both with and without an office and bathroom. The Township
will move forward with obtaining a site plan of the Township Hall property to
decide if the maintenance building could be built on the township site.
Mr. Taschner advised that last year the Board had approved the purchase of a
new lawn mower for the cemetery, however it was not purchased. He would like to
move forward on obtaining a new mower this year. He was authorized to move
forward with the purchase.
Mr. Taschner reminded the Board that they had purchased a new flag pole for the
cemetery in February of this year, but as of this date it has not been
delivered. They would like to have it installed before Memorial Day. Supervisor
Martin advised that they would check into it.
Complaints (423 E Grand River & 3861 Zimmer Rd):
423 E Grand River Ave: Mr. Dahlstrom (Township Constable) reported that the
property is rented by Mr. Snelson. The renter has not responded to Mr.
Dahlstrom's email, nor to the notes left on his door. The State of Michigan has
been out and gave the individual 30 days to correct a problem with the heater
in the garage. It is Mr. Dahlstrom's understanding that the individual will be
moving within the next 30 days. This has been an ongoing problem for several
years. Mr. Dahlstrom will continue to monitor the situation.
3861 Zimmer Rd : The address is in a subdivision, R 1 district. Supervisor
Martin indicated the homeowner was present. Mr. Scott Robataille advised he is
the homeowner. He indicated that his children wanted to do a 4H project this
year. In January he came to the Township and reviewed the ordinances pertaining
to farm animals, and he interpreted the ordinance to indicate he could have the
farm animals. He also asked an individual working at the Township office, and
they advised him that he could have the animals. The pigs will be leaving the
property in 9 weeks for the Fowlerville Fair, they will be removed on July
11th.
Supervisor Martin advised Mr. Robataille that the complaint was regarding the
odor. Mr. Robataille indicated they had put gravel down in the pens to assist
with better drainage, also his children clean the pens on a daily basis.
Individuals in the audience that also raise pigs recommended that Mr.
Robataille obtain a lime mixture from his local elevator and cheap charcoal
briquets to put in with the pigs to control the odor.
Supervisor Martin apologized to Mr. Robataille for the miss information he
received, and purposed that the Board work with him regarding this issue. He
was advised if he, put up a plywood fence, put down the lime mixture and the
charcoal briquets in the pen, and have his children continue to clean the pens
on a daily basis, the Board is willing to allow the pigs to remain. Mr.
Robataille agreed to the conditions. Supervisor Martin advised that Mr.
Dahlstrom will be out to check the location within the next two weeks.
Burn Ordinance Revision Proposal (Addition):
Supervisor Martin received a written request from Mr. Frans Wilbrink that the
Burning Ordinance be revised, under Section 5.02-a Burn permit required. He
would like it changed to "A burn permit shall be obtained form the Williamstown
Township Hall, or the local Fire Authority, NIESA, prior to kindling a
fire...." He would also like the ordinance to state that NIESA must have a copy
of the ordinance.
Supervisor Martin indicated that this should go to the Planning Commission for
consideration. She advised Mr. Wilbrink that if wanted this issue considered
immediately he would have to complete an application for a text amendment and
pay the appropriate fees, then the Planning Commission would review his
request. Otherwise his request would be filed until the annual review of all
ordinances.
Paula Curtis (NIESA, Secretary/ Treasurer) stated she would not want the
responsibility of issuing the initial permit for the Township because of the
complexity of their burning ordinance. However she would not be opposed to
activating the permits if there was an easy way for her to determine which
permits had limitations.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Barry Road Paving - Supervisor Martin reported that there are three roads in
the township that are still gravel.
She did send a survey letter to residents on Barry road regarding the paving of
the road, and the results of the survey in their packets. The majority of the
residents that responded want it paved, but do not want to share in the
expense,
Supervisor Martin suggested that this issue be referred to the Transportation
Committee for further review. Clerk Zaban indicated he will try and have a
meeting of the Transportation Committee the week of May 17th.
Trustee Kraft asked how paving Barry road would effect the township budget.
Clerk Zaban reported it would take the entire road improvement budget.
REPORTS
Library
Supervisor Martin reported she had not heard if the Wood building had been
appraised yet. She also reported that they would have to do contamination and
engineering studies on the building if they were going to consider purchasing
it. At the present time they want 1.5 million for the building and the
property.
NIESA Minutes:
Clerk Zaban reported that the Strategic Planning Committee is moving forward.
They have split the committee into subcommittees to look at various issues such
as: property, buildings, equipment, and short term fix. Their main focus at
this time is to move forward with expanding our fire department, specifically
for building something on the property east of the station to alleviate the
space problem.
Parks
Supervisor Martin reported that she completed her final walk through with the
engineer. She reported that both herself and the engineer felt that the grading
should be finer especially in the purposed grassy areas. The engineer has
forwarded a letter to the Township with his opinion regarding the final walk
through. Supervisor Martin suggested that the letter be forwarded to
contractor, Kamminga & Roodvoets, and request that they make the necessary
repairs. If they don't make the repairs, then she would recommend that the
Township not pay the balance due on the project.
Other
Deer Dama e to Cemetery Trees: Mr. Taschner asked if the cemetery is
responsible for the deer damage to trees that are planted at individual grave
sites. The Board felt it was not their responsibility. Workshop - Supervisor
Martin scheduled a workshop meeting for May 18th at 5:00 pm. Mr. Barzack will
be bringing a proposal on AFLAC Benefits,. They will also discuss the 457
agreement, and the cemetery agreement.
Annual Meeting- Supervisor Martin reported that it was the Townships turn to
host the annual meeting as stipulated by the 425 agreement. It was purposed
that the meeting be held on Thursday May 27th at 7:00 pm. She will contact the
City for their agreement, and then send out invitations.
Introduction of New Deputy Clerk - Clerk Zaban introduced Jennifer Hartley as
the new Deputy Clerk for the Township.
MEETING REVIEW
Supervisor Martin will send Mr. Barkham a letter of approval with the
conditions indicated. She will advise Mr. Tabor to move forward with obtaining
bids on the building. Supervisor Martin will also forward a letter to Mr.
Robataille outlining the townships stipulations for him to retain the pigs for
9 weeks. She will also be forwarding a letter to Kanuninga & Roodvoets. Mr.
Taschner will move forward with the purchase of a lawn mower for the cemetery.
Clerk Zaban will take the issue of paving Barry road to the Transportation
Committee.
Treasurer Fink expressed concern about the cemetery information, and when they
are going to get something set up at the Township to address the issue.
Everyone was directed to put all the information they receive regarding the
cemetery into the cemetery notebook and Clerk Zaban will address the
information.
Supervisor Martin read a letter from Representative Dianne Byrum inviting the
Board to the unveiling of the James M. Pelton Firefighters Memorial Highway at
the Mason Fire Station on may 14, 2004 at 6:00 pm.
Trustee Kraft requested that the topic of a board policy regarding meeting
minutes be added to the agenda of the workshop meeting.
ADJOURN
Trustee Wright made a motion to adjourn supported by Trustee Kraft and passed
unanimously. Meeting adjourned at 9:40 pm
JUNE 1, 2004
CALL TO ORDER
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order at 7:33 pm, and reviewed
the agenda.
PLEDGE
ROLL CALL
Trustee Daniel Kraft, Treasurer Nancy Fink, Supervisor Mickey Martin, Clerk
Steven Zaban, Trustee Martin Wright
CONSENT AGENDA
Minutes of 5/4/04 meeting:
Treasurer Fink stated that the on page 2, paragraph 10, change the word
“interrupted” to interpreted.
Minutes of 5/18/04 meeting:
Treasurer Fink indicated that on page 2, under the 457 Plan, the second line,
changed “deferred benefit plan” to deferred compensation plan, and strike “like
a 401K.” Also under the last sentence change the word “incorrectly” to
correctly.
May Activity Report
Treasurer’s Report:
Treasurer Fink reported that they had provided the Board members with a
schedule of accounts. It represents the year-end synopsis of the accounts. At
the present time she is lacking the interest component on the accounts.
Trustee Kraft asked for an explanation on the current tax account. Treasurer
Fink reported that the NOW account generates some interest, however the MMA
generates a little higher interest. The current practice is to initially put
the tax payments into the MMA account, then transfer funds to the NOW account
when needed.
Accounts Paid / Payable
Treasurer Fink reported there should be no further expenses for American
Rentals after April. Also Clerk Zaban had prepared a different Payroll Report
which provided a breakdown of hours worked by department.
Trustee Kraft questioned the large expense to Northern Tool on the cemetery
fund. Clerk Zaban indicated it was for the cement mixer. Trustee Kraft asked
what time period the payment for Murphy, Brenton & Spagnuolo PC covered.
Supervisor Martin reported it was for services from January 2004 to April 2004.
Building Inspector
No questions at this time.
Trustee Kraft made a motion to accept the Consent Agenda with the corrections
stated. Motion supported by Clerk Zaban and passed unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Roger Philips, 5350 Barton Rd, stated that the Township had received some
letters that included accusations regarding the Township. He wanted to know if
the Township was going to respond to the accusations.
Trustee Kraft asked Mr. Philips which public issues he wanted a response. Mr.
Phillips indicated all of the issues and accusations cited in the letter.
Supervisor Martin indicated they were going to respond when the attorney
completes his review.
Frans Wilbrink, 4701 Zimmer Rd, questioned the termination of the Office
Manager. Supervisor Martin advised him that it was a personnel issue and
thanked him for his comment.
Billie Jo O’Berry, Candidate for Judge 55th District Court. Advised that she is
seeking the position vacated by Judge Brennan, and provided information about
her candidacy.
NEW BUSINESS
Riding Area Use Permit
Supervisor Martin reported that a special use permit is already in place for
the riding arena. The resident has written the Board and advised that he would
like to have riding competition at the location twice a month. They would start
at approximately 10 am, and end around 6 pm. They have also installed permanent
restrooms within the indoor riding arena.
Trustee Kraft stated that as long as they comply with the eight items listed in
8.02a he did not see a problem. Supervisor Martin reported that the building
inspector had been out to the location to assess the sound system. He felt that
it complied with the ordinance restrictions.
Mr. VanCamp advised the Board that the largest number of competitors would be
between 40 or 50 individuals, and that the largest number of trailers he would
expect is 27.
Trustee Wright made a motion to approve the request for the riding arena per
the stipulations under Ordinance 8.02 CC 3, subsections b and g. Motion
supported by Clerk Zaban and passed unanimously.
Planning Commission Meeting Minutes 5/18/04
Trustee Kraft reported that the Planning Commission received no public comments
at any of their hearings on the items listed. Supervisor Martin expressed
concern over the portion of the revision that broke the buildings down by size.
She indicated by changing the language as indicated it would create numerous
non-conforming buildings. Trustee Kraft indicated they would grandfather all
current buildings. Supervisor Martin agreed they would be grandfather in but
they would still be nonconforming, which would not allow any modifications to
the buildings. She requested that the Planning Commission take a look at some
of the parcels that this change would affect.
Mr. LaMore suggested that the Board reject the revision, and refer it back to
the Planning Commission for further review. Supervisor Martin advised that the
planning Commission is not asking for the board approval of the changes this
evening, so she requested that Mr. LaMore take their concerns back to the
Planning commission for further review.
Text Amendment, Zoning Ordinance - RE Zone on Grand River
Mr. LaMore advised that the revision would allow only those RE zones, which
have frontage along Grand River Ave, to use 20 percent of their total site for
retail sales. The intent is not to turn these sites into commercial sites, but
to allow limited commercial usage. .
Mr. LaMore reported that the Planning commission did have a public hearing on
this matter, and there was no negative response.
Trustee Kraft made a motion to approve the revision to Rural Estates District,
as set forth in the letter from McKenna and Associates dated May 20th 2003.
Motion was supported by Trustee Wright and passed unanimously.
Zoning Ordinance Revision - Mixed Use Overlay District
Mr. LaMore reported that the Mixed Use Overlay District only pertained to the
portion of Grand River avenue east of the City of Williamston. He indicated its
intent was to encourage innovation and mixed use development.
Trustee Wright indicated that a number of individuals came to the information
meeting regarding this issue, and they received positive comments. Trustee
Wight felt it would be a long time before the board saw any significant changes
in that area, but it gives people options.
Trustee Wright also felt something like this could work on the west sided of
the district in the future.
Trustee Kraft made a motion to adopt the MU, Mixed Use Overlay District and
incorporate it into the Township Zoning Ordinance. Motion supported by Trustee
Wright and passed unanimously.
Zoning Ordinance Revision - Special Land Use Permit
Mr. LaMore reviewed the information provided to the Board regarding the changes
to Zoning Ordinance 27.02 sub-section D.10 Modification to Approved Site Plans.
The language change would allow the building official to approve minor changes.
Also a change to 27.03 to allow administration to call for a Public Hearing.
The intent is to facilitate a speedy review for the applicants.
Supervisor Martin indicated that the legal counsel had brought forward one
modification. He would like to see the following under “Modifications Not
Deemed ‘Minor’” ‘if the modifications are not deemed minor by the Building
Official, or if the Building Official finds in the Building Officials sole
discretion and professional opinion that there are characteristics of the site
plan that warrant Planning Commission review.
Trustee Wright made a motion to approve the text revision to stream line the
review process, 27.03 and 27.02 as outlined by McKenna and Associates in the
February 26,2004 letter, as well as incorporation the wording “in the Building
Officials sole discretion and professional opinion. Motion supported by Trustee
Kraft and passes unanimously.
Zoning Ordinance Revision - Site Plan Approval
Trustee Wright reported that the Board needs to provide the planning Commission
with the site plan for the Cemetery project, along with a letter outlining why
we feel that a special use permit is not necessary.
Cemetery - Building Proposals
Trustee Wright indicated that the Planning Commission meets in two weeks. Some
individuals have indicated that they want to look at something more substantial
that a pole building. Supervisor Martin advised that she will discuss it with
cemetery committee. Some have suggested a masonry building rather than a pole
building.
Complaints
Nothing this evening.
PC Appointment
Supervisor Martin advised that in their packets this evening was a letter from
Cindy Davis stating her interest in a position on the planning commission.
Supervisor Martin also reminded the Board of the previous letter from Mr.
Wilbrink regarding his interest.
Supervisor Martin recommended Cindy Davis for the position of the Planning
Commission. She indicated that her decision was based on the fact that Mr.
Wilbrink has submitted a petition to run for trustee in November. This
appointment will fulfill Trustee Kraft’s appointment through 2004.
Supervisor Martin made a motion to appoint Cindy Davis to the Planning
Commission to fulfill the vacancy left my Trustee Draft, and to fulfill it
through his remaining term of appointment. Motion supported by Trustee Wright
and passed unanimously.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Road Improvements
Supervisor Martin asked Clerk Zaban for the Road Commission’s recommendations.
He indicated that they are recommending that the Township not pave any gravel
roads, that they resurface Sunrise Drive and Rodeo Trail, an that they Crack
Fill five streets which are Maple Shade, Red Maple, Congdon, Oliver and
Wilfors.
Clerk Zaban Reported that the Transportation Committee does not feel there is
enough traffic volume on Barry Road between Lounsbury and Williamston to
warrant paving.
Trustee Wright made a motion to follow the recommendations as indicated by the
Transportation Committee. Motion was supported by Clerk Zaban and passed
unanimously.
M43 Corridor Overlay Zone Approval of Zoning
Supervisor Martin reported that a text amendment was approved last year by the
Board regarding the M43 Access Management District, however it was never
published. It was recommended by consultant Chris Doozan that they reiterate
their approval, then publish the text amendment as required.
Clerk Zaban made a motion to include the proposed text amendment for an M43
Access Management District as an overlay to Article 25A of the Zoning
ordinance. Motion supported by Trustee Wright. Motion passed unanimously.
REPORTS
Annual Joint Meeting
Supervisor Martin reported that the annual meeting went well. They had
representatives present from Locke, Leroy and Wheatfield Townships, along with
representatives from the City of Williamston, NIESA and the Library Board.
Approximately 25 to 30 people.
Supervisor Martin offered to mediate a meeting between NIESA and the City of
Williamston regarding the current Williamston Fire Station, so NIESA can move
forward with their plans.
Library
Supervisor Martin advised that the library committee is still looking into the
wood building.
NIESA
Clerk Zaban advised that NIESA received the signed agreement from the City of
Williamston’s DDA along with a check for $7,500.
Parks
Treasurer Fink indicated that the City of Williamston offered their old park
benches to the Township for used in the park.
Other
Workshop
The next workshop is scheduled for June 15,2004 at 5:00 PM
PDR’s
Supervisor Martin reported that there is another way to obtain a pool of money
to have for matching grants. The more farmers that enter into it the stronger
the Township’s position. She will talk with some of the local farmers.
Meridian
Supervisor Martin attended the Meridian Township visioning meeting last
Tuesday. She indicated that Meridian is trying to set up a joint meeting of
planning commissions.
MDOT
Supervisor Martin reported that MDOT has not done the study on Zimmer Rd and
Grand River as of this date.
NEWSLETTER
Supervisor Martin reported it will be going out next month. If anyone wants
something in the newsletter let her know by Tuesday the 15th.
HOURS OF OPERATION
Supervisor Martin recommended that the Township cut back for the summer and not
be open on Monday. We have logged the calls and people, and found very little,
if any business Mon. from 8:am to 2:00p.m.
Supervisor martin made a motion to close the township office on Mondays
effective June 14th, 2004 and we will revisit the issue at the September
meeting. Motion supported by trustee Wright and passed unanimously.
MEETING REVIEW
Supervisor martin reviewed the high points of meeting.
ADJOURN
Trustee Wright made a motion to adjourn the meeting, supported by treasurer
fink and passed unanimously. Meeting adjourned at 10:05pm.
JULY 5, 2004
CALL TO ORDER
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order at 7:30 pm and reviewed
the agenda.
Supervisor Martin advised the Board that she would like to have the attorney
letter responding to recent allegations added to the agenda under unfinished
business with the Board members permission.
Trustee Wright made a motion to waive attorney client privilege and put the
letter on the agenda under unfinished business. Trustee Kraft seconded the
motion with the clarification that this letter would address the issues of
expanding the board, moving the money, the assessors salary raise for 9 percent
compared to 1.5 percent for the staff, and other miscellaneous charges and it
passed unanimously.
PLEDGE
ROLL CALL
trustee Kraft, Trustee Wright, Treasurer Fink, Supervisor Martin, Clerk Zaban.
CONSENT AGENDA
Minutes of 6/1/04 meeting:
No comment.
Minutes of 6/15/04 meeting.
No Comment
June Activity Report
Treasurer’s Report:
Treasurer Fink reported that there was no Treasurer’s report at this time.
Accounts Paid / Payable:
No comments at this time
Building Inspector
No comment
Trustee Kraft made a motion to approve the Consent Agenda as written. Trustee
Wright seconded the motion and it passed unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS:
Bob Pease, 3795 Zimmer Rd. – Commented that the public could not hear the
discussion.
Frans Wilbrink, 4701 Zimmer – Requested clarification of what the attorney
letter would cover. Supervisor Martin advised that it would respond to the
allegations against the Township.
Roger Phillip, 5350 Barton Road. – Read a letter regarding the allegations
against the Township.
Trustee Kraft advised Mr. Phillip that the first three allegations would be
discussed later in the meeting; the rest of
the items would have to be pursued and addressed at a later date.
Teresa Smith, no address provided – Indicated she was the employee released by
the Board and requested to know
the personnel issue. Supervisor Martin advised that the Board could not comment
on personnel issues.
Velma Oesterle, 1931 Epley Road – Provided public comment on the issues
presented.
Frans Wilbrink, 4701 Zimmer Rd – Advised that in the last 4 years he has
requested to be appointed to various positions within the Township, and has not
been appointed. He wants to help, not fight with the Board.
NEW BUSINESS
Ingham County Sheriffs Office
Supervisor Martin advised that the Ingham County Sheriff’s Department has a
representative, Deputy Michael DeBruin.
Deputy DeBruin reported that the county was unable to attend the joint meeting.
It was his understanding they wanted to discuss emergency planning. He
recommended that if they have any questions that they contact Sgt Michael
Perez, he is responsible for County’s emergency plan and assist other
organizations. Treasurer Fink indicated she would follow up with Sgt Perez.
Clerk Zaban asked Deputy DeBruin if the County had any involvement with the
speed limits set on the roadways. Deputy DeBruin reported that they can make
suggestions, however the ultimate decision is with the Michigan State Police.
Millennium Cable
Supervisor Martin reported that she received a letter from Attorney Daniel
Pulter of Loomis, Ewert, Parsley, Davis & Gotting. He is representing the
original developer of Williamstown Estates, and was requested to bring a
complaint to their attention regarding Millennium Cable. He indicated that they
failed to install cable facilities to serve the residents at the rear of the
development. He went on to state that the Township’s Franchise Agreement with
Millennium under Article IV (A) that they have to make cable service available
to every dwelling in an area that meets a minimum density requirement. At this
time Millennium is stating they will provide cable for a fee. They want the
Board to consider terminating their agreement with Millennium and see an
alternative provider.
Supervisor Martin reported that Williamston Estates was built in three phases.
Cable was installed in the first two phases but not the third.
Attorney Pulter was present and expressed his interpretation of the agreement /
contract with Millennium. He indicated that Millennium took over the original
contract from Horizon. He felt there were two issues. One was a policy issue do
you allow a service provider to put service in two thirds of the development,
then charge for the last third. Attorney Pulter stated that the developer had
an agreement with Horizon to put cable in to the entire development. He does
not feel that the Township should allow Millennium to charge for the
installation in the last third of the development. He felt the second concern
was a contractual issue, because there is language that is not defined and
there is ambiguity in the contract. They want the Board to address the issue
and require Millennium to provide the cable service at no charge to the
developer.
Supervisor Martin advised that the Township does not have copies of the
agreements between developers and the providers. Mr. Pulter advised that he
could provide the information they have which indicates the service that
Horizon agreed to perform.
Supervisor Martin reported that the Township received a letter from Millennium
Digital today, and their representative Rick Clark is present. There is also a
representative from the Townships Cable Commission.
Mr. Clark referred to his June 30th letter. He indicated that the cable service
is required to make cable service available to each “dwelling” not lot. He
discussed with the Board how their trunking system worked, and how they
computed minimum density.
Norma Johnston was present from the Cable Commission to obtain information
regarding this issue.
Supervisor Martin recommended that this issue be referred over to the Cable
Commission for their review and recommendations. The Board members agreed.
Planning Commission Meeting Minutes 6/15/04
No comment. Planning Commission Chairperson LaMore is present at the meeting.
He advised that the Planning Commission had a number of recommendations for the
Board.
Zoning Text Amendment Antique Mall Sec 19.02. 4.01C8
Mr. LaMore referenced a letter from McKenna Associates Inc, dated June 9, 2004.
The Commission is
recommending that the Board adopt the language changes as indicated in the
letter. Treasurer Fink asked why they chose 15,000 square feet. Mr. LaMore
advised that anything larger than that would require a sprinkler system.
Trustee Kraft made a motion to approve the text amendments referenced in the
June 9, 2004 letter from McKenna Associates under article 1.00, Section 19.02
(B), and Section 4.01(C)(8). Trustee Wright seconded the motion, which passed
unanimously.
Zoning Text Amendment bona fide farm Se 1.03. 18.02 A 13
Mr. LaMore indicated that this amendment more clearly defines “bona fide farm.”
It also clarifies the use of the second residential building.
Ruth Templeton, 1435 Epley Rd – She asked how many farmers the Township has
that this would apply to.
Supervisor Martin indicated approximately 3. Supervisor Martin indicated that
the intent was to provide the bona fide farmer with options. Mrs. Templeton
felt that this was unnecessary change and not needed.
Trustee Kraft made a motion to approve the text amendment recommended by the
Planning Commission to section 18.02(A)(13) as indicated in the McKenna
Associates letter dated May 12, 2004. Trustee Wright seconded the motion and it
passed unanimously.
Zoning Text Amendment detached accessory Sec 2.03
Mr. LaMore indicated that they are recommending a change in the language
regarding detached accessory buildings. The Planning Commission did review the
categories as requested by the Board, and they have consolidated some of
the categories.
Trustee Wright made a motion to approve the text amendments as indicated in the
McKenna Associates letter dated June 21, 2004, under Section 2.03C(1)(b).
Trustee Kraft seconded the motion and it passed unanimously.
Zoning Text Amendment Open Space Option Sec 8.03
Mr. LaMore reported that the Planning Commission has reviewed the Open Space
Preservation Option, and made a
few minor changes. Supervisor Martin reported that the change in AG-SF to one
unit per 6.66 acres was necessary
for the mathematics to work out.
Mr. Lamar reported that it does not change the site plan procedures that would
be used, however it does change the density and road frontage.
Supervisor Martin made a motion to approve the text amendment to the Open Space
Preservation Option; sub-section C, item 2, Applicability; Sub-section C, item
4, Permitted Density and the change to 6.66; Sub-section C, item 8, Roads and
Driveways; Section 18.02, subsection E, item 1, Maximum Number of Lot Splits as
recommended by McKenna Associates in their letter of April 20, 2004. Clerk
Zaban seconded the motion and it passed unanimously.
Blake Mossholder Special Use Permit
Mr. LaMore indicated that this issue was tabled in January of 2004 waiting for
information from the applicant. They are recommending that his application be
denied at this time because they have not received the necessary information
they need to move forward, and for inactivity on the applicants part. They are
recommending the denial of the special use permit.
Supervisor Martin reported that they did hear from Mr. Mossholder’s legal
counsel today, and he requested an extension for his client.
Trustee Wright recommended that this issue be moved back to the Planning
Commission, and advise the applicant
that they have a deadline to provide their information by the next Planning
Commission meeting.
Trustee Kraft made a motion to inform the applicant on Thursday that he has
until August 3rd to provide a completed site plan to the Planning Commission,
and the Township Board will table the issue until its August meeting. If the
applicant has not provided the necessary information the Township Board will
address the issue at the August meeting. Trustee Wright seconded the motion and
it passed unanimously.
Cemetery Accessory Building
Conrad Taschner, Chairperson of the Cemetery Board, 1787 Harvey Drive- He
reported that the Cemetery Board is requesting permission to start building
their storage building at Summit Cemetery. He indicated they are now 60 days
behind schedule, and have $80,000 in equipment unprotected. They would like to
get started by August.
He advised they are purposing a 36 x 48 steel building, with a stone front.
There will be landscaping around the building. The builder was present and
discussed several options with the Board for the front of the building, and the
roof. They also discussed the additional cost involved. Public comment was in
support of the building.
Trustee Kraft made a motion recommending that the Cemetery Board be allowed to
build a building at Summit Cemetery as specified with a 2 foot over hang, and
6/12 pitch roof, and give the Cemetery Board the authority to make the decision
regarding the other exterior aspects. Trustee Wright second the motion and it
passed unanimously.
Complaints
None at this time.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Attorney Letter
The Township Board waived their attorney client privilege and Supervisor Martin
read the attorney letter regarding the various allegations against the
Williamstown Township Board. Trustee Kraft also requested that copies of the
letter be made available for the public. The letter from the Attorney indicated
that the allegations against the Township officials that were submitted to him
were unfounded.
Treasurer Fink read the letter that she forwarded to the attorney regarding her
actions concerning the allegations.
The allegations were discussed with various members of the public that were in
attendance at the meeting.
REPORTS
Library
Supervisor Martin reported that the appraisal for the Wood Building had been
received and it came in at $275,000, which is not acceptable to the owner.
NIESA
Clerk Zaban reported that NIESA is looking for volunteers to help them move
forward with their strategic planning for NIESA. They are looking at building a
new fire station, and they had a couple of presentations regarding buildings.
They are also considering building a residence on the vacant lot for the
ambulance for temporary housing to try and alleviate the space problem until a
new station can be built. The house would be sold at a later date.
NIESA has also received a petition for a union to represent the six full time
personnel. There is a hearing scheduled for July 16th.
Parks
Nothing at this time.
Other:
Workshop
The next workshop meeting in on July 20th at 5:00 pm. Board of Review is at 7:
00 pm and the Planning Commission at 7:30pm.
Signs
Trustee Wright reported that he had obtained information on the interior and
exterior signs. He would like to move forward and order the signs.
Supervisor Martin made a motion to purchase the signs for the building as
recommended by Trustee Wright. Trustee Kraft seconded the motion and it passed
unanimously.
MEETING REVIEW
Clerk Zaban will be publishing the various text amendments approved this
evening. The Cable Commission will review the complaint concerning Millennium
Digital and Williamstown Estates, and the Cemetery Board will move forward with
the construction of their building.
ADJOURN
Clerk Zaban made a motion to adjourn the meeting at 10:56 pm. Trustee Wright
seconded the motion, which passed unanimously.
______________________________________
      _____________________________________
Supervisor Mickey Martin                         Clerk Steve Zaban
AUGUST 16, 2004
CALL TO ORDER
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order at 7:30 p.m. and reviewed
the agenda. The Treasurer’s report was deleted from the agenda.
PLEDGE
ROLL CALL
Trustee Daniel Kraft, Trustee Martin Wright, Treasurer Nancy Fink, Supervisor
Mickey Martin, Clerk Steven Zaban, Recording Secretary Cindy Davis.
CONSENT AGENDA:
Minutes of 7/6/04 meeting:
Date of meeting changed from July 6 to July 5.
Minutes of 7/20/04 meeting:
Page Three; bullet four changed Martin to Wright.
July Activity Report:
No questions.
Treasurer’s Report:
No report.
Accounts Paid/Payable:
No questions.
Payroll:
No questions.
Building Inspector:
No questions.
Trustee Wright made a motion to accept the Consent Agenda with the corrections
stated. Motion supported by Clerk Zaban and passed unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS
George J. Durak, 116 Feldspar Drive, read a letter requesting the Board to
revisit the issue of increasing the number of trustees by two members and to
place it on the November 2 ballot. Supervisor Martin tabled a discussion
regarding this item during public comment, but placed it on the agenda under
Unfinished Business to be further discussed.
Katie Lo, 290 E Sherwood Rd., supported the discussion of additional trustees.
Ms. Lo also wanted to know why there was not a treasurer’s report. Treasurer
Fink responded by indicating that there has been a change in staffing and
because of training and summer taxes, a treasurer’s report was not prepared,
but would have one prepared for the next board meeting.
Franz Wilbrink, 4701 Zimmer Road, it was brought to his attention that a
violation had occurred at the primary election. Specifically, there were
workers that were directly related to people on the ballot, which is a
violation. Supervisor Martin thanked Mr. Wilbrink for bringing this to the
Board’s attention. It was brought to Supervisor Martin’s attention, after the
election, that a violation may have occurred. However, past precedence, as well
as direction from the county level, did not alert us of any violation and/or
that the workers hired were ineligible. As when any error is brought to the
Board’s attention, action will be taken to correct the error in the future.
Clerk Zaban reviewed Election Day and noted that the County complimented our
Township for having so many young adult workers.
Al LeBlanc, 4720 Jadestone Drive. During a May meeting where there were other
townships and NIESA in attendance, NIESA reported they were hoping to have more
defibrillators available throughout the area and would be interested in holding
CPR training. Mr. LeBlanc, through the Pebblebrook Association, has three
people so far that are interested in CPR training. Mr. LeBlanc would like to
get others interested in this training and then have NIESA conduct the
training. Supervisor Martin said the Township could announce the training in
the next Township newsletter and could host the training at the Township hall.
NEW BUSINESS
Planning Commission Minutes 7/20/04:
Bob Hayes has been appointed chair of the Planning Commission.
Bob Hayes reported that the Planning Commission held a public meeting and
deliberated on the special land use permit and site plan for Williamston Free
Methodist Church. There was no opposition for either the special land use
permit or the site plan. There were many residents in attendance to support the
expansion. Attendance at the church has increased which is the main reason for
expansion. The Planning Commission is recommending the Board approve both the
site plan and the special land use permit request.
Site plan recommendations by McKenna for Williamston Free Methodist Church have
all been met. The site plan is just for the church use. They will not operate a
school from the location.
Trustee Kraft made a motion to approve the site plan as revised on 7/21/04.
Motion was supported by Trustee Wright and passed unanimously.
Williamston Free Methodist Church Special Land Use Permit: Supervisor Martin
asked if there were any questions regarding the special land use permit. There
were none.
Trustee Kraft made a motion to approve the special land use permit. Motion was
supported by Trustee Wright and passed unanimously.
Planning Chair Bob Hayes reviewed Springbrook Estates Subdivision Preliminary
Plat approval. He indicated that McKenna who provided some conditions had
reviewed a new revised tentative preliminary plat. The Planning Commission
agrees with the conditions. Chair Hayes was not sure if all conditions have
been met, except for the wetland permit. Supervisor Martin said condition one
and five are satisfied, but two, three and four still have to be put on the
site plan.
Chair Hayes indicated that Mr. Hilty would place sidewalks on both sides of the
street as condition five indicates. Condition three regarding streets and
access was clarified. There is no agreement to move the road from the
Timmerman’s. However, to the degree they can they will move the road more to
the north to give Timmerman’s more room.
The Planning Commission unanimously passed a motion to recommend tentative
preliminary plat approval subject to the conditions. Supervisor Martin asked if
there were any questions? Trustee Kraft asked for further clarification
regarding the sidewalks in particular Lots 23-26. Mr. Hilty provided a new plan
where he highlighted in green where sidewalks would be for easier viewing.
Treasurer Fink questioned the location of the road in relation to the
Timmerman’s. The road commission governs the road placement. However, Mr. Hilty
has placed a note on the drawings.
Mr. Hilty indicated that the plans have gone through several revisions, but he
is pleased with how it has turned out. Supervisor Martin agreed and is also
pleased with the open space.
Trustee Wright made a motion to approve the tentative preliminary plat approval
with conditions per McKenna’s letter dated 7/14/04 and the Township must have
approval for a wetland permit. Motion was supported by Clerk Zaban and
unanimously approved.
Treasurer Fink asked that in the future the wetland application be approved
before a preliminary plat approval is requested. Supervisor Martin said that in
the future our consultant will look at the sequence of permits.
Mr. Timmerman asked if the entrance to this subdivision would extend down the
road 30 feet or so as it does across the street. Trustee Wright said that would
be dependent upon the road commission specifications. Mr. Timmerman asked if it
could be cut down, he would be appreciative. Treasurer Fink suggested Mr.
Timmerman contact the road commission regarding that request.
Trustee Kraft asked to have the name changed for Woodbury Road. He acknowledged
that the minutes indicate it has to stay that way for now, but for the minutes
he would like it recorded that the Woodbury Road name is not approved by the
Board. Mr. Hilty responded that Woodbury Road is the platted name, but he is
going to try and change it.
Supervisor Martin also indicated that she will work with Mr. Hilty and the City
regarding Hornbeam. Supervisor Martin will forward the site plan to the city.
Mr. Hilty needs to go to the city next for sewer and water approval.
Cemetery:
Connie Taschner, 1787 Harvey Dr., Chair of the Cemetery Committee, reported
that the building has begun and is going along at a good pace. The roof should
be on by the end of the week; cement next week; the whole project should be
completed within two weeks. He asked if there were any questions.
Trustee Kraft asked if the footprints had stayed the same? He questioned the
pitch of the roof and the overhang. Mr. Tashner said they had stayed the same.
The contractor has been very good. The only change had been drain run off.
Mr. Taschner indicated that the landscape would be done later. Treasurer Fink
said they should think about the deer when they decide on the landscape. There
are some trees that are better to plant so deer will not eat them.
Clerk Zaban reported that the next project would be to look at cost of plots.
The prices have not been changed since the 70s. Mr. Taschner is taking a survey
of cemeteries in the area.
  Complaints:
423 E Grand River. No discussion. Representatives not present.
Election Pay:
Supervisor Martin asked that Clerk Zaban research other townships rate of pay
for election workers and make a recommendation regarding pay for election
workers. There has been no increase in some time and it needs to be re-
evaluated.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Millennium Cable:
Presently cable is not available in Phase 2 (Northwest section) of Williamston
Estates. The developer and Millennium Digital Media have different opinions on
who should absorb the cost of extending cable within this subdivision. The
developer wants the cable company to pay the entire cost of extending the
cable. They have asked the board to review this issue. The franchise agreement
with Millennium (formerly Horizon Cablevision) specifies “…a minimum density of
20 dwelling units per ‘street’ mile, as measured from the existing trunk
system.” There are only six houses from the existing trunk system. Four of
those six are being served. This falls short of the 20 dwelling minimum.
Therefore, the commission voted unanimously to support Millennium Digital
Media’s position in which the company offered to pay approximately one half of
the installation cost of expanding the cable.
Supervisor Martin made a motion to accept the cable commissions report and
their findings and to support their recommendations. The motion was supported
by Trustee Wright and pass unanimously.
A copy of this motion will be forwarded to the legal firm representing the
developers.
Blake Mossholder:
The board has tabled this Special Use Permit request for one month. No plans
have been brought in, however his attorney and a planning company are drafting
up plans. It is Chris Doozan’s recommendation that the board table for one
month. There was some discussion regarding not tabling this request for one
month and the steps Mr. Mossholder would have to take to bring forth a new
request.
Trustee Wright made a motion to table Blake Mossholder’s Special Use Permit and
Site Plan request for one month with a deadline for plans to be submitted by
September 7, 2004. The motion was supported by Clerk Zaban and pass
unanimously.
Mr. Mossholder will be sent a letter of decision.
Unfinished Business –Discussion regarding two more trustees:
Supervisor Martin reviewed the requirement for the addition of two trustees to
the board. Public Act 116 allows township voters to increase trustee members by
two. It has two conditions: The township must have over 3000 voters and/or 5000
in population. The Township does not have a population of over 5000, but they
do have over 3000 voters. Therefore, this question can go on a ballot. The
Board has until August 24 to have wording drafted and submitted to the county.
If it is placed on the ballot then it would go to a vote this November 2004 and
the election of the trustees would be in two years. The last time language was
submitted it was rejected by the county because it was not approved by the
board. The board did not see the language and/or pass a motion to place it on
the ballot.
There was public comment regarding having a public hearing before placing it on
the ballot. There was some discussion that this had already been done at the
annual meeting two years ago. In addition, it was publicized and there is an
affidavit on file of the one person who voted on the issue. Other discussion
included the cost of printing the ballots and the cost of additional trustee
stipends. Others questioned the townships ability to bring forth two more
candidates to be considered. For example, this primary had two vacant positions
and only three candidates ran; only one was a new candidate. Clerk Zaban added
that we need residents to step forward and volunteer for other committees and
we can’t seem to get interest in committees either, so what would happen if
nobody ran?
George Durak, 116 Feldspar Dr., agreed that resident turnout at meetings,
including the annual meeting is low, but the citizens should have the right to
vote and putting this issue on the ballot would do that. “It would be the best
job of getting the vote out if it were on the ballot,” stated Mr. Durak.
There was consensus that this should be placed on the ballot and public forums
should be held regarding the issue. A workshop meeting was scheduled for
Wednesday, August 19, to draft the language to be reviewed by legal counsel for
submission on or before August 24.
Treasurer Fink made a motion to put language on the ballot to add two trustees
to the Williamstown Township Board of Directors. The motion was supported by
Clerk Zaban and passed with one no vote from Trustee Kraft.
REPORTS
Library:
No Report.
NIESA:
No Report.
Parks:
Treasurer Fink reported that a bulletin board kiosk is up. Ordinances are
posted and they are working on putting other displays up. For example, they
have a bird project. The committee would still like to see a service
organization start a project. A consultant is doing a survey to make
recommendations for the park such as putting up beaver signs. The committee
would like to do more work on the dog area. There has also been some nuisance
weeds spotted that will need to be taken care of.
Connie Taschner, 1787 Harvey Dr., asked if the road commission would be dumping
soil at the park again because the soccer fields are still very uneven. In
fact, it is difficult to mow. No. That was a previous contract that has expired
and the Township has not been approached again. Supervisor Martin indicated
that the soccer fields are an ongoing project that still needs work.
Other public comment regarding the park included putting language on the ballot
for park funding and road signs announcing the park and its entrance.
Supervisor Martin will ask the road commission about possible signs.
Other:
A proposal from the Ingham County Road Commission has been received for
resurfacing of Sunrise and Rodeo Trail. It came in at approximately $57,000,
which is lower than the projected $58.000. The Township funds will be matched
by the County.
Supervisor Martin attended a legislative conference. It was excellent. The
conference focused on the impact of state government on local townships. The
biggest topic was revenue sharing and the decrease townships will be getting.
Another big issue, one of Governor Granholm’s number one issues, was the water
in Michigan and groundwater contamination. Steve Chester was there, Director of
DEQ, and he spoke about the diversion of water from Michigan and specifically
bottling water and regulating it. A new Act coming up will address water issues
and will give the townships something to cite for local issues.
The meeting was reviewed by Supervisor Martin.
Clerk Zaban made a motion to adjourn the meeting. The motion was supported by
Trustee Wright and passed unanimously.
The meeting adjourned at 10:22 p.m.
Steve Zaban, Williamstown Township Clerk
SEPTEMBER 7, 2004
CALL TO ORDER
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order at 7:30 p.m. and reviewed
the agenda. There were no changes to the agenda.
PLEDGE
ROLL CALL
Trustee Daniel Kraft, Trustee Martin Wright, Treasurer Nancy Fink, Supervisor
Mickey Martin, Clerk Steven Zaban, Recording Secretary Cindy Davis.
CONSENT AGENDA:
Minutes of 8/16/04 meeting:
No changes.
Minutes of 8/18/04 meeting:
No changes.
August Activity Report:
No questions.
Treasurer’s Report:
Trustee Kraft asked when May, June and July reports would be available.
Treasurer Fink indicated that reconciliation is almost completed and property
tax deadlines will soon be passed. When reconciled and property taxes have
passed, reports will be ready. Treasurer Fink is considering quarterly reports.
Accounts Paid/Payable:
Trustee Kraft asked what Williamston Mini Storage was for. Supervisor Martin
indicated it is material kept in storage from the remodeling. Most has been
moved from storage and what is remaining will be moved to the new cemetery
building when finished.
Trustee Kraft asked who has access to the Platinum Plus for Business and what
are the procedures for making purchases. Supervisor Martin reviewed the process
and indicated that most of the recent purchases were for landscaping.
Payroll:
No questions.
Building Inspector:
No questions.
Supervisor Martin made a motion to accept the Consent Agenda. Motion supported
by Clerk Zaban and passed unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin welcomed a local scout working towards a badge to the
meeting.
Billie Jo O’Berry, candidate 55th district court, reviewed the position of a
district court judge. Ms. O’Berry presented her qualifications for district
court judge. She is endorsed by many judges and is an adjunct instructor at
Cooley Law School
Rosemary Philip, 5350 Barton Road. Read letter of resignation as planning
commission assistant.
NEW BUSINESS
Planning Commission Minutes 8/17/04:
Bob Hayes, Planning Commission Chair, summarized 8/17/04 meeting. Deliberation
for Stuwe rezoning request was tabled until the September meeting. Two public
hearings were held: Dexter request for rezoning from AG-C to AG-SF and Hilty
request for rezoning of the Keck property. The planning commission held a
conversation with Williamston Floral regarding their site and the possibilities
of moving forward with a site plan for a banquet hall. The planning commission
approved Windybrook Subdivision final plat for the board’s consideration with
conditions. Mr. Hayes indicated that all the conditions have been met except
for the association covenants and the surety bond for landscaping. The planning
commission questioned if the antiques mall had submitted any thing regarding
the additional information the planning commission requested. It was suggested
that Mr. Doozan send them a letter reminding them to submit the additional
information.
Supervisor Martin indicated the Windybrook surety bond had been received. She
said the antiques mall had called and acknowledged receiving Mr. Doozan’s
letter. They hope to submit the information within two weeks. The deadline
would have been today, 9/7/04.
Treasurer Fink questioned a reference regarding the soil of the Dexter land.
Would the entire site need above ground drain fields? Mr. Hayes said there
might be some spots far back in the property that will perk, but the majority
would need above ground drain fields.
Trustee Kraft questioned a reference regarding Daune Powell and her opposition
to the rezoning. Mr. Hayes indicated that Mrs. Powell’s call to the office may
have been Mr. Dexter’s conversation.
Windybrook Subdivision Final Plat Approval: Mr. Hayes indicated that the
information that the Board has was agreed to by the planning commission with
little discussion. There was a discussion about trees along the road. A
Forsberg representative reviewed the procedures for recording the association.
Trustee Kraft made a motion to approve the final plat approval for Windybrook
Subdivision subject to the following conditions that they submit evidence to
the Township that the Subdivision covenants have been recorded and the
Association has been created. Motion was supported by Trustee Wright and passed
unanimously.
Treasurer Fink commented that there appears to be a lot of wet area. The
Forsberg represented indicated that might have been because of the heavy rains
they experience. The DEQ letter has been received and reviewed and they meet
our ordinances.
Planning Commission Appointments:
Supervisor Martin indicated that Rex LaMore, Cindy Davis, and Martin Wright’s
planning commissioner appointments expire October 1. Both LaMore and Davis have
submitted a letter of continued interest to be reappointed as planning
commissioners and Supervisor Martin recommends Trustee Wright continue as the
board representative for the planning commission.
Trustee Kraft made a motion that Rex LeMore, Cindy Davis and Trustee Wright be
reappointed to the planning commission. The motion was supported by Clerk Zaban
and passed unanimously.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Blake Mossholder Special Use Permit:
Mr. Mossholder did not submit any plans as of 9/7/04 for his special use
permit. This review was tabled in July and August. Supervisor Martin indicated
that his attorney contacted her and indicated he is no longer representing Mr.
Mossholder. An excerpt from the June Planning Commission meeting minutes was
read denying his request because of insufficient plans.
There was discussion regarding the process if Mr. Mossholder’s request was
denied.
Trustee Wright made a motion to deny the site plan and special use permit as
was recommended by the planning commission in their June 15, 2004, meeting.
Motion was supported by Trustee Kraft and passed unanimously.
Trustee Zaban made a motion that the Board sends a letter that he is denied and
a 10-day notice that he is in violation of Township ordinance. The motion was
supported by Trustee Wright and passed unanimously.
Complaint 423 Grand River Avenue:
There were no representatives for this complaint present. There is a letter
from the neighbors that are complaining. Constable Dahlstrom reported that the
lawn is mowed and things are sort of getting cleaned up and there have been
improvements. Supervisor Martin asked if the Board wanted to take further
action regarding this complaint. There was some discussion regarding the
ordinance and actions the Board can take. It was decided that a letter would be
sent to the complainant indicating there is no violation of the nuisance
ordinance and no action will be taken.
REPORTS
Library:
No meeting to report. Mickey meeting with Noonan 9/8/04.
NIESA:
Clerk Zaban reported that NIESA passed a budget for next year. They will be
updating one of the fire trucks. There is continued discussion regarding the
vacant lot and building a house for the paramedics.
Parks:
No meeting to report. The soccer fields are being used. Everything is getting
closer to being cleaned up. Several areas have been reseeded.
Other:
Township office hours were discussed. It was decided that the hours will remain
the same and no changes are recommended.
There will be a Board Workshop meeting on September 21st at 5:00 p.m.
Supervisor Martin and Building Inspector Walt Aven attended a court hearing
regarding Mr. Ciolek that has been ongoing since 2002. It was decided that he
has to allow building inspection and bring up to code any violations. The judge
ruled he had plenty of information to know what to do and gave the Township 14
days to inspect.
Chris Cotter, 4377 Red Maple Drive. Asked for clarification of the burn
ordinance in the R1S zone. Supervisor Martin reviewed the ordinance. Mr. Cotter
asked if you were exempt from this ordinance if you burned in a burn barrel?
Supervisor Martin will check. The process was reviewed for making a complaint.
Supervisor Martin made a motion to adjourn the meeting. The motion was
supported by Clerk Zaban and passed unanimously.
The meeting was adjourned at 9:01 p.m.
Steve Zaban, Williamstown Township Clerk
OCTOBER 5, 2004
CALL TO ORDER
Supervisor Martin called the meeting to order at 7:33 pm and reviewed the
agenda.
Supervisor Martin added Cemetery Sexton retirement to New Business Cemetery and
removed Susan Stuwe, 900 E Sherwood Road, rezoning request from New Business
per Ms. Stuwe’s request dated October 5, 2004. Treasurer Fink removed treasurer
reports.
PLEDGE
ROLL CALL
Trustee Kraft, Trustee Wright, Treasurer Fink, Supervisor Martin, Clerk Zaban.
CONSENT AGENDA:
Minutes of 9/7/04 and 9/21/04 meeting.
No comment.
September Activity Report.
Trustee Kraft requested clarification for items that were marked with a (-).
Supervisor Martin indicated those are check written but not yet issued for
payment.
Payroll.
No comment.
Building Inspector
No comment.
Trustee Kraft made a motion to accept the consent agenda. Trustee Wright
seconded the motion and it passed unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS
George Durak: 116 Feldspar Dr. -- Read a letter to the board dated October 5,
2004, regarding outside burning within the Pebblebrook subdivision.
Ruth Templeton: 1435 Epley Rd. -- Asked if the board would be discussing health
benefits for Township employees? Supervisor Martin indicated the board would
not be discussing Township employee health benefits. Ms. Templeton also
requested the board to look into a previous complaint she made against the
Davis’ and added trespassing to her complaint.
Gary Gillespie: 4701 Jadestone -- Read a letter to the board pertaining to the
Township Burning Ordinance from 1989 to the present.
Michael Brian Cavanaugh for Ingham County Circuit Court Judge. Mr. Cavanaugh
presented his qualifications for Circuit Court Judge. For more information
regarding Mr. Cavanaugh you can visit www.CavanaughforJudge.com
Shawn Franklin: 440 E Grand River -- Requested the board to look into a rental
property complaint as reviewed in his October 2, 2004, email to Supervisor
Martin.
Chris Cotter: 4377 Red Maple Dr. -- Thanked Supervisor Martin for her attention
to his complaint regarding a burning violation.
Elaine Gillespie: 4701 Jadestone -- Asked that the board consider her husband’s
letter and the environmental health hazards he addresses.
Supervisor Martin responded to public comment regarding the Pebblebrook burning
ban. She has received other letters and should a petition come forward to
revise the burning ban, those letters will be shared with the Board for
consideration.
Hugh Allen: 1940 Mapleshade Dr. -- Submitted a letter of complaint to the board
and discussed his complaint regarding recent activities at the Goetz property
on Williamston Rd. in which dirt is being moved from the Free Methodist Church
and dumped on Mr. Goetz property.
NEW BUSINESS
Planning Commission Meeting Minutes of 9/21/04:
No Comment.
Rezoning request , 80 acres from AG-C to AG-SF final action:
Supervisor Martin read a letter from Dennis Forsberg dated September 30, 2004,
requesting the Board to table the rezoning application for Joseph and Marilynn
Dexter, 4895 Zimmer Road. Supervisor Martin requested a formal motion to table
the issue until the applicants can look at their other options and until the
Planning Commission makes a decision regarding any amendments to the master
plan.
Dennis Forsberg commented that because a master plan amendment would take time,
the applicants are still looking at other options that will be brought to the
Planning Commission at a later date.
Trustee Kraft made a motion that the board table Joseph and Marilynn Dexter’s
rezoning application until such time that the Planning Commission reviews the
master plan as it pertains to AG-C property. The motion was seconded by Trustee
Wright and passed unanimously.
HMM&H Reality, Robert D Hilty, 1099 E Grand River rezoning request 8.58 from RE
to B-2 final action.
Commissioner Hayes reported that the Planning Commission is recommending
approval to the board for this rezoning request. Rezoning would allow for the
property to fit the existing use of the property. Trustee Kraft questioned the
drainage concern and the back lot line. Treasurer Fink questioned the type of
uses for a B2 zone.
Mr. Hilty responded to the drainage issue by indicating it had been fixed.
Commissioner Hayes responded to the lot line and B2 uses. He indicated that the
back lot line was reduced to be more compatible with the adjacent property and
that the only uses that were discussed were what the building is currently
being used for.
Trustee Wright made a motion to grant the request for rezoning of l099 E Grand
River, 8.89 ac from RE to B2. Trustee Zaban seconded the motion and it passed
unanimously.
Cemetery
The cemetery committee requested a rate increase for plots and opening and
closing of graves as detailed in the Cemetery Board Meeting Minutes of
September 9, 2004.
Trustee Kraft made a motion that the board approve the rate increase for plots
as proposed by the cemetery committee to be as follows: $500 for residents and
$700 for nonresidents to be effective January 1, 2005. Clerk Zaban seconded the
motion and it passed unanimously.
Cemetery Sexton Retirement
The cemetery committee requested the board to allocate $175 to purchase Ben
Moline, who is retiring as cemetery sexton after 40 years of service, with a
gold pocket watch. The watch will be presented to him at an open house for the
new building on October 17, 2004, at a cost of $175.
Trustee Zaban made a motion to spend up to $200 to purchase an engraved watch
for Ben Moline at the cemetery committee’s choice. Trustee Kraft seconded the
motion and it passed unanimously.
Cemetery Chair Taschner also discussed a complaint of someone dumping trash
(grass clippings) at back of the cemetery property.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Library Proposal
At the September 21, 2004, Board Workshop Meeting, the board discussed a
proposal of consensus to present to the Library Foundation regarding the
funding of a new library. Since that meeting, a proposal has been received from
the Library Foundation. Supervisor Martin asked that the board review their
proposal before moving forward with their 9/21/04 consensus proposal. Treasurer
Fink spoke with Ed Noonan, President, Library Foundation, regarding the
establishment of a joint building authority as proposed by the Library
Foundation. There was general consensus that a meeting should be held with a
joint building authority before any formal proposal is sent. Supervisor Martin
will move forward with convening a meeting.
Allen Dale: 5410 N Meridian Rd. – Provided citizen comment on the issue. He
stated that asking for 5m for a 15,000 square foot building is overestimated.
His experience would indicated 3m for over 20,000 square feet. He asked the
board to consider who primarily uses the library. The Foundation’s focus may be
residents of the city and surrounding communities, but our residents my use
other resources in the Okemos, Haslett or Perry areas. Therefore, support from
our Township may not be there. He also suggested that the Internet and its
current usage could impact the usage of a new library.
Complaint
There were no complaints.
REPORTS
Library
See unfinished business.
NIESA
The next meeting is scheduled for October 7, 2004. An agenda was part of the
board packet.
Parks
Parks committee met and they would like to purchase a brush hog to get to areas
where the tractor cannot instead of renting one as they did last year.
Trustee Wright made a motion that the park committee research and purchase a
brush hog through a local dealer, if possible, at a cost of up to $2800.
Trustee Kraft seconded the motion and passed unanimously.
Other
Supervisor Martin announced that there will be an Intergovernmental Joint
Meeting with Meridian Township at 7:00 pm on November 4, 2004. Previously,
Trustee Fink and Supervisor Martin and attended this meeting. However,
Supervisor Martin would like to encourage other board members to attend.
Supervisor Martin announced that the Ingham County Commissioners’ have passed a
PDR for a countywide development ordinance. If the board would like the
Township to participate in this PDR, a board resolution in support would be
needed.
MTA Legislative Update
Was distributed as part of the board packet.
Mellennium Digital Media
Mellennium Digital Media will be making some rate increases. Letter distributed
as part of board packet.
Supervisor Martin recently attended a Road Commission meeting through MTA and
received valuable information regarding gravel roads, crack fill and roads in
general.
Next Board Workshop Meeting is scheduled for October 23, 2004, at 5:00 pm.
MEETING REVIEW
Supervisor Martin will convene a meeting regarding the Library proposal.
Supervisor Martin will look into the complaint received by the Board against
Mr. Goetz.
Supervisor Martin made a motion to adjourn. The motion was seconded by Trustee
Wright and passed unanimously.
________________________________________________________________________
Steve Zaban, Clerk
NOVEMBER 9, 2004
CALL TO ORDER
Supervisor Martin called the meeting to order at 7:31 and reviewed the agenda.
PLEDGE
ROLL CALL
Trustee Kraft, Trustee Wright, Treasurer Fink, Supervisor Martin, Clerk Zaban
CONSENT AGENDA:
Minutes of 10/5/04 and 10/19/04 meeting.
No comment.
October Activity Report.
No comment.
Treasurer’s Report.
Reports submitted May through September. The reports have been modified and
simplified to make them more reader friendly. These include a summary of
investments as well as other accounts.
Accounts Paid and Payable.
No comment.
Building Inspector.
No comment.
Trustee Kraft made a motion to accept the consent agenda. Trustee Wright
seconded the motion and it passed unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS
No comments
Abraham & Gaffney Audit.
Aaron Stevens from Abraham & Gaffney gave a short presentation of the audit
ending March 31, 2004. His report included: 1) A summary of the services
provided and management responsibilities for this audit as outline in their
Engagement Letter of January 5, 2004; 2) A general letter of statement dated
September 16, 2004, that outlined an overall report of their findings; 3) A
letter dated September 16, 2004, that reviewed their ‘Report of Internal
Control;’ and 4) A ‘Management Letter’ dated September 15, 2004, that provided
suggestions in accounting and administrative procedures that would be helpful
in improving management’s control and the operational efficiency of the
accounting and administrative functions.
NEW BUSINESS
Planning Commission Meeting Minutes 10/19/04.
No comment.
Hideaway Woods #5 Final Pre-Plat Approval.
Commissioner Hayes stated that this is approximately a 10 acre subdivision that
has approximately six areas platted for development. It is zoned R1—single-
family residential with approximately ½ acre lots. It is an extension of the
other Hideaway Woods. Originally, McKenna recommended we table the issue
because all conditions had not been met, but the developer did submit the
needed information the night of the meeting, so the Commission moved forward
with recommending to the Board a preliminary plat approval as long as the
information submitted met any outstanding conditions. McKenna’s letter dated
November 5, 2004, states they have met the conditions with the exception of
two. The two conditions are the relocation of a side street tree to the front
of lot 40 and the restoration of the “T” turn-a-around.
Carl McIntosh, Hideaway Woods’ Developer, assured that the turn-a-round would
be adjusted as directed by the road commission. However, he was disappointed
that the trees have to be moved. Otherwise, he had no additional comments.
Trustee Kraft made a motion that the Board adopts the Planning Commission’s
recommendations with the two conditions presented in the McKenna letter dated
11/5/04. Trustee Wright seconded the motion and it passed unanimously.
Pebblebrook Petition—Burn Petition.
Supervisor Martin indicated that a petition has been received that consists of
ninety-nine signatures requesting that Pebblebrook Estates, Pebblebrook No. 2,
3, 4 and 5, and Pebblebrook Place become consistent with Williamstown Township
and remove the restrictions placed on these areas to allow the burning of
campfires. In addition to the signed petitions, Supervisor Martin has received
approximately 15 emails, phone calls or letters of opposition to this petition.
Supervisor Martin stated that the burn ordinance allows the board to make a
change if any advisory petitions are presented regardless of the number in
support or opposition to the petition.
Supervisor Martin opened the floor for public discussion to anyone who has not
already contacted the Township and/or had any new information to offer.
Bob Pendergast--230 Cinnabar Circle: Submitted and read letter support.
George Durak—116 Feldspar Drive: Stated that fifteen years ago there was
nothing secret about the Pebblebrook burning ban because there were many public
meetings regarding this ordinance. Mr. Durak question if the petition was 99
signatures or 99 households? Supervisor Martin indicated it was 99 households.
In his opinion, there are three problems: polluting the air; increase of fire
potential; and loud parties. He believes that if the burning ban is lifted, it
will change the entire make-up of the subdivision. Mr. Durak also offered
additional opposition from Don Wake (letter not received by the Board) and Ivan
Woodhams—130 Feldspar Drive (letter to be forwarded).
Brian DeRath--4708 Sandstone Drive: Stated that both sides have very valid
points and this has become a very personal issue. He noted that when they
brought the petition forward, he respected his neighbors. However, he believes
in the neighborhood and felt that the data should be presented to the Board for
decision. He will respect and abide by the Board’s decision.
Jean Eggemeyer--35 E. Newman Road: As witness to social campfires in the
neighborhood, she can testify that a house, not within the neighborhood, but
close in proximity, has had social occasions that don’t begin until 9:30 or 10:
00 pm. because of the long summer days. She is disturbed by the noise and
smoke. She stated that you cannot mandate responsibility and consideration and
that there are many who would not violate a new ordinance, but there are many
who would. Therefore, she is in opposition.
William Nowland--248 E. Newman Road: In support of the petition. He stated that
regardless of fire pits, parties are going to happen. Kids, young adults, or
other adults do not matter—“wisdom comes from who you are.” He also stated that
when there is an ordinance, you can call and report violators. He also noted
that air quality couldn’t be considered because there are household fireplaces
that could be contributing to the air quality.
Gary Gillespie—4701 Jadestone: Stated that by signing a petition granting the
right to burn may not necessarily mean they understand the consequences of that
signature. Mr. Gillespie went on to read a letter of his concerns which was
given to the Board.
Juan Juarez--207 E. Newman Road.: In support of petition. He questioned the
total number of households in Pebblebrook and wanted to know of those
households, what was the process for originally creating the ban? For example,
was it a majority of those households in favor of the ban or was it a smaller
majority of those households? Was there a petition? Was there a clear
understanding of the majority and minority’s opinion? Mr. Durak responded that
there were five public meetings held and the decision was based on those that
attended the meetings not necessarily every household. Mr. Juarez when on to
state that in his opinion leaf burning is of a concern, but the petition
clearly states campfires and not leaves. His experience in talking with his
neighbors is that of surprise that they can’t have campfires
John Jones--211 Cinnabar Circle: In support of petition. Mr. Jones has
researched and learned that you can monitor smoke level. He suggests a monitor
could be conducted. If there is a problem, then even household fireplaces
should be banned.
Christopher Cleveland--4696 Sandstone Drive: In support of petition. Her
husband has asthma and he does not see campfires as a concern. In her opinion,
property owners have rights and this should be treated as a democracy. Articles
can always be found in support or opposition to your position. In her opinion,
property value cannot be considered.
Elaine Gillespie---4701 Jadestone: Opposes the petition. Read letter (not given
to Board). Ms. Gillespie has personal experience of a home fire and the
response of the Williamston Fire Dept. They did not have enough water and had
to drain water from a pond.
Heather DeRath--4708 Sandstone Drive: Ms. DeRath stated, for the record, that
it is her understanding that the Gillespie’s house fire was not due to
campfire, but a chimney fire.
Calvin Betts--4695 Rocky Hill: In support of petition. He helped obtain
signatures. In his opinion, everyone that signed the petition thoroughly
understood what they were signing and those who were not in agreement did not
sign.
Supervisor Martin thanked the residents for their input and indicated that all
testimony, reports from environmental organizations, as well as NIESA will be
considered when reviewing this petition.
Trustee Kraft believes we need to consider a change in this ordinance in
consideration of all those that came out to express their opinions and to have
the involvement of the fire chief would be valuable. He offered that the
Planning Commission should also review the petition. He believes the Board
should take some time to debate this issue.
Clerk Zaban suggested that a committee comprised of supporters and opponents
along with the Board could convene to resolve this issue.
Treasurer Fink suggested that many communities control fires. There are also
other considerations, such as the county, that may need to be considered.
Ms. DeRath asked for clarification regarding why the Board wouldn’t make a
decision tonight because isn’t it ultimately their decision? Supervisor Martin
responded that the Board will ultimately make the decision, but because of the
amount of information that there is to consider, it may be in the Board’s best
interest to take some time to consider the petition. The board has options: it
can accept the petition as is; it can impose conditions to the petition; or it
can deny the petition.
Ms. DeRath also asked the definition of an outdoor grill. Supervisor Martin
read the ordinance and definition of an outdoor grill.
The public hearing concluded with the Board agreeing to develop a committee to
review the petition. Supervisor Martin asked anyone interested in serving on
the committee to contact her by phone or in writing. The Board is reluctant to
set a timeline. However, Supervisor Martin believes that with a mediator along
with other opinion from the fire chief and the county, a decision can be made
in a timely manner.
Mr. Joel Raddatz, Superintendent Williamston Community Schools.
Mr. Raddatz presented information on the upcoming school bond election. The
school district has taken the last 18 months to review the input from the last
bond that was defeated. Their focus is on a need for new athletic facilities
and the location of those facilities; growth and the number of classrooms; and
taxes. This proposal is different in four primary areas: there will be no
construction on Sherwood Road for new athletic facilities; there will be no 5/
6 building; no new bus barn; and there is no need for an increase in the school
mileage rate to pay for this. The current mileage will be extended for five
years. Mr. Raddatz distributed a flier of the key points and encouraged
everyone to vote on December 6, 2004.
Williamstown Estates—Burn Petition.
Supervisor Martin received a petition from Williamstown Estates’ Subdivision
Association requesting the restricted burn dates to be lifted from their
subdivision. They are requesting that the burn restrictions be the same as
other RE zoning.
Supervisor Martin asked Mr. Kurt Guter, Association Representative, how the
residents of the subdivision were notified of the petition? Mr. Guter responded
that on October 10, 2004, at their annual homeowners meeting, which was
attended by 19 of the 25 residents, the petition was presented and signatures
were obtained. The few that didn’t sign do not live in the area or are senior
citizens who were not interested. There was not one person who opposed the
petition. The subdivision is asking for this change because of safety and
appearance. Because of the current limited burn dates and the amount of brush
to be burned, the size of the fires can be large and safety is a concern. They
would also like to request controlled burns to enhance wild flower growth.
Supervisor Martin opened the floor to public comment.
Todd Bashore--4040 Warbler Way: In support of petition. As an example of how
brush accumulates, Mr. Bashore noted that some of the current burn restriction
dates fall on a holiday, such as July 4, so many can’t burn because of other
obligations.
Jim Genova--1477 Osprey Way: In support of petition. Talked about other
examples and reasons you may not be able to burn on restricted dates, such as
windstorms.
Jim Lynch—1540 Osprey Way: In support of petition. Stated that he lives in the
middle of a pine tree forest and windfall causes lots of brush that takes a
long time to burn. The current burn restrictions make it even harder for him to
burn the accumulated brush.
Don Cooper—1501 Osprey Way: In support of petition. He supported Mr. Genova’s
postion on how weather conditions limit burning on restricted dates.
Supervisor Martin asked if the Association had thought about how the burn
ordinance protects those who are offended by the smoke? For example, with the
current restrictions, residents who are offended by the smoke can plan for
those days because they are designated. Supervisor Martin also asked if the
association had considered the 425 plan and the concentration of homes that
will come in around them? Mr. Guter responded that the abundance of brush comes
with this being new development. For example when you move in, you need to burn
regularly. Once you get on top of it, you are going to burn a lot less.
Therefore, future burning most likely will not be a problem.
Trustee Kraft and Clerk Zaban were in favor of lifting the burn. McKenna
reviewed the petition and also supported the petition.
Trustee Kraft made a motion to amend the burning ordinance by making a change
in 4a and 4b of the Williamstown Township Burn Ordinance: 4a would be changed
to read “except Williamstown Estates” and 4b would be changed to add the words
“and Williamstown Estates” after RR districts. Treasurer Fink seconded the
motion and it passed unanimously by roll call.
Roll Call Vote: Trustee Kraft Yes; Trustee Wright Yes; Treasurer Fink Yes;
Supervisor Martin Yes; Clerk Zaban Yes.
This change will be mailed to every resident of the subdivision and all
residents within 500 feet. The change will become effective 15 days after
publication.
ZBA Appointments.
Supervisor Martin indicated that Kurt Guter and Dale Fulton are up for
reappointment. Dale Fulton is going to retire from his position. Kurt Guter has
requested reappointment. Daniel Kraft has requested an appointment to the ZBA.
No other request for appointment have been received.
Trustee Wright made a motion that Daniel Kraft be appointed to the ZBA and Kurt
Guter be reappointed. Supervisor Martin seconded the motion and it passed
unanimously.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Complaint--Kendal Goetz North Williamston Road:
In follow-up to the complaint brought before the Board at their October 5,
2004, regular meeting, Supervisor Martin met with Mr. Goetz. Mr. Goetz asked
Supervisor Martin to communicate with the Board that he does not agree with the
burn ordinance, but would comply. He also indicated that the dirt will be moved
soon and any remaining dirt will be surrounded by silk fence. Constable
Dahlstrom reported that approximately 500 yards have been moved, but the silk
fence has not been put up. Constable Dahlstrom will check to see if the fence
has been put in place. There was Board consensus that if he is moving forward
with these changes, then the complaint will be satisfied.
REPORTS
NIESA:
Franz Wilbrink reported that there was a walk through of the police building as
a possibility for housing instead of building a new building. No decisions were
made.
Parks:
Meeting canceled and rescheduled for 11/17/04.
Other:
Williamstown Township Board Workshop Meeting time changed to 5:30 pm.
The Township offices will be closed Thursday, November 11, 2004, for Veterans
Day. The hours of operation for November 24, 2004, will 1-4 pm and closed
Thanksgiving Day.
Clerk Zaban made a motion to approve the Township office hours as stated above.
Trustee Wright seconded the motion and it passed unanimously.
Supervisor Martin reported that she attended the Meridian Township Joint
meeting. Pat Lindeman spoke on the Phase II Watershed issue. In attendance were
Bath Township, East Lansing, Lansing Township and others.
Supervisor Martin and Treasurer-elect Al LeBlanc attended the County Assessors
and Treasurer’s Meeting.
Clerk Zaban reported on the recent election. He stated that the Township was
second to last to turn in ballots. Bush carried Township by vote. The Township
had the second highest voter turnout in the County. Supervisor Martin stated
that she had received comments from the election workers that everything went
well.
Supervisor Martin attended the proclamation for Eagle Scout McGuire. It was a
very inspiring ceremony and she encouraged Board members to attend one if they
have the chance.
Supervisor Martin made a motion to adjourn the meeting. Clerk Zaban second the
motion and it passed unanimously.
DECEMBER 7, 2004
CALL TO ORDER
Supervisor Martin called the meeting to order at 7:30 pm and reviewed the
agenda.
PLEDGE
ROLL CALL
Trustee Wilbrink; Trustee Wright; Treasurer LeBlanc; Supervisor Martin; and
Clerk Zaban.
CONSENT AGENDA:
Minutes of 11/9/04 and 11/16/04 Meeting
November 16, 2004, Workshop Meeting Minutes: Change date from October 19, 2004,
to November 16, 2004, in document title. Add under “Other” letter dated
November 16, 2004, distributed to Board by Treasurer Fink.
November Activity Report
No Comment.
Treasurer’s Report
Treasurer LeBlanc reviewed the investments, rate of returns and errors
indicated that the general fund statement cannot be reconciled until a valid
beginning balance for August 2004 is established.
Accounts Paid and Payable
No Comment.
Building Inspector
No Comment.
Trustee Wright made a motion to accept the consent agenda. Trustee Wilbrink
seconded the motion and it passed unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Katie Lo—290 E. Sherwood: Asked what the status of the black angus cattle is?
Supervisor Martin indicated that there has been a meeting with the property
owners. The meeting was to exchange information. This information needs to be
reviewed and further investigation needs to be conducted before a decision/
action can be taken.
NEW BUSINESS
Planning Commission Meeting Minutes 11/16/04
Chairman Hayes reviewed the minutes. No board comment.
Master Plan Revisions
The board was presented with two letters from McKenna and Associates for
review. The highlighted areas indicated changes made. Supervisor Martin
reviewed the Amendments as an increase in the Manufactured Housing and Mixed-
Use District to accommodate future expansion of both these areas. The Mixed-Use
District will have sewer and utilities, so that these areas can serve a variety
of uses. It will also preserve the river frontage. Supervisor Martin asked the
Board to review the proposed Amendments. If approved, then the master plan
amendment process can move forward following the Municipal Planning Act, PA 285
of 1931, guidelines.
Trustee Wright made a motion to forward the Master Plan Amendments for
Manufactured Housing and Mixed-Use District to other townships and
municipalities for review as regulated by the Municipal Planning Act, PA 285 of
1931. Treasurer LeBlanc seconded the motion and it passed unanimously.
Trustee Wright proposed a resolution for the Board to adopt the Master Plan
Amendments for Manufactured Housing and Mixed-Use District. Trustee Wilbrink
seconded the motion and it passed unanimously.
Liquor License Transfer
Burgdorf’s Winery LLC, 5635 Shoeman Road, Haslett, MI, have a pending request
for a new Small Wine Maker licence with Outdoor Service Area and Living
Quarters Permit at said location which was approved by the Township of
Williamstown on August 6, 2002. The applicant has since requested to transfer
ownership from individuals, Deborah and David Burgdorf to a Limited Liability
Company, Burgdorf’s Winery LLC.
Trustee Wright made a motion to approve the transfer from Deborah and David
Burgdorf to a Limited Liability Company, Burgdorf’s Winery LLC. The motion was
seconded by Treasurer LeBlanc.
Roll Call Vote: Trustee Wilbrink--Yes; Trustee Wright--Yes; Treasurer LeBlanc--
Yes; Supervisor Martin--Yes; Clerk Zaban--Yes. Passed 5-0
Budget 2005-06
A template budget was distributed for each department to prepare a budget to be
reviewed at the next workshop meeting scheduled December 21, 2004. The template
includes 2004 actuals and a 2005 estimate to assist each department with budget
planning. A budget hearing will be held in February 2005 to approve a to new
budget beginning in March April 1, 2005.
Complaints
Trustee Wright acknowledged that a building permit for Ciolek at 1054 E.
Sherwood had been pulled to bring the building into compliance per a previous
complaint.
A detailed report of activity was presented to the Board prepared by Constable
Dahlstrom. This report will be provided each month for Board review.
REPORTS
NEISA
Clerk Zaban reported that there was a meeting on December 2, 2004. Meeting
highlights included continued discussion regarding building/housing; the
budget; a no-fault accident the ambulance was involved in that caused
considerable damage. The ambulance is in repair to be back in service within 1
to 2 weeks.
Treasurer LeBlanc reported on the CPR class. It was attended by approximately
12 people. Future classes will be held periodically throughout the year.
Treasuer LeBlanc introduced the new Deputy Treasurer, Gwen Chirico-Brandon, and
her qualifications.
Parks
Supervisor Martin reviewed the November 17, 2004, minutes and reported updates.
The trash cans have been placed and the sledding hill has been mowed.
Other
December Board of Review will be held December 14, 2004, to review any
homesteads, mistakes, or other qualifications that need to be processed/
corrected.
The Pebblebrook Burning Petition Committee met on December 2, 2004, and was
facilitated by a professional mediator. The Fire Chief provided some very
specific parameters that were helpful. The mediator will provide a draft of all
agreed information for the committee to finalize a recommendation to be
presented to the Board for a final decision. Trustee Wright asked that the
Planning Commission have the opportunity to review the final recommendation.
Workshop meeting scheduled for December 21, 2004.
Supervisor Martin proposed a motion to adjourn. Trustee Wright second the
motion and it passed unanimously.
CLERK, STEVE ZABAN                     DATE
2005 Meeting Minutes
JANUARY 4, 2005
CALL TO ORDER
Supervisor Martin called the meeting to order at 7:30 pm and reviewed the
agenda.
PLEDGE
ROLL CALL
Trustee Wilbrink; Trustee Wright; Treasurer LeBlanc; Supervisor Martin; and
Clerk Zaban.
CONSENT AGENDA:
Minutes of 12/7/04 and 12/21/04 Meeting
12/7/04 Correction to Treasurer’s Report: Treasurer LeBlanc cannot reconcile
general fund monthly statements until a valid beginning balance for August is
established.
12/7/05 Correction to Budget 2005-06: Change March 2005 to April 1, 2005.
12/21/04 Correction to Building Library Authority: Change CATL to CADL.
12/21/04: Add attendance.
December Activity Report
No Comment.
Treasurer’s Report
Treasurer LeBlanc indicated that a tax disbursement report is included for
review.
Addition/Correction from 2/1/05 Regular Board Meeting: Treasurer LeBlanc
reported that he was not able to reconcile the General Fund account because
there was a discrepancy of approximately $1,800.00 between the amount that the
bank statement said we had and the amount that our Quickbooks accounting
software said that we had. Quickbooks indicated that we had $1,779.92 more than
the bank.
Accounts Paid and Payable
Trustee Wilbrink questioned paid items: Quill, Diamond International, Wetland
and Costal Resources, Inc. Trustee Wilbrink questioned payroll deductions for
AFLAC. Supervisor Martin clarified each expenditure.
Trustee Wilbrink questioned Cemetery Report and costs of caretaker and sexton.
Supervisor indicated that the sexton is in transition towards retirement.
Building Inspector
No Comment.
Treasurer LeBlanc made a motion to accept the consent agenda with changes.
Trustee Wilbrink seconded the motion and it passed unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT
George Durak--116 Feldspar Dr.: Questioned what amount of the general fund
balance is not balancing. Treasurer LeBlanc indicated that it is approximately
$1,116 and indicated that the auditor has reviewed and identified it as payroll
errors. Mr. Durak also questioned how vacancies were filled on committees.
Supervisor Martin indicated that vacancies are filled by appointment. Residents
interested should submit request for appointments in writing.
Lisa Whitman—4965 Petoskey Dr.: Submitted and reviewed a proposal to use the
rental hall for weekly Yoga classes. Supervisor Martin indicated that the Board
would review the proposal and discuss it at the January 18 workshop meeting.
Nancy Fink--535 Sherwood Rd.: Will be making a proposal to the Cemetery
Committee to start a volunteer committee to fix broken headstones at Foote
Cemetery. Clerk Zaban indicated that the next Cemetery Meeting is January 11 at
10:00 am. Mrs. Fink would also like to see the fence repaired.
Katie Lo—290 E. Sherwood Rd.: Asked for an update regarding the Black Angus Cow
complaint. Supervisor Martin reviewed the status to date and indicated that the
issue to be resolved involves the Right to Farm Act and compliance with that
Act. The Drain Commission, at this time, does not see a violation.
John Dickerson—5872 Lounsbury Rd.: Offered that the Drain Commission was very
strict with the Rifle Club and erosion issues.
Bob Hayes—1240 Sherwood Rd.: Offered that, in his professional experience, the
Department of Agriculture typically supports farmer and are not very objective
and that the DEQ tries to stay out of Right to Farm Act issues. The Right to
Farm act gives a tremendous amount of latitude to farmers.
Ruth Templeton—1435 Epley Rd.: Questioned why the Manufactured Housing and
Mixed Use Master Plan Amendments and Map had not been seen by the Planning
Commission? Trustee Wright indicated that the Planning Commission had reviewed
the map last summer. Mrs. Templeton also questioned why then had the Planners
brought the map up for two months to the Planning Commission. Supervisor Martin
the process for Master Plan revisions and indicated that most of the steps had
been completed and set-aside for more pressing issues. The Planners were just
bringing the revisions back to the table to see if the Planning Commission was
ready to move forward. Trustee Wright confirmed Supervisor Martin’s assessment
of the process and where the Planning Commission was with the process.
NEW BUSINESS
Planning Commission Meeting Minutes 12/21/04
Chairman Hayes reviewed the minutes. No board comment.
Springbrook Road Name
The Planning Commission made recommendation to the Board to approve the name
Springbrook Drive for Springbrook Subdivision. Supervisor Martin explained that
road name considerations are important because of the 911 system. When 911 was
locally dispatched, road naming was not such an issue. Now that 911 is
dispatched centrally out of Lansing, road name consideration is important
because dispatchers may not be familiar with the area. The Tri-County Planning
Commission provides a good service reviewing street names that are matching in
the local area, but it is a recommendation and the Board can approve a road
name outside of their recommendation.
Trustee Wright made a motion to approve Springbrook Drive as a road name for
Springbrook Subdivision. Treasurer LeBlanc seconded the motion and it passed
unanimously.
Master Plan Revisions
Supervisor Martin reviewed a compressed timeline for Master Plan revisions
submitted by McKenna and Associates. Supervisor Martin acknowledged that moving
forward with this project with a compressed timeline would be a vigorous
schedule and it would be a big commitment by the Planning Commission. Chairman
Hayes indicated that the Planning Commission is willing to commit the time.
Trustee Wright expressed a concern of the cost and would hope that the numbers
presented are on high side. Supervisor Martin believes this is an important
project and that a contract could be negotiated with the Planners to commit to
a limit on costs. Trustee Wilbrink asked if these hours are in addition to the
Planner’s regular hours? Supervisor Martin indicated that these costs would be
above the regular hours. Supervisor Martin also clarified that when the
Planners are here, they are not necessarily billing the Township. They may be
working on outside projects and only bill us when working on Township issues or
attending meetings.
Trustee Wright made a motion that the Board accept the compressed Master Plan
timeline and contract a monthly review of progress that would include a stop
clause, if necessary, and cost limits. The motion was seconded by Clerk Zaban
and passed unanimously.
Library Board Appointments
The Williamston Community Library Foundation appointment for Township
representative Ed Noonan is up for renewal. Supervisor Martin recommended that
he be reappointed. Trustee Wilbrink questioned the timing of the appointment
notice and the procedure. Trustee Wright and Supervisor Martin both believe the
timing is an oversight because of other priorities. This is a voluntary group
and they put in many hours of work and should be supported by the Township
Board. Supervisor Martin suggested that Trustee Wilbrink follow-up with the
Foundation regarding any concerns.
Supervisor Martin made a motion to reappoint Ed Noonan to the Williamston
Community Library Foundation as Williamstown Township’s representative. The
motion was seconded by Treasurer Leblanc and passed unanimously.
Poverty Guidelines/Asset Level
Every year the Board must pass a resolution to set the poverty and asset level
guidelines. The 2004 guideline allows for an asset level of one parcel of real
property (no cottage) and one licensed and plated vehicle per driver in the
household. Supervisor made a recommendation that the Board adopt the 2004 asset
guideline and the Federal Poverty Guidelines.
Past Treasurer Fink offered history of the previous guidelines and asset levels
such as saving accounts, vehicles, etc.
Trustee Wright made a motion to pass a resolution to adopt the Federal Poverty
Guidelines and an asset level of one parcel of real property (no cottage) and
one licensed and plated vehicle per driver in the household. Trustee Wilbrink
seconded the motion and it passed unanimously.
Precinct Changes
Clerk Zaban reported that the County has made precinct rule changes mandating
that the Township reduce their number of precincts effective March 10. The
Township will now conduct all school votes. Distributed was a proposed
resolution changing the current four precincts to two precincts voting at the
Township Hall and St. Katherine’s. Trustee Wilbrink expressed concern regarding
the reduction in precincts and how that would effect voting wait times. Clerk
Zaban indicated that there would be more voting machines that will be more
efficient, as well as other changes that will speed up the process. Other
advantages of this change would include streamlining the voting process for all
votes, including school votes, and resident precinct identification.
Trustee Wright made a motion to pass the proposed resolution to adopt the new
precincts. The motion was seconded by Supervisor Martin.
Roll Call:   Trustee Wilbrink   Yes
Trustee Wright    Yes
Treasurer LeBlanc   Yes
Supervisor Martin    Yes
Clerk Zaban       Yes
The motion passed 5 to 0.
Budget Amendment
Supervisor Martin proposed a motion that the April through December 2004 Cable
Commission Salary (425-702) be amended from $500 to $910 taking $410 from
Contingency. Trustee Wright seconded the motion and it passed unanimously.
Consultants Contract Renewal
McKenna and Associations have submitted an Update of Fees for Planning Services
to be approved by the board for 2005.
Trustee Wright made a motion that the Update of Fees for Planning Services be
approved. The motion was seconded by Treasurer Leblanc and passed unanimously.
Board of Review Appointments
Supervisor Martin made a recommendation to the board to reappoint Gerald Eidt
and Robert Tetzlaff to the Board of Review and to fill the vacant position with
Kurt Guter. Trustee Wilbrink asked if there had been other applicants for the
vacant position? Supervisor Martin indicated that two other people had applied
and their letters of request will be held on file for future openings. Mr.
Guter had volunteered in other areas of the Township and had proved to be very
thorough and diligent in his work. Trustee Wilbrink suggested that appointments
for vacant positions be posted to the public through the newsletter. Supervisor
Martin stated that was a great idea and asked Treasurer Trustee Wilbrink to
write a letter for the newsletter.
Supervisor Martin made a motion to reappoint Gerry Eidt and Robert Tetzlaff and
to appoint Kurt Guter to the Board of Review. The motion was seconded by
Trustee Wright. The motioned passed by a 4-1 vote.
Unfinished Business
None
Budget 2005-06
Supervisor Martin presented a proposed budget and recommended that the Board
make a motion to hold a Budget Public Hearing in February for budget approval
in March. The Public Hearing will be conducted to go through the budget line
item by line item.
Treasurer LeBlanc requested that the Treasurer’s Budget be considered
separately from the proposed budget at the public hearing. Supervisor Martin
asked the Board if they would like the Treasurer’s Budget figures to be added
to the proposed budget prior to public hearing or be heard as a separate
budget? Trustee Wright suggested they be put into the proposed budget for
public hearing, but he questioned the proposed budgeted amounts to be inserted.
It is Trustee Wright’s understanding that the Township is growing and
increasing the budget may be needed, but does the Deputy Treasurer’s salary
need to be doubled? Treasurer LeBlanc explained that the increase in salary and
training are due to the positions being held by new employees. Review continued
of comparable salaries across deputies. Supervisor Martin asked what are the
anticipated increases in tasks that would necessitate the need for increased
hours? Treasurer LeBlanc indicated the increase in hours would allow the deputy
to qualify for Township payment of Aflac. It was suggested by Clerk Zaban that
if the Deputy Treasurer’s hours were to be increased then that position could
be considered for receptionist duties if needed.
Trustee Wilbrink questioned the budget for road improvement and shouldn’t
future road improvements be part of the budget? Trustee Wilbrink also
questioned what the park expenses would be. Supervisor Martin responded that
road improvements are based on County budgets and park expenses are for
maintenance, equipment, and other improvements.
Supervisor Martin indicated that this budget assumes cost of living increases
in salary with the exception of Mark Tabors’ who has requested any salary
increases be put in a retirement plan. Trustee Wright asked if these increases
included the elected positions because they have not increased in approximately
3 to 4 years. Supervisor Martin indicated that it does not include increases
for elected positions. Supervisor Martin suggested that if the Board would like
to look at elected salaries, then the Board should established a committee to
review and make recommendations.
Trustee Wilbrink questioned the Township’s hours of operation. Trustee Wright
indicated that opening on Mondays would increase the budget in salary costs.
Clerk Zaban also reminded Trustee Wilbrink that Mondays are available for
officers to get work done outside of the public hours.
Treasurer LeBlanc asked if a budget amendment could be considered to satisfy a
current shortfall in training expenses for the Treasurer’s office. Supervisor
Martin indicated that a budget amendment request could be considered before
March through regular or special meeting.
Trustee Wright made a motion to approve a February Budget Public Hearing and to
add the Treasurer’s budget figures into the proposed budget for public hearing
with a change to the Deputy Treasurers salary from the proposed $13,416.00 to
$8,300.00. The motion was seconded by Trustee Wilbrink and passed unanimously.
Cemetery Budget
The Cemetery Budget is submitted by the Cemetery Committee. Trustee Wilbrink
questioned why the Burial line item has double? Supervisor Martin indicated
that burials in the past year have increased.
Clerk Zaban made a motion that the Cemetery Budget proposal be approved for a
February Budget Public Hearing. Trustee Wright seconded the motion and it
passed unanimously.
Date set for public hearing to be February 15 at 5:00 pm.
Complaints
No report.
Trustee Wright requested that the Constable check on the Ciolek complaint.
Trustee Wright also requested that the Supervisor move forward with taking
action against US1 Motors for ordinance violations.
REPORTS
NEISA
No meeting since last report. Agenda for next meeting presented.
Parks
No meeting since last report. Trustee Wilbrink asked if the park is plowed for
snow. Supervisor Martin said it is plowed and will check with maintenance
regarding schedule of plowing.
Other
Mitchell Road Speed Study: Supervisor Martin and Clerk Zaban accompanied the
Michigan State Police to review the speed on Mitchell road. A report was
distributed and a recommendation was made to enforce the speed limit and not
make any changes. It was also noted that there is no parking along soccer field
on Mitchell Road. A detailed report from the State Police will follow.
Workshop set for January 18 at 5:00 pm.
Supervisor Martin is continuing work with the City to move the process of
development forward for Hideaway Woods 5 and Brookstone. Supervisor Martin,
Lisa Hitchcock, Williamston City Manager and Lynn Wilson Williamston City
Planner met with the Ingham County Drain Commission to work out a positive
drainage system.
Trustee Wright made a motion that the Board goes into closed session. The
motion was seconded by Clerk Zaban and passed unanimously.
Supervisor Martin made a motion that recording secretary take minutes during
closed session. The motion was supported by Trustee Wright and passed
unanimously.
JANUARY 18, 2005
PRESENT: Trustee Wilbrink; Treasurer LeBlanc; Trustee Wright; Supervisor
Martin; Clerk Zaban.
CALL TO ORDER: Supervisor Martin called the meeting to order at 5:00 pm and
reviewed the agenda.
BURN PETITION: Supervisor Martin reviewed the steps taken to date regarding the
review and consideration of the Pebblebrook Burn Petition. Supervisor Martin
also met with Donald Pixley, Township Insurance Representative, to review any
liability issues. It was determined that the Township would not be liable for
any personal lose loss to homeowners. Vince Spagnuolo, Township Legal Counsel,
confirmed that the Township would only be responsible for issuing and enforcing
the burn ordinance. The Township would not be liable for any personal loses
under the governmental immunity laws.
Supervisor Martin then opened the floor for any additional discussion:
Gary Gillespie—4701 Jadestone: Asked if personal homeowner insurance rates
would increase if the burning ban were lifted? Supervisor Martin responded that
homeowner insurance is an individual homeowner responsibility and that those
type of questions should be directed to their insurance carriers.
George Durak—116 Feldspar Dr.: Asked what would happen if the person who caused
the fire had no homeowner’s insurance? Township Legal Counsel responded that it
would be the responsibility of the victim to seek legal action against those
persons for negligence. Mr. Durak also asked if the Township would require
proof of homeowner’s insurance when issuing burn permits? Currently, the burn
ordinance does not require proof of homeowner’s insurance. If proof were
required, the burn ordinance would need to be amended.
Supervisor Martin reviewed the Meeting Summary Recommendations. It was noted
that a NIESA representative was present at the meeting and the recommendations
would be satisfactory to NIESA. Two concerns not addressed were severe
respiratory problems and Township-wide burn ordinance enforcement.
Supervisor Martin again opened the floor to discussion regarding the Meeting
Summary Recommendations:
Mr. Gillespie asked if the Township had setback requirements for wooded areas?
Supervisor Martin indicated that the current ordinance addresses setbacks for
wooded areas.
Clerk Zaban asked if a fee for inspecting fire pits could be imposed.
Supervisor Martin indicated that the Constable is paid $35 for each call he is
sent out on. Treasurer LeBlanc asked if NIESA could conduct the inspections in
lieu of a fee? Clerk Zaban indicated that NIESA does not inspect in their own
jurisdiction and he was doubtful that they would conduct the inspections in
Williamstown Township.
Mr. Durak asked if the nuisance ordinance could be enforced in areas where
someone has respiratory problems. Legal Counsel responded that the nuisance
ordinance could be enforced if there was a violation. However, if a burn permit
is issued then the fire is permitted and it would likely not violate the
nuisance ordinance.
Mr. Meadows asked how the ordinance would be enforced. Legal counsel indicated
that enforcement would be through the burn ordinance.
Supervisor Martin asked the Board if they were ready to propose a motion
regarding the Pebblebrook Burn Ordinance Petition. Trustee Wilbrink, Trustee
Wright and Clerk Zaban were in favor of moving forward. However, Trustee Wright
had concerns regarding the number of restrictions recommended. He suggested
that burn permits be limited to Friday, Saturday and Sunday and if there is a
reported problem, then the restrictions should be enforced. To enforce the
restrictions at the time of the burn permit request may not be in the best
interest of the Township. Supervisor Martin questioned the Friday, Saturday,
Sunday limitation because that might create a heavy concentration of fire
smoke. Mr. Durak agreed. Supervisor Martin indicated that typically campfire
requests are for one day. Treasurer LeBlanc felt the enforcement of a one-time
inspection is important because the spark arrestor could be checked on chimenea
type devices. Trustee Wilbrink felt the one time inspection with a fee is ok,
but what if the fire device is changed? It was also questioned if the numbers
of burn permits issued for Pebblebrook could be limited per day. Supervisor
Martin indicated that limiting burn permits would be difficult.
In conclusion, it was decided that Supervisor Martin would investigate and
recommend inspections fees for the Board to consider. Supervisor Martin asked
if there was any other information the Board would need to move forward with a
motion. Trustee Wilbrink would also like a recommendation for violation fines
and fees. Supervisor Martin indicated that she would recommend using the
current ordinance procedures. Trustee Wilbrink asked that seasoned firewood be
removed. Trustee Wright indicated that a lot of the recommended restrictions
are already in our ordinance and their burn permits should be as similar to our
current ordinance as possible.
Heather DeRath—4708 Sandstone: Indicated that people who signed the petition
did not know they were signing a petition that had a cost attached to it. The
goal behind the petition was to give opportunity to families to enjoy a few
fires per year. Limiting the number of fires would be fine. Treasurer LeBlanc
felt that the use of campfires may diminish over time as the initial novelty of
allowing campfires diminishes.
HALL RENTAL
Supervisor Martin reviewed the proposal submitted by Lissa Whitman to use the
hall for a weekly yoga class. Supervisor Martin checked insurance liability
with Donald Pixley who said the Township would need to be named on Ms.
Whitman’s insurance. There was Board consensus that a trial period be approved.
Legal counsel said that if the Board were to approve this, then the Township
would need to revise its rental agreement because currently it can’t be used
for commercial purposes. Legal counsel cautioned the Board that if you allow
commercial activities, then you might be opening up the hall to uses that would
not meet the Board’s approval. Supervisor Martin asked if instead of allowing
commercial uses, could the rental agreement be revised to only except the yoga
class. Trustee Wright suggested revising the rental agreement to read,
“exceptions based on Board approval.” Legal counsel recommended that the Board
define what is allowed then to go with the exception language.
Legal counsel will review the current rental hall agreement and make
recommendations for revision.
Trustee Wright made a motion that the Board go into closed session pursuant to
the Open Meetings Act, section 8d, to consider the purchase of real property
and to allow the recording secretary, Ernie St. Pierre and Jeff Bartram to be
present during closed session.
Roll Call: Trustee Wilbrink – Yes; Treasurer Leblanc- Yes; Trustee Wright-Yes;
Supervisor Martin-Yes; Clerk Zaban-Yes. Motion Passed 5-0.
JANUARY 18, 2005 -- CLOSED SESSION MEETING
Supervisor Martin reviewed the purpose of closed session was to review the
purchase of property on land contract from Frank Kolasa for the amount of
290,000 with payments of 30,000 down and two payments of 130,000 at the end of
the first and second year of the contract.
The Friends of the Library have put forward the down payment and the Foundation
agreed to the payment schedule using their 503c status.
The Township Board questioned who would be responsible for the two payments
should the Foundation not be able to make the payments using monies raised
through fundraising. Would the Township be responsible for those payments? Mr.
St. Pierre of the Library Foundation indicated that the Foundation didn’t even
know that the Township had to give approval for purchase or if the Township
would be responsible for payments should the Foundation default on the
contract.
Legal Counsel asked for clarification of how the Foundation came to purchase
the property in question. Mr. St. Pierre indicated that Mr. Kolasa had
contacted the Foundation some time ago regarding some property he may have
available. The land was not for sale, but he wanted to work with the Foundation
to come up with a contract that would be feasible for the Foundation. The
process has been going on for approximately 2 years. In the meantime, Mr.
Kolasa had listed the property for sale while the Foundation considered other
property. After many failed attempts to identify property, the Foundation went
back to Mr. Kolasa and worked out a contract that would fit within the
Foundation’s budget. The property has been appraised and the current house on
the property has been inspected.
Legal counsel confirmed that the Township Board is required to pass a
resolution authorizing the Foundation to purchase property. The second issue is
does the Township, and the other municipalities, want to assume financial
responsibility if the Foundation defaults. The answer may be that the purchase
contract has a clause that states, “in the event of a default the
municipalities will not be responsible for any remaining costs.” Mr. St. Pierre
also offered another option. If the Friends of the Library purchased the
property instead of the Foundation, then approval or responsibility of the
Township and municipalities could be avoided. Trustee Wright indicated that
because of the short timeline, February 15, and without discussion with the
other municipalities, then exclusion language within the contract may be the
best option.
The Board requested Legal Counsel to contact Mr. Kolasa to work out a contract
on behalf of the Township that would exclude the Township form any financial
responsibility in the event of a default in payment.
Trustee Wright made a motion to come out of close session. Trustee Wilbrink
seconded the motion and it passed unanimously.
Trustee Wilbrink made a motion to adjourn. Trustee Wright seconded the motion
and it passed it unanimously.
CLERK, STEVE ZABAN                     DATE
FEBRUARY 1, 2005
CALL TO ORDER
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order at 7:30 pm and reviewed
the agenda.
PLEDGE
ROLL CALL
Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer LeBlanc, Trustee Wright, Supervisor Martin, Clerk
Zaban.
CONSENT AGENDA:
Minutes of 1/4/05 meeting
Treasurer LeBlanc submitted a statement to be added to the minutes under
Treasurer’s Report to read, “Treasurer LeBlanc reported that he was not able to
reconcile the General Fund account because there was a discrepancy of
approximately $1,800.00 between the amount the bank statement said we had and
the amount that our Quickbooks accounting software said that we had. Quickbooks
indicated that we had $1,779.92 more than the bank indicated.”
Correction to page 5, Board of Review Appointments, sentence 6, change
“Treasurer Wilbrink” to “Trustee Wilbrink.”
Minutes of 1/8/94 meeting
Correct to BURN PETITION, third sentence—“lose” to “loss.”
Trustee Wilbrink asked the time each meeting is adjourned be added to the
minutes.
January Activity
Treasurer Leblanc asked if the vender bills listed are outstanding or paid.
Supervisor Martin said they are outstanding until they are approved at the
regular meeting.
Treasurer’s Report
He noted the Treasury Report Financial Activity in December 2004 and the Mason
State Bank CD interest paid. He noted that the Treasury Department is
continuing to work on the general fund discrepancy. The Treasury Department has
proposed making changes to the signatures on Township bank accounts.
Accounts Paid/Payable
No Comment
Building Inspector
It was noted that there were 13 building permits issued and 1 finaled.
Clerk Zaban made a motion to approve the Consent Agenda. Trustee Wilbrink
seconded the motion and it passed unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS:
Katie Lo: 290 E Sherwood Rd. -- Asked what is AFLAC insurance. Supervisor
Martin reviewed what AFLAC benefits are indicating that the Township has been
able to offer the benefits to employees working 20 hours or more as a benefit.
It is a voluntary program offered as a benefit.
NEW BUSINESS
Planning Commission Meeting Minutes 1/18/05. 
Planning Commissioner Chair, Bob Hayes, reported that the 1/18/05 meeting was a
light agenda in which the Planning Commission reviewed the revised master plan
time line and proposed survey. It was decided that the timeline would be
reviewed monthly and should it be necessary, the timeline could be terminated
at anytime. The draft community survey was reviewed and changes are reflected
in the minutes.
Supervisor Martin reported that she had researched mailing and postage
possibilities. The cost of mailing the survey with a self-stamped, self-
addressed envelop for return would be expensive and not be feasible. Trustee
Wilbrink asked if a self-addressed envelop would still be included for return.
Supervisor Martin suggested the survey be printed like the newsletter and could
be folded, with the return address pre-printed. Another option would be for
people to drop off the survey in the office. Planning Commissioner Hayes asked
if there could be any other incentives that could be used to help generate
interest in returning the survey. Trustee Wilbrink suggested a reminder phone
call to return the survey. Trustee Wilbrink asked when the survey would be
mailed. Supervisor Martin said it would take at least 2 weeks to review, print
and mail and would likely be late February before it goes out.
Annual Meeting
Supervisor Martin indicated that it has been two years since the last annual
meeting and should an annual meeting be held this year. She explained that it
is by vote of the Board to hold an annual meeting? Supervisor Martin asked if
the Board would want to make a motion to hold an annual meeting? There was no
discussion.
Trustee Wright made a motion that the Board not hold a 2005 annual meeting.
Clerk Zaban supported the motion and it passed unanimously.
Yoga Class
Supervisor Martin indicated that legal counsel had amended the rental agreement
to include the yoga class for the Board’s review. Treasurer Leblanc asked if
the instructors name should be on the rental agreement. Because this is a
rental agreement used for all rentals it was decided not to put the name of the
instructor, to strike the days and times. Other changes were noted for
regulations 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12. Trustee Wilbrink asked if the Board
should review the fee structure. Supervisor Martin indicated that the fee
structure is part of a separate contract and she would recommend the Board
approve the contract and fee structure as stated.
Treasurer LeBlanc made a motion that the Board approve the amended rental hall
agreement with the following change: strike the days and times. Trustee
Wilbrink seconded the motion and it passed unanimously.
Signature Cards
Treasurer Leblanc reviewed his letter submitted 1/20/05 to the Board requesting
that Deputy Clerk, Jenniffer Hartley, Deputy Treasurer Gwen Chirico-Brandon be
added to the signature cards and past Treasurer Nancy Fink’s signature be
removed. He also proposed that the check signing procedure consist of one
signature from the Clerk’s office and one from the Treasurer’s office and that
one signature must be an elected officials.
Treasurer Leblanc made a motion to add Deputy Treasurer Gwen Chirico-Brandon
and Deputy Clerk Jenniffer Hartley’s signatures to the bank signature cards and
to remove past Treasurer Nancy Fink’s signature from the bank signature card.
The check signing policy is to consist of two signatures: one from the Treasury
Department and one from the Clerk’s Department with one signature being an
elected officials. Trustee Wright seconded the motion and it passed
unanimously.
Budget Amendment
Treasurer LeBlanc submitted a budget amendment dated 1/25/05 with the following
changes: Change the Deputy Treasurer’s line item to 1,643.75 from 1,995.75. The
new total to be $4,438.26. Treasurer LeBlanc indicated the proposed amendment
was due to increased hours, conference and travel, and supply costs. Trustee
Wright recommended the budget amendment be for $4,500 because the budget is not
detailed as this amendment proposes, but is a general line item for Treasurer.
Supervisor Martin made a motion to approve moving $4,500 into the Treasury
budget from the contingency fund. Trustee Wright seconded the motion and it
passed unanimously.
Election Resolution
Clerk Zaban read the proposed Williamstown Township Board Resolution to the
Board for approval. Clerk Zaban indicated that the county has requested this
resolution be passed so that it can be attached to the order form for new
equipment.
Supervisor Martin made a motion to approve a Williamstown Township Board
Resolution as read by Clerk Zaban for voting equipment and software. Trustee
Wilbrink seconded the motion and a roll call vote was taken as indicated:
Roll call vote: Trustee Wilbrink – Yes; Treasurer LeBlanc -- Yes; Trust Wright
– Yes; Supervisor Martin -- Yes; Clerk Zaban – Yes. The motion passes 5-0.
Katie Lo asked for clarification of what is an optical reader. Clerk Zaban said
he has not seen the equipment and has little to share. However, the equipment
will be adapted to the current voting stations. The optical readers will be
able to count the votes immediately, which will cut down the amount of work by
voter volunteer workers. This equipment should be available for the May 3
school vote. Clerk Zaban reviewed the new precinct changes.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
None
COMPLAINTS
Supervisor Martin provided an update regarding the cattle on Meridian Road.
Supervisor Martin will arrange for the Dept of Agriculture to perform an
assessment of the site and provide a review of their finding. Supervisor Martin
indicated that the Township’s current zoning ordinances as they apply to AG-
Commercial zoning might need to be reviewed. There was question if the DEQ will
regulate the wetland. Supervisor Martin said it is not likely that the DEQ will
enforce any wetland regulations because of the Right to Farm Act.
REPORTS
NIESA
The minutes from the 1/6/05 meeting were provided in board packets. No
discussion.
Parks
The minutes from the 1/12/05 meeting were provided in board packets. The Parks
Committee will be doing some invasive plant work.  
Library
There is a Building Authority meeting scheduled to continue working on setting
up the Authority and its documents. Supervisor Martin met with the CADL board
and they confirmed they would assist in getting a building up and running. Once
the building is up, they will put everything in to operate it and will operate
it. Katie Lo asked if they had looked at the Keller Building? Supervisor Martin
said not to her knowledge and then reviewed some recent buildings they have
looked at. They are still looking and may have a spot identified. There was
continued discussion of building options.
Other
Clerk Zaban and Supervisor Martin attended the Michigan Township Association
conference. It was very informative. The opening address indicated that general
law townships should not expect any increase in funding from the state. In
fact, the funding to townships will continue to decrease. Bob Hayes asked if
the Headly Amendment would supply funds for programs mandated by the state?
Supervisor Martin said that, to her knowledge, part of the amendment does not
apply to townships.
Supervisor Martin has been elected president to the Ingham County Assessor
Association for 2005.
Supervisor Martin attended an Eagle Scout presentation for Alex Shultink. The
next one is scheduled for March 13, Jeff Edwards, if anyone is interested in
attending.
Trustee Wright attended the City of Williamston Bridge Meeting. The project is
two weeks behind schedule. The footbridge is ready to be put in place as soon
as the permit comes in. One side of the bridge will be repaired at a time with
a traffic signal to direct traffic. The park parking lot will not be available.
They will most likely have to change Jubilee procedures. Traffic signal
logistics are still being worked out for the five residents on north Riverside.
There will be three lights. There will be two times during the course of the
project that the bridge will be closed completely -- April and August.
Treasurer LeBlanc attended the Michigan Municipal Treasurers Winter Workshop.
He received information regarding computer system updates for the tax roll.
Treasurer LeBlanc also thanked Mark Tabor for his recent help to the Treasury
Department Williamstown Township Budget Hearing is set for 2/15/05.
Martin Wright made a motion to adjourn the meeting. Supervisor Martin seconded
the motion and it passed unanimously.
Meeting adjourned at 8:45 pm
Clerk Steve Zaban                        Date
FEBRUARY 15, 2005
Supervisor Martin opened the public hearing by asking if there were any changes
to Revenues?
Treasurer LeBlanc increased interest and rent from 9,100 to 20,120.
Supervisor Martin then proceeded to review the budget by item beginning on page
four with General governmental Legislative Control as follows:
101-101-702
Supervisor Martin indicated that trustees has been   increased from to allow
for two extra meetings in 2005.
101-101-801; 802; 812
Supervisor Martin indicated that auditor, legal and consultant fees have been
increased based on previous usage and expected issues for 2005.
101-101-910
Supervisor Martin indicated that insurance has   been   increased due to
expected rate increases and the addition of a bond.
Public Comment: Ruth Templeton (1435 Epley Rd.) – asked for clarification of
line item 101-171-956. Clerk Zaban indicated memberships are for professional
organizations that the Township are members of.
101-171-703
Public Comment: George Durak (116 Feldspar) – asked why there was an increase
in the Supervisor’s assistant’s salary? Supervisor Martin responded that the
increase is due to a full year of work and an expected salary increase.
Ruth Templeton asked if the supervisor’s assistant’s hour would be increased?
Supervisor Martin indicated that the hours would increase.
101-171-728 & 730
  Supervisor Martin noted that a supply and postage line item has been added to
each department budget due to changes in tracking procedures for costs of
supplies used in specific areas.
101-170-865
Public Comment: Ruth Templeton asked for clarification of line item 101-170-
865. Supervisor Martin indicated mileage is reimbursement f or business use of
personal vehicles for travel to such places as the county for meetings, etc. As
with supplies and postage, the line item is new to each department. Previously
it was tracked in a different area.
101-191-702
Supervisor Martin indicated there is one school election in 2005. The schools
will reimburse the Township for a portion of the cost. There is no major
election. Therefore, there is a decrease in salaries.
  101-215-703
Trustee Wilbrink asked if the Deputy Clerk's salary was for 10 hours per week?
Clerk Zaban said it is approximately 12.5 hours.
Public Comment: Ruth Templeton asked why the AFLAC benefit is not reflected in
salaries? Trustee Martin said it is a health benefit and reflected in another
line item.
101-215-704
Public Comment: George Durak asked if the recording secretary is the same
person as the supervisor’s assistant. Supervisor Martin said it is the same
person working in different capacities.
101-253-703; 704; 728; 730; 864; and 865
Treasurer LeBlanc indicated that it appeared his proposed budget items have
been reflected in this proposed budget. Supervisor Martin said those figures
were posted as previously motioned by Trustee Wright.
Public Comment:
George Durak asked for clarification of what is temporary helped used for.
Treasurer LeBlanc indicated that temporary help is used for such tasks as
helping with large mailings, etc. However, cross training with other current
office staff is being considered in lieu of temporary help.
Gary Gillespie (4701 Jadestone) – asked if auditor services are scheduled under
temporary help? Supervisor Martin indicated that auditor fees are scheduled
under legislative control.
Ruth Templeton asked for clarification of what training is used for. Treasurer
LeBlanc indicated that training is used primarily for the tax software.
However, as new staff members, there is other training that is needed.
101-247-865
Treasure LeBlanc asked for clarification of what mileage is used for.
Supervisor Martin indicated that the rate of reimbursement is set by the state
and it is for using your own car for Township business.
101-209-803
Supervisor Martin indicated that the outside assessor salaries are for Roger
Roty and Patty Armstrong. The Township conducts reassessments on a five-year
cycle. In 2005 a larger section will be reassessed because of the density in
the area being assessed.
101-209-804
Supervisor Martin indicated that tax services are fees charged by the county
for tax services such as spot-checking the assessor records.
Public Comment:
Ruth Templeton commented that previously one person did all assessing.
Supervisor Martin indicated that the cost of assessing have only increased by
approximately 3,000 in the past four years. Supervisor Martin reviewed the
specific duties of the Assessor Level II; Assessor Level III; and Assessor
Level IV. She also indicated that the former supervisor used a different system
in charging out assessing costs. With the current procedures, control in not
left with one person and it provides for more fair accurate assessments.
101-265-805
Supervisor Martin clarified the role of custodian and indicated that things
such as snow removal/lawn maintenance have been split out into their own line
item.
Public Comment:
Ruth Templeton asked for clarification of what the salary is for Mark Tabor and
Michelle Morse. Supervisor Martin indicated that Mark Tabor salary is
approximately $27,000 and Michelle Morse is paid $10.00 an hour. However,
Supervisor Martin would anticipate an hourly rate increase for Michelle Morse.
101-265-910
Supervisor Martin indicated that insurance is for the Township truck,
equipment, inventory, and the building. The increase is not only due to rate
increases, but the addition of equipment and square footage of the building.
Public Comment:
George Durak asked if the Township insurance goes out for bids every 3 years?
Clerk Zaban indicated that the same company has been used for some time, but he
is considering getting other quotes. However, it should be noted that the
current insurance agent is a Township resident and knows the Township’s
history. The Township also conducts a yearly review with the agent to review
any increases
Trustee Wilbrink asked if the Township is credited with any discounts because
of the security? Supervisor Martin would need to check the policy.
101-265-920
Supervisor Martin indicated that utility costs are for propane and electricity.
101-265-975
Supervisor Martin indicated that site improvements are primarily for
landscaping costs.
101-256-980
Supervisor Martin indicated that capital outlay is for the purchase of
equipments such as lawn equipment.
Trustee Wilbrink asked if buying equipment and those continued costs are
comparative to contracting the services out? Trustee Wright reviewed the
decision-making history in deciding to provide services in-house versus
contracting. With the addition of the cemeteries, park, and Township parking
lot and landscape it was determined that it would be more costly to contract
out the services. In addition, the Township receives more timely service with
in-house services.
101-265-990
Supervisor Martin indicated that renovation is the furniture payments, which
will be completed this year.
101-276-807
Supervisor Martin indicated that cemetery expenditures are monies moved from
the general fund to the cemetery budget. The cemetery budget is tracked under a
separate account.
101-294-702
Supervisor Martin indicated that office manager costs have decreased because of
new procedures and cross training of tasks with current staff.
Public Comment:
Ruth Templeton asked what the hourly rate of the receptionist is? Supervisor
Martin indicated that the hourly rate is dependent on the rate of the person
who is assigned that day to the position.
101-294-704
Supervisor Martin indicated that temporary help is for filing, large mailings,
etc.
101-294-728
Supervisor Martin indicated that office supplies are for supplies for general
use that cannot be allocated to a department such as printer ink, paper, etc.
101-294-730
Supervisor Martin indicated that postage and publishing cost are down because
those costs have been partially reallocated to specific departments.
101-294-930
Supervisor Martin indicated that repairs/maintenance are for computer repairs,
copier lease, etc.
Trustee Wilbrink asked if leasing a copier is comparable to purchasing a
copier? Trustee Wright indicated that the decision to lease a copier when
through the same decision making process as providing services in-house versus
contracting. Leasing a copier was the best option.
101-294-956
Clerk Zaban indicated that memberships under this line item are for the
Township’s Michigan Township Association membership.
101-294-985
Clerk Zaban indicated that a storage facility is needed for election equipment
through the spring. He would propose a $250 budget.
101-294-980
Supervisor Martin indicated that capital outlay is for codification of Township
ordinances.
101-411-702
Supervisor Martin indicated that fees are for constable services and is being
reduced.
101-371-811
Supervisor Martin indicated that the inspection fees are self-supporting from
the building permit fees.
101-400-702
Supervisor Martin indicated that commissioners’ salaries have been increased to
facilitate 6 extra meetings. An increased to $14,400 would accommodate the most
possible meetings for the year.
Trustee Wilbrink asked if it is necessary to have nine planning commissioners?
Supervisor Martin indicated that it is state statute to have nine or five.
Discussion continued regarding the role of the Planning Consultants and the
Planning Commissioners’ contribution to the decision making process. It was
determined that the question may not be the number of commissioners, but who is
appointed as a planning commissioner. Planning commissioner appointments renew
in September.
101-400-956
Supervisor Martin indicated that dues and memberships are for the Michigan
Society of Planning.
101-400-812
Supervisor Martin indicated that ordinance systems/cnsultnts is increased due
to master plan revisions planned for 2005.
101-400-705
Supervisor Martin indicated that planning assistant has also been increased due
to master plan revisions planned for 2005.
101-400-704
Supervisor Martin indicated that recording secretary is increased to
accommodate the additional meetings planned for 2005.
101-425-702
Supervisor Martin indicated that commissioners’ salaries are for three meetings
per year.
101-411-814
Supervisor Martin indicated that the county sets road improvements and
maintenance and the Township has to match that amount in order to receive the
county’s portion.
101-441-816
Supervisor Martin indicated that recycling is for the person to run recycling
once a month.
101-441-817
Supervisor Martin indicated that NPDES permit is for the watershed permit.
101-441-818
Supervisor Martin added this line item to provide for HASMET costs.
101-751-880
Supervisor Martin indicated that pool appropriation is for the pool at the high
school that is a community pool.
Public Comment:
George Durak asked why the school doesn’t pay for the pool? Supervisor Martin
indicated that since it is a community pool at the high school, the Township
entered into a contract 10 years ago to help fund it.
101-751-881
Supervisor Martin indicated that parkland costs for 2005 are for a prairie
burn, prairie planning, a dog run, etc.
101-851-710
Supervisor Martin indicated that employee insurance is the AFLAC benefit.
101-851-713
Supervisor Martin indicated that pension plan is the 457 plan in which the
Township matches employee contributions. It also reflects an increase for Mark
Tabor’s contribution match.
In summary, Supervisor Martin indicated that with changes to expected revenues,
other miscellaneous expenditure changes, the recommended Township budget would
have a surplus of $4,233.
CEMETERY BUDGET REVIEW
209-000-602
Supervisor Martin indicated that under revenue burial space has increased due
to the increase of lot prices.
209-000-665
Supervisor Martin indicated that she would anticipate an increase in interest
on cemetery funds.
290-276-703
Supervisor Martin indicated that the Sexton costs have been reduced because Ben
will be paid as a consultant. Trustee Wright stated we need to change amounts
since Mark is the sexton now. Therefore, 15,000 would be for sexton and 4200
would be for Ben as caretaker.
290-276-900
Supervisor Martin indicated that the fuel costs have been reduced because some
of those cost have been moved to the Township’s budget.
290-276-980
Supervisor Martin indicated that capital outlay increase for equipment
purchases.
In summary, Supervisor Martin indicated that the Cemetery Budget has a surplus
of $13,850.
Trustee Wright made a motion to close the public hearing. Clerk Zaban seconded
the motion and it passed unanimously.
Other
Trustee Wilbrink asked if splitting wages up across departments is too
cumbersome and suggested that all wages be listed under one line item.
Supervisor Martin indicated that all wages could be listed in the general fund,
and is supported by the auditor’s recommendations, but historically the
Treasurer has requested that salaries be separated by department for accounting
purposes. Treasurer LeBlanc indicated that he preferred separate line items
because of wages are paid from a different bank that other expenditures
George Durak indicated that it is easier for the public to interpret the budget
with salaries split out by department.
Trustee Wilbrink made a motion to adjourn. Clerk Zaban seconded the motion and
it passed unanimously.
The meeting adjourned at 7:10 pm.
Clerk Steve Zaban               Date
MARCH 1, 2005
CALL TO ORDER
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order at 7:30 pm and reviewed
the agenda.
PLEDGE
ROLL CALL
Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer LeBlanc, Trustee Wright, Supervisor Martin, Clerk
Zaban.
CONSENT AGENDA:
Minutes of 2/1/05 meeting
No Comment.
February Activity
No Comment.
Treasurer’s Report
Treasurer LeBlanc noted that CD maturity dates have been added to the
Treasurer’s report. Treasurer LeBlanc also reported that the Clerk, Treasurer,
Deputy Treasurer and Deputy Clerk met to resolve the general fund
discrepancies. It was resolved that the Deputies would work on resolving the
problem at a later date. The Deputy Treasurer has started that review and made
a report of her findings.
Treasurer LeBlanc distributed a memo to Board members requesting a check to pay
for training in May. Supervisor Martin asked if the expense is scheduled in the
2005-06 budget? The expense is scheduled in the 2005-06 budget, but he wants to
pay out of current 2004-05. There was board consensus to make payment for the
training requested.
Accounts Paid/Payable
No Comment.
Building Inspector
No Comment.
Trustee Wright made a motion to approve the Consent Agenda. Clerk Zaban
seconded the motion and it passed unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS:
No Comment.
NEW BUSINESS
Planning Commission Meeting Minutes 2/15/05. 
Planning Commission Chair, Bob Hayes, reported that the 2/15/05 meeting was
short. The Planning Commission is making recommendation to the Board to approve
the Final Preliminary Plat Approval for Springbrook Estates with conditions
noted by McKenna in their letter dated 2/9/05.
Supervisor Martin reported that legal counsel has reviewed the covenants and
the applicant has made his recommended changes, which clears condition number
one. Conditions 2-5 have also been resolved.
Trustee Wright made a motion to approve the Final Preliminary Plat Approval for
Springbrook Estates with no conditions. Treasurer LeBlanc seconded the motion
and it passed unanimously.
Brookstone Preliminary Plat Extension
Supervisor Martin reported that the City has approved the sanitary hookups for
Brookstone. This project has been delayed because of sewer approval. Now that
is approved, it is anticipated that they will need no further extensions.
Trustee Wright made a motion to approve a one-year extension for Brookstone
Preliminary Plat Approval with conditions 2-5 from McKenna’s letter dated 1/10/
2003. Clerk Zaban seconded the motion and it passed unanimously.
Supervisor Martin indicated that the Planning Commission meeting regularly
scheduled for March 15 is rescheduled to March 22 due to Board of Review
meetings scheduled for March 15. A notice will be sent out to Planning
Commissioners.
EMS Jamie Janson
Not present. Report in board packet for review.
Band Shell
Howard Dahlstrom, representative from the Williamston Beautification Fund
distributed and reviewed an informational flyer regarding the Fund’s efforts to
construct a new Band Shell in McCormick Park similar to the band shell at Lake
Lansing Park. The Fund will be fundraising to pay for the band shell at an
approximate cost of $150,000. Residents can become donors by purchasing plaques
to be placed at the band shell. The Fund will also be looking for grant money
as part of their fundraising efforts. It is anticipated that the fundraising
will take approximately two years. Anyone interested in participating can
attend the next meeting scheduled for March 17, 7:00 p.m. at the Museum Depot.
Board Meeting Dates
Supervisor Martin reviewed the proposed 2005-06 Board Meeting dates. Board
Workshop meetings dates will be added to the 2005-06 schedule of meetings.
Trustee Wilbrink made a motion to approve the 2005-06 Board Meeting Schedule.
Trustee Wright seconded the motion and it passed unanimously.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Pebblebrook Campfire
Supervisor Martin reviewed the steps taken to date in consideration of the
Pebblebrook Campfire Petition. Supervisor Martin presented legal counsel’s
recommendations for fees and ordinance revision. The Ordinance revision would
include additional restrictions for Pebblebrook as follows:
a.   No burning when winds are over 10 mph
b.   Initial burn permit required
c.   Approved devices not to exceed 36 inches in diameter and equipped with a
spark arrester
d.   One time physical inspection by Township with fee of $25.
Treasurer LeBlanc submitted a revision to the ordinance to be incorporated in
“c” that read as follows: “In-ground fire rings or fire pits are not permitted
in Pebblebrook.” Discussion followed regarding the need to be specific
regarding the type of fire unit to be used whether in-ground, aboveground, or
aboveground with legs. There was also discussion regarding assessing a fee and
the need for a physical inspection.
Heather DeRath (4708 Sandstone Dr.): Expressed her concern for above ground
devices (e.g., the storage, location, etc.) versus below ground. She indicated
that when the petitioners signed the petition, they were not signing in belief
that there would be cost or fees associated with having a campfire.
George Durak (116 Feldspar Dr.): Reminded the Board that at the facilitator
meeting there was general agreement that the campfires would be above ground
with a spark arrestor for safety.
Ruth Templeton (1435 Epley Rd.): Offered that a fee, in her opinion, would be
unreasonable.
Supervisor Martin stated that she was not in favor of the fee since all other
burn permits were free.
Gary Gillespie (4701 Jadestone): Countered that a fee is not discriminatory
because their subdivision is unique to the Township and for safety reasons,
restrictions are needed.
Walt Aven expressed concern for an inspection and any liability that would
create for the Township.
Clerk Zaban made a motion to accept the Burn Ordinance as submitted; to delete
“d” and revise a-c as follows:
a.   No burning when winds are over 10 mph.
b.   Initial burn permit issued after Township inspection.
c.   Approved devices not to exceed 36 inches in diameter; equipped with a
spark arrester; and in-ground fire rings or fire pits are not permitted.
Trustee Wright seconded the motion and it passed unanimously.
Budget 2005-2006
Trustee Wright a motion to accept the budget as printed and dated 2/15/05.
Trustee Wilbrink seconded the motion and it passed unanimously.
COMPLAINTS
Epley Road
Supervisor Martin reviewed a complaint regarding construction equipment being
used on a property for a personal business, which is in violation of the zoning
ordinance. Supervisor Martin indicated that she has met with the property owner
and sent a letter dated 2/22/05 indicating that the property owner has 10 days
to submit a remedial plan or make corrections as stated. To date, no plan has
been submitted. The Board was in consensus that if a plan is not submitted by
the deadline date, then Supervisor Martin should take further action as stated
in her letter to the property owner.
REPORTS
NIESA
The minutes from the 2/3/05 meeting were provided in Board packets. No
discussion.
Parks
No report.
Library
Land has been purchased on Grand River near Brent’s Pizza to build a new
library. Three municipalities are still working on developing a Building
Authority.
Other
The City of Williamston has sent an email alerting the Township that
construction will start on the Putnam Street Bridge Monday March 7 at 7:00 a.m.
Supervisor Martin and Kurt Guter attended the State Board of Review meeting
where they were informed of new Board of Review regulations.
Supervisor Martin conducted a meeting with the Assessor Board and BS&A to learn
new information regarding the tax and assessing software.
Next Workshop meeting is scheduled for March 24 at 2:00 p.m. instead of the
regularly scheduled time due to Board of Review meetings.
Trustee Wilbrink agreed to attend the next Looking Glass Watershed meeting.
Trustee Wright made a motion to adjourn the meeting. Supervisor Martin seconded
the motion and it passed unanimously.
Adjourned at 8:55 p.m.
Clerk Steve Zaban                        Date
APRIL 5, 2005
CALL TO ORDER
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order at 7:30pm and reviewed the
agenda.
ROLL CALL
Trustee Wilbrink; Treasurer LeBlanc; Trustee Wright; Supervisor Martin; Clerk
Zaban.
CONSENT AGENDA:
Minutes of 3/1/05 meeting
Trustee Wilbrink asked for a correction to page five of the minutes of the
March 29th meeting: correction should be ade under MEMOS. The memo date 3/24/05
should read 3/29/05.
Minutes of 3/29/05 meeting
no comments
Treasurer’s Report
Treasurer LeBlanc reported that in the month of February treasury disbursed
just under 2.1 million dollars of property taxes and drain assessments to the
taxing authorities. On page two of Treasurer's Report note the new maturity
date for the Republic Bank CD and the increased interest to 3.4%.
Accounts Paid/Payable
Trustee Wilbrink questioned the legal bills the Township has incurred.
Supervisor Martin responded that over $3,000. was paid regarding a complaint to
the property on Sherwood Road. Also the lawyer came to a few workshops and
library authority meetings. Clerk Zaban has an itemized statement for perusal
in the office.
Trustee Wilbrink questioned the Verizon Wireless bill. Supervisor Martin
explained the cost.
Building Inspector
no comment
Trustee Wilbrink asked if there were any minutes of the special meeting on
February 22nd. Clerk Zaban responded that the minutes are available in the
Township file.
Clerk Zaban made a motion to approve the Consent Agenda. Treasurer LeBlanc
seconded the motion and the motion passed unanimously.
PUBLIC COMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS:
Katie Lo asked if there is a jogging track on the wish list for the Township
park and what is the cost? Supervisor Martin responded that the parks committee
will be meeting this week and she will ask and relay the information to Katie.
Supervisor Martin commented that the Township had received a Thank You poster
from the schools for promoting their recycle campaign (on display in the
meeting room).
Ruth Templeton questioned the lawyer fees on the report: Are we winning for all
the money we have spent? Supervisor Martin responded affirmatively.
NEW BUSINESS
Planning Commission Meeting minutes 3-22-05
Bob Hayes reported that at the meeting of March 22 nd  the commission called
for a public hearing on Joseph Perkin's property rezoning request for 38 acres
to be commercial. A proposal was made to revise the text for conditional
rezoning.
A discussion ensued regarding the need for affordable housing. Conditional
zoning is being considered as a possible solution.
Hayes reported that the other part of Breukman's presentation that was of
interest was that people are willing to pay a premium for lots with open space
for development.
Hayes also said that a comment from one person suggested that something be done
with the Branch School. It is in disrepair and because it is a great historical
site if shouldn't be ignored. Supervisor Martin said Cindy Davis had written an
article in the upcoming Township newsletter suggesting that a volunteer group
be organized to form a historical society. Other sites in the Township were
mentioned to add to the list of possible historical sites.
Treasurer LeBlanc asked Hayes: Are there any requirements or pressure from the
government to develop housing for different socio- economic levels? Hayes
responded that he didn't think so.
2005 Local Road Improvements
Supervisor Martin reported that the first letter was received from Ingham
County Road Commission asking for suggestions on the road improvement program
for the Township. Supervisor Martin asked Clerk Zaban to follow up on the
letter.
Supervisor Martin reported that Dana Mirate wanted to have Barry Road paved and
asked that Clerk Zaban include this request in his review with the committee.
Supervisor Martin commented that Terry Monahan who lives locally would like to
serve on the transportation committee and Clerk Zaban will follow up on that
request and set up a meeting by the Board's next meeting.
Street light request
Supervisor Martin reported that Dilyn Duffey requested a street light for
Thatcher Road. She said that this is an MDOT decision and that the Board should
respond to Duffey suggesting that he contact MDOT.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
MDOT- report of Grand River and Zimmer
Supervisor Martin reported that the Board received a report from MDOT regarding
the traffic study at Grand River and Zimmer Roads. The report stated that the
Township does not have the warrants to meet a traffic light. A traffic study
was done in August. She said this was a disappointment because traffic was not
normal during that vacation month. MDOT will have another spot study done.
Trustee Wright said that the Board specifically asked that the study be done
during school. Supervisor Martin commented that MDOT was reminded not to do the
study in the summer but Steve Shaughnessy, MDOT Traffic and Safety Engineer,
has no control over when they do the study. She said it is still a dangerous
corner. Trustee Wright commented that the more subdivisions built in that area
the better the chances of eventually having a traffic light installed at that
intersection.
Investment Questions
Supervisor Martin asked if there were any questions that Clerk Zaban could
submit to Mr. Rozelle regarding the retirement plan program discussed at the
March 29 th Board workshop meeting. There was a brief discussion regarding fees
as compared to the present investment program. Supervisor Martin asked that all
comments and questions be put in writing and submitted to Clerk Zaban for
follow up.
Cemetery 2005 Amendment
Supervisor Martin reported that the Board still had to amend the Cemetery
budget and the contributions to it. She reported that she had talked with the
Township deputies and to Treasurer LeBlanc regarding the discrepancies. She
said that it appears on paper that too much money has been deposited to the
account.
Treasurer LeBlanc commented that the problem is a QuickBooks issue and this
will be corrected.
Trustee Wilbrink commented that the cost seems high.
Trustee Wilbrink questioned the consultation expense. Clerk Zaban said the
software representative came in and spent four hours training the staff.
Trustee Wilbrink commented that there was a dramatic increase in insurance and
asked if it was attributed to the new Cemetery building? Supervisor Martin
responded that there is lot of new machinery to insure. Trustee Wilbrink asked
about the repairs as well since most of equipment is new. Supervisor Martin
responded that part of the costs for repairs and maintenance were for dumpsters
to clean up piles of debris that had been there for 15 years. In addition, over
$1500. is attributed to the port-a-potty costs which had not been there before.
There were repairs on the truck and the blades etc. Trustee Wright asked
whether the new budget more represents the actual costs and suggested that the
Board clue the Cemetery committee that they have to work within a budget.
Trustee Wilbrink commented that the budget is so much higher than previous
years and that $2700 misc. that wasn’t classified for something else should be
itemized.
Trustee Wilbrink questioned the capital outlay for new equipment. He commented
that almost a $35,000.00 difference was spent than was budgeted. Supervisor
Martin responded that every month the Township will issue a statement to the
Cemetery committee to help them stay in line with what they have to spend.
Supervisor Martin commented that the committee obviously overspent on the
Cemetery building. She said there was $12,000 just to get the electricity back
to the new building. Supervisor Martin said regardless of how it is
appropriated the total amount spent is still the same.
Trustee Wilbrink commented that there is a big difference in what was
appropriated and what was spent. Supervisor Martin responded that the Board
needs to keep better track of the committee's spending and have financial
statements available at their meetings. Trustee Wilbrink said we need to have
this statement on a quarterly basis and Supervisor Martin responded that it
should be available on a monthly basis until the committee can get going.
Trustee Wright asked if the Board has a body currently sitting on Cemetery
meetings. Supervisor Martin responded that the Clerk has sat but if he isn't
available he needs to make arrangements for a representative to attend these
meetings.
Trustee Wright made a motion to amend the budget by $19,000. Clerk Zaban
supported the motion. The motion was passed.
Ruth Templeton asked if this is a new Cemetery committee.
Kate Lo asked will the amended amount come out of the general fund account.
Supervisor Martin responded that the Cemetery committee has a reserve.
Bob Hayes asked what is the surplus for, if not to spend on this? Supervisor
Martin commented that the Cemetery budget should be handled like the park
budget. The spending should be monitored right down to the penny and the
committee should be held to the budget. If they want to re appropriate they
should go to approval from the Board. The Cemetery committee can come forward
and ask for their surplus money.
Trustee Wilbrink commented that they should consider buying future land to
expand the Cemetery. Clerk Zaban said that expansion has been discussed many
times. He said that the committee felt they had enough land to go 30 years at
least and the Board felt that there was enough land for about 5-10 years. Clerk
Zaban said the discussion didn’t go any further.
Supervisor Martin indicated that the Cemetery will buy another lawn mower this
year and then they are pretty much set with equipment. She reported that the
Cemetery finally got eaves troughs on the old building.
COMPLAINTS
1835 Epley Rd
Supervisor Martin reported that the Township had sent everything to Mr. Stevens
Clerk Zaban reported that the Township received a complaint about excess
equipment on the property and that Mr. Stevens knows the situation and the
Township has spent a lot of time in discussions with him.
Supervisor Martin read excerpts from Mr. Stevens letter and said that Mr.
Stevens will have to make other arrangements as storing vehicles outside while
being maintained is not acceptable. The vehicles have to be kept inside the
storage facility. Supervisor Martin discussed the noise disturbances.
Supervisor Martin responded that the Township will respond to Mr. Stevens that
he can't keep the vehicles out. Regarding the storage tanks; Mr. Stevens
communicated in his letter that he spoke with Paul Domagalski of Domagalski
Research and Consulting, who subsequently talked with MDEQ and the fire
marshal. Supervisor Martin said that this information should be submitted to
the Township in formal letters from Mr. Domagalski, et al. Mr. Stevens felt
that it was the building inspector who inspected the tanks. Supervisor Martin
said the Township building inspector has no jurisdiction over that. Howard
Dahlstrom commented that MDEQ sends some one out within 24 hours to resolve
issues quickly.
Supervisor Martin said that in regard to the removal of debris it would be
removed by May 15 th . She asked if the Board is agreeable to that date. Howard
Dahlstrom will need to check to make sure that the debris is gone by that time.
Trustee Wright said the other issue of removing the vehicles may be a bigger
issue.
Clerk Zaban said that Mr. Steven's lumber will be gone by end of July.
Inspector Aven said Mr. Stevens will need a permit to make the building larger
and that the junk that is sitting outside should be put in there.
Trustee Wright said if he plans on expanding his building the Board will know
he is moving forward to remove building materials and to house his vehicles.
There is no reason for him to wait to get a building permit. He will have six
months. If he pulls the permit it shows the Board that he is serious about
doing something.
Supervisor Martin indicated that she would respond to Mr. Stevens.
1054 E Sherwood Rd
Supervisor Martin reported on the issue regarding Mr. Ciolek's property. The
court issued a full injunction demanding that Mr. Ciolek get everything up to
code and pull the appropriate permits.
REPORTS
NIESA
Trustee Wilbrink indicated the committee is still trying to find a location. He
said that they discussed the possibility of the city building but felt that
they would have to make a lot more improvements plus address the housing needs.
Supervisor Martin asked if Trustee Wilbrink would want to be on that committee
and that she would write a letter from the Township that gives him all the
voting rights. Trustee Wilbrink responded affirmatively and added that the
committee has to work together as a group instead of considering all the
different organizations that are combined.
Parks
Supervisor Martin reported that another prairie was burned on Sunday. The Parks
committee is meeting tomorrow and she will be there to get an update. She noted
that Nancy Fink would be out of town and therefore not attending the Parks
committee meeting.
Library
Supervisor Martin said that the Building Authority hasn't met recently but at
the last meeting they determined that they need to have their own legal counsel
prepare their contract.
Other
Supervisor Martin commented on the Eagle Scout letter that the Township
received and asked if any of the Board members could represent the Township by
attending Sunday, April 17 th at 3pm at St. Mary's Church. Trustee Wright said
that he can attend and will confirm with Scoutmaster Schuck early next week.
Treasurer memo
Supervisor Martin read excerpts from Treasurer Leblanc’s letter requesting a
Board vote to advise on the discrepancy issue. Trustee Wright asked Treasurer
LeBlanc if he was confident that everything was done that could be to find this
discrepancy. Treasurer LeBlanc said he was not sure he knew what to look for.
He added that the demands of tax season held up the process. Also, he said that
each month he checks the math and is inclined to think that the bank is right.
QuickBooks had already reconciled the account but the reconciliation in
September showed the discrepancy in question, the bank, however, was
consistent. Treasurer LeBlanc added that the auditor Bill Tucker said the last
time a change was made it was something done retroactively. Treasurer LeBlanc
discussed the history of the discrepancy and how it may have occurred.
Treasurer LeBlanc commented on the possibility of changing accounting software
programs to one that is dedicated to government units. He said he had
researched different software programs and found that QuickBooks was very
inexpensive in comparison. He said the BS & A software package costs $15,400.00
to purchase. One day of training costs $800. QuickBooks Pro 2005 is $600.00 for
a five user license. He added that there is an online QuickBooks service that
costs $30.00/month for 10 users plus free upgrades and more benefits. Treasurer
LeBlanc said that he is not supporting any change from QuickBooks but feels
that Teach-U-Comp is not adequate for the Township needs. Treasury needs more
intense training.
Treasurer LeBlanc said that the auditor charges $90 per hour and obviously will
find stuff quicker than the Township staff and may also find patterns of things
the staff are doing wrong and that we can correct, but the auditor can't
guarantee he will find the discrepancy problem. He said that we haven't
reconciled the general fund account. He said that if we choose to write off the
approximate $1700., a similar glitch in QuickBooks may occur some time later.
Supervisor Martin made a motion to instruct Treasurer LeBlanc to write off this
amount to adjust for the discrepancy.
Trustee Wright supports the motion.
Treasurer LeBlanc commented that the auditor advised to double check, and
during the initial phase of researching the problem Treasurer LeBlanc and staff
were able to reduce the discrepancy amount by about $25. He added that there
may be a special way to adjust this so that we don't lose the money.
Trustee Wilbrink suggested amending the motion to contact the auditor to
properly change the discrepancy. Supervisor Martin accepted that amendment.
Trustee Wright agreed.
Treasurer LeBlanc added that he would attach a letter to the document in the
general fund to inform the auditor.
Motion passed unanimously.
Board of Review
Supervisor Martin reported that the BOR went well and only 20 property owners
came in. She reported that assessing reconciled with the County on March 28 th
.
Web Site
Supervisor Martin reported that the Township website is up and running. She
said that applications will soon be available on line and that the newsletter
is already available on line. Cemetery and recycling info will be on soon.
Supervisor Martin announced the address for the audience as
Williamstowntownship.com and added that the website is in the process of
building; if any one wants something on the website please contact her. In
addition the meeting minutes will be on as soon as they are codified.
Hayes asked if building permits are on line. Supervisor Martin said not yet but
they will be soon and they will have to be in triplicate. But general
applications are available. Trustee Wright asked if applicants will be able to
submit applications on line. Supervisor Martin responded that ability is maybe
in the future.
Ruth Templeton asked if a list of all the meetings would be available on the
site. Supervisor Martin responded affirmatively. Trustee Wright added that the
website doesn't take the place of normal information that is available through
postings or in the office. The website information is in addition to the
regular information.
Watershed
Trustee Wilbrink reported on the Looking Glass Watershed meeting. He indicated
that the Township is only 2% of that watershed but the Township is in the area
that is most contaminated. Trustee Wright asked if there was any information on
the source of the contamination. Trustee Wilbrink responded that they were not
sure but are still working on organizing and getting funding to try to clean it
up. He added that there was not much contamination in the creeks north of the
Township. Mostly by the Shaftsburg area. He said that most everything in the
Township runs north to the Looking Glass River.
Other
Supervisor Martin noted there were some extra letters from McKenzie that should
be noted.
Supervisor Martin noted that Millennium had some changes.
Economic development meeting is April 20 th . Supervisor Martin asked if anyone
could attend that meeting. Treasurer LeBlanc indicated he would be out of town
most of April. Trustee Wilbrink indicated he would be able to go on the 20 th .
Supervisor Martin reported that from MTA a release was received regarding
meetings to evaluate assessing issues and which unit should control them.
Supervisor Martin discussed the recycling letters and the SOAR Recycling
meeting. Trustee Wright commented that the Township has room to expand the
recycling program. If the Township ever needed another container then the costs
would double. He said that the Township doesn't check for residency but if we
get to that point we may have to check residency.
Supervisor Martin reported that a County Commissioner was surprised that the
Township spent money and added that they could help defray costs. Its possible
that the Township facility could be a regional site and the Township could get
some funding for it. Trustee Martin commented that if we could get some funds
we could accept more materials without funds once we reach our saturation point
we would not be able to accept more materials without double the expense.
Supervisor Martin will keep pursuing with County commissioners the possibility
of funding sent our way for the recycling efforts.
Supervisor Martin noted she brought this forward for discussion and if anyone
wants to go to those meetings it would be helpful working with County to get
some funding.
MEETING REVIEW
Supervisor Martin reported that the local road improvements will be handled by
Clerk Zaban, and that she will write a letter regarding the street light issue.
Supervisor Martin requested that any investment questions will be given to
Clerk Zaban.
Supervisor Martin will write letter to Mr. Stevens.
Trustee Wilbrink will be representative at NIESA and Supervisor Martin will
write letter.
Supervisor Wright will go to the Eagle Scout recognition ceremony.
Board Workshop will be on the 19 th at 5pm. Neither Treasurer LeBlanc nor Clerk
Zaban will be able to attend.
Motion to adjourn.
ADJOURNED

CLERK STEVE ZABAN    DATE   
 
APRIL 19, 2005
PRESENT
Trustee Wilbrink; Trustee Wright; Supervisor Martin. Absent: Treasurer LeBlanc
and Clerk Zaban
CALL TO ORDER
Supervisor Martin called the meeting to order at 2:00 pm and reviewed the
agenda.
COMMITTEES
The attending board members reviewed each committee and assigned a board member
to each as Township. See attached chart of committee assignments.
Meeting adjourned at 3:20 p.m.
 
CLERK STEVE ZABAN                           DATE
MAY 10, 2005—REGULAR MEETING
CALL TO ORDER
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order at 7:30 pm and reviewed
the agenda.
PLEDGE
ROLL CALL
Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer LeBlanc, Trustee Wright, Supervisor Martin, Clerk
Zaban.
CONSENT AGENDA:
Minutes of 4/5/05 meeting
No Comment
Minutes of 4/19/05 meeting
No Comment
April Activity
No Comment
Treasurer’s Report
Treasurer LeBlanc reviewed Treasury activity. His report included: a summary of
the review process being use to review the CD investments, their maturity date,
updating signature cards, etc., settlement with the County Treasurer and an
overpayment by the Township for the 2004 tax bill. He is currently in the
process of identifying where there has been overpayment and making any
corrections necessary to settle the Winter 2004 Tax Payment to the County
Treasurer. Treasurer LeBlanc presented a letter dated May 10, 2005, for the
Board to review. Supervisor Martin indicated that the letter appeared to be an
agenda item that would need to be added to the consent agenda by Board approval
after all reports have been made.
Trustee Wilbrink asked if the Drain Assessment payment had been made and if
not, how will the payment be accounted for since we are in a new budget year?
Supervisor Martin responded that the Drain Assessment couldn’t be paid until
the Winter 2004 Tax payment has been settled. Treasurer LeBlanc indicated that
he has not requested payment to date because he has not completed the county
settlement of Winter 2004 Tax payments and there is still the question of how
the bill is itemized. Supervisor Martin indicated that the auditors would need
to be contacted . Supervisor Martin asked if an accounting of the Drain
Assessment had ever been received? Trustee Wilbrink indicated that he has
spoken to the Drain Commission and they provided him a document, which he
shared with the Board.
Accounts Paid/Payable
No Comment
Building Inspector
No comment
Trustee Wilbrink made a motion to approve the Consent Agenda. Clerk Zaban
seconded the motion and it passed unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS:
George Durak (116 Feldspar Dr.):  Reviewed a letter submitted he submitted to
the Board dated May 10, 2005, regarding availability of documents.
Ruth Templeton (1435 Epley Rd.): Reviewed some information regarding upgrades
to the Heath Drain that she recently learned at the last Planning Commission
meeting. Trustee Wright clarified the information shared regarding the upgrades
to the Heath Drain presented at the last Planning Commission meeting.
Gary Gillespie (4701 Jadestone Dr.): Provided public comment.
Supervisor Martin responded to George Durak and Gary Gillespie by indicating
that the Township is in the process of putting the Board minutes on their new
website and that other options for disseminating information can be placed on a
future Board agenda as it relates to Board policy.
Nancy Fink (435 Sherwood Rd.): Commented on the “at-large” drain payment. She
indicated that the county’s system is flawed and she would recommend and
support the Townships request for an itemized invoice of those payments. She
also requested that in lieu of her retirement from the Board, someone else be
appointed the Board representative to the watershed. She also encouraged the
Board to present some community education regarding water pollution possibly
through the Township Newsletter or the Website.
Katie Lo (290 E. Sherwood Rd.): Reviewed her knowledge of the history
pertaining to Board document dissemination and that she would support any Board
policy in regards to more available documents to the public at Board meetings.
Public comment was ended.
Supervisor Martin asked for a motion to add Treasurer LeBlanc’s letter to the
consent agenda or to scheduled it for another meeting
Clerk Zaban made a motion to not put Treasurer LeBlanc’s letter on the agenda.
Trustee Wilbrink and Trustee Wright discussed other options for reviewing
Treasurer LeBlanc’s letter and the motion was amended to:
Trustee Wright made an amended motion to put Treasurer LeBlanc’s memo on the
current consent agenda at the end of the meeting under Treasurer memos after
the Board is given a five minute break to review the memo for discussion.
Treasurer LeBlanc seconded the motion and a Roll Call was called:
Trustee Wilbrink:       Yes
Treasurer LeBlanc      Yes
Trustee Martin Wright   No
Supervisor Martin       No
Clerk Zaban         No
The motion failed: 3 to 5 2
NEW BUSINESS
Planning Commission Meeting Minutes 4/19/05. 
Planning Commissioner Chair, Bob Hayes, reported that there was a public
hearing conducted to rezone Mr. Joseph Perkin’s 38 acres parcel on Haslett Road
from RE to AG-C. The deliberation is scheduled for 5/17/05. There was a public
hearing called for proposed text revisions to the subdivision control
ordinance. The proposed zoning ordinance text amendments were tabled until the
state’s revisions are finalized. A workshop meeting was scheduled and held on
April 26, 2005, to review the community survey. At the April 26, 2005, workshop
there was general consensus by the Planning Commissioners that the residents
have indicated through the survey that the current master plan accurately
reflects Township future development. Therefore, there is no need to revise
future development strategies in the Master Plan. It only needs to be updated
in regards to census data, etc. McKenna and Associates have been asked to
revise the Master Plan Revision Timeline to reflect this decision.
Rifle Club
Trustee Wilbrink reported that the Rifle Club’s membership has doubled. Due to
the increased membership they have increased their hours by 1 hour on both
Saturday and Sunday. Bill Hamilton, Club Board Member, commented on the Club’s
desire to meet the needs of their membership and their neighbors. To neither
Trustee Wilbrink or Bob Hamilton’s knowledge is there a written agreement
between the Club and the Township. Trustee Wilbrink will explore the idea of a
written agreement.
Gaming License
Rex Ellsworth, representative of the Kathy Ellsworth Scholarship Funds Inc.,
presented a request to conduct Texas Holdem Tournaments up to four times a year
to be held at Dietz Pool. All the money goes to the scholarship funds.
Currently, they hold a golf outing and this event would be an additional source
for raising scholarship funds. Before the state will issue a gaming license,
the Township must pass a resolution approving this request. A license has to be
applied for every event, but the resolution will allow them to renew the
license each time they have an event.
Trustee Wilbrink made a motion to pass a resolution to read:
The Williamstown Township Board of Directors resolved at their regular meeting
of May 10, 2005, that the Kathy Ellsworth Scholarship Funds, Inc. has approval
to run a Texas Holdem Tournament up to four times per year within the Township
of Williamstown.
Trustee Wright seconded the motion and a roll call was conducted:
Trustee Wilbrink:       Yes
Treasurer LeBlanc:      Yes
Trustee Wright:      Yes
Supervisor Martin:      Yes
Clerk Zaban:       Yes
The motion passed 5 to 0.
Historic Committee
Supervisor Martin reported that a request for committee members was made in the
recent Township Newsletter for residents to serve on a Historic Committee. Two
letters were received from Tom Johnson and Clay Braden and one phone call of
interest from LaFollette Builders. Supervisor Martin asked for a motion to
convene a historic committee on behalf of Williamstown Township.
Supervisor Martin made a motion to convene a Historic Committee on behalf of
Williamstown Township. Trustee Wright seconded the motion and it passed
unanimously.
Trustee Wilbrink agreed to serve on the committee.
Permit Refund
Supervisor Martin indicated that a letter dated April 26, 2005, submitted by
Sean Conklin had been received requesting a reimbursement of his building
permit fee. Supervisor Martin indicated that past practice has been to refund
80% of the total fee when requested in writing by the applicant. However, the
Township does not have an obligation to refund the fee.
Trustee Wright made a motion to refund 80% of the total building fee for
applicant Sean Conklin. Trustee Wilbrink seconded the motion and it passed
unanimously.
Audit Dates
Supervisor Martin indicated that the auditors have set the 2004-05 audit date
for May 31, 2005. She indicated that they will send information regarding what
will be needed from each department to conduct the audit.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Investment 457 Plan
Treasurer LeBlanc submitted a letter dated April 9, 2005, requesting that Rick
Gladding be scheduled to present to the Board regarding the current 457 plan
before the Board makes any decisions regarding this plan. Clerk Zaban will
schedule a Board presentation with Rick Gladding at the next workshop meeting
Roadwork
Clerk Zaban indicated that the Board has been provided with information
regarding roadwork. He suggested that the Board be allowed to review the
information and roadwork be placed on the next workshop meeting for discussion.
COMPLAINTS
1835 Epley Road
Supervisor Martin reviewed the status of this complaint. Constable Dahlstrom
reported that some items of complaint have been moved since the 10 am walk
through this morning of April 17, 2005, but the property is still not in
compliance with Township ordinance. Supervisor Martin asked Mr. Stevens to
respond to the complaint. Mr. Stevens indicated that he would continue to bring
the property into compliance with Township ordinance with the exception of the
lumber, which is for his personal use and not for use by the construction
company. He indicated that he has a temporary permit to keep a trailer on the
property through December 1, 2005. He has posted a bond as surety. Supervisor
Martin asked if Mr. Stevens could bring the property into Township ordinance
compliance within the next 24 hours?
Craig Wedge (1861 Epley Rd.): Provided public comment regarding this complaint
as stated in his letter dated May 9, 2005. He indicated that construction on
the property has not been stopping by 8:00 pm; commercial construction
equipment is on site and travels up and down the road day and night; and there
is a fuel tank on the property that could be a hazard. In addition, he has
spoken with the county weigh master and has learned that if Mr. Stevens
continues to run a construction business from his property, he may have to
provide a surety bond to the County for road maintenance.
Richard Foster (1857 Epley Rd.): Provided public comment regarding this
complaint. He indicated that he is subject to heavy equipment noise daily; that
the property has been out of Township compliance since last year and feels that
Mr. Stevens attempts to justify the equipment for personal use is a façade and
should not be continued. He believes the Township has ordinances to control
this activity and that he sould should be given an end date when he can expect
these activities to stop.
Richard Williams (1860 Epley Rd.): Asked for clarification regarding the use of
the barn and any variance request that may be pending regarding the barn.
Supervisor Martin indicated that the barn could only be used for personal use
unless Mr. Stevens seeks approval through the Planning Commission to house one
piece of heavy equipment. Supervisor Martin also reviewed the variance
procedures and indicated that to date no variance has been applied for on this
property.
Supervisor Martin read the zoning ordinance regarding rules of commercial
construction, temporary structures, and commercial use parking. She indicated
that Mr. Stevens has complied with the temporary structures ordinance. However,
if Mr. Stevens wants to house a piece of commercial equipment on the property,
he must obtain approval through the Planning Commission.
Supervisor Martin reviewed actions taken to date and asked the Board to
respond. Trustee Wilbrink asked Mr. Stevens when the equipment would be moved.
Mr. Stevens indicated that he has rented space to house his equipment and it
has already been moved to the new location. The only time a piece of commercial
equipment will be on the property is if it is for personal use or to conduct
maintenance on the vehicle. Trustee Wilbrink asked if the Board made a motion
to allow an extension to bring the property into compliance and if Mr. Stevens
does not comply by the deadline, then could the Township impose a fine against
Mr. Stevens? Supervisor Martin responded that if Mr. Stevens did not comply,
the next step would be to take legal action against Mr. Stevens for
noncompliance of Township ordinances.
Trustee Wilbrink made a motion to allow three more days (Friday at 10:00 am,
May 13, 2005) to bring the property into Township ordinance compliance. Mr.
Stevens must also seek Planning Commission approval to bring one piece of heavy
equipment in excess of 1 ton onto his property per zoning ordinance section
4.01e. Mr. Stevens is to cease his commercial business activity from his
property unless otherwise approved through the Planning Commission. Should Mr.
Stevens fail to comply with Township ordinances, the Board authorizes legal
action to be taken against Mr. Stevens. Trustee Wright seconded the motion and
the motion passed unanimously.
1054 E. Sherwood Road
Supervisor Martin reviewed the complaint and recent updates regarding Judge
Manderfield’s decision.
Mr. Laux, counsel of Mr. Ciolek’s presented public comment. Mr. Laux asked that
the Board through his representation try to seek a reasonable resolution to
this complaint that would be satisfactory to both parties. Mr. Laux reviewed
his understanding of Township ordinance as it pertains to two residents on a
single property. He questioned the judgment against Mr. Ciolek and its
violation of this ordinance. If Mr. Ciolek were to bring the property into
compliance, would he be able to occupy it?
Trustee Wright responded to Mr. Laux by indicating that this complaint is a
legal matter that has already been judged by the courts and it is too late to
come to a reasonable resolution through discussion at a Board meeting. He
indicated that Mr. Ciolek should have sought a reasonable resolution one year
ago when the complaint first came before the Board and he was asked for a
resolution.
Supervisor Martin suggested that due to legal documents already in place
regarding this complaint, the Board would have to pull all previous materials,
review them, and decide if this complaint should be brought back before the
Board at another meeting for discussion. Trustee Wilbrink supported the
suggestion.
Susan Stuwe (900 E. Sherwood Rd.): Provided public comment regarding this
complaint. She indicated that Mr. Ciolek’s living situation does not cause any
problems within the Township and in her opinion the township should not
regulate this issue.
Ruth Templeton (1435 Epley Rd.): Provided public comment regarding a similar
property that has recently been listed for sale within the township and has an
1100 sq. ft. guesthouse.
Zimmer Road
Supervisor Martin reviewed a new complaint regarding a fence violation in a R-
1 district. Supervisor Martin indicated that she would be meeting with the
parties involved on May 18, 2005, to attempt to resolve the complaint.
REPORTS
NIESA
Trustee Wilbrink gave an update on a property offer made by NIESA in their
attempt to relocate their facilities.
Parks
Trustee Wilbrink will attend the next Parks and Recreation Committee meeting
scheduled for May 18, 2005. He will address parking issues at the park.
Supervisor Martin suggested that Trustee Wilbrink contact the RCRA for their
assistance.
Library
Supervisor Martin reported that there is no new information regarding the
Library Building Authority. Treasurer LeBlanc will be representing the Board at
the Library Foundation meetings. Treasurer LeBlanc reported that he had
attended a recent meeting in which they reviewed the property they have
purchased. He indicated the next meeting would be a presentation by a
professional fundraiser to assist them with fundraising.
Watershed
Trustee Wilbrink reported there is a joint meeting for Looking Glass Watershed
on June 3, 2005. Trustee Wilbrink will attend if Treasurer LeBlanc is unable.
Other
Supervisor Martin reported that the joint meeting between the City of
Williamston, Williamstown Township and other local townships is scheduled for
Tuesday, May 24, 2005, at 7:00 p.m. Location to be announced.
Supervisor Martin reported that Ingham County held a 100 th anniversary
celebration. The county requested that each township submit something for a
time capsule. Supervisor Martin requested suggestions from everyone working
with the Township, but no one submitted any suggestions, so the recent Township
Community Survey was submitted.
Clerk Zaban reported on the recent school election. He indicated the new
equipment was used and the process worked well and was timelier. The process
was complete by 10:30 pm.
Treasurer LeBlanc submitted two letters to the Board for review dated April 9,
2005. He reviewed his letter regarding citizen participation in Township Board
meetings. He proposed that a second public comment be added to the agenda at
the end of the meeting. Supervisor Martin referenced her memo dated May 6,
2005, as reference for discussion regarding the structure of a public meeting.
She agreed to a second public comment; however, she would like to see the
comment limited to new comment and not a rehashing of issues already publicly
commented on and/or discussed during the meeting.
Treasurer LeBlanc made a motion to establish a second public comment period at
the end of each Township Board meeting, or at the end of the public session if
the Board is going to go into closed session. A time limit of three minutes per
individual speaker would be applied and limited to only commenting once on
issues relevant to township government. Trustee Wilbrink second the motion and
it passed unanimously.
Supervisor Martin announced that she has an assessor meeting tomorrow at 5:00
pm and a morning meeting until approximately 3:00 pm. She asked if any other
official would be in the office at that time. In lieu of no response,
Supervisor Martin asked if Trustee Wilbrink would be available to cover the
office.
The Workshop Meeting was scheduled for May 17, 2005, at 5:00 pm.
Trustee Wilbrink made a motion to adjourn the meeting. Supervisor Martin
seconded the motion and it passed unanimously.
Meeting adjourned at 10:25 pm
Clerk Steve Zaban                        Date
MAY 17, 2005
PRESENT
Trustee Wilbrink; Treasurer LeBlanc; Trustee Wright; Supervisor Martin and
Clerk Zaban
CALL TO ORDER
Supervisor Martin called the meeting to order at 5:00 pm and reviewed the
agenda.
RICK GLADDING: Unable to attend. Treasurer LeBlanc will reschedule Mr. Gladding
for the next Board workshop meeting.
ROADWORK:
Clerk Zaban presented the Road Task Force Committee’s recommendation for local
road improvements dated May 17, 2005. Clerk Zaban reviewed the information and
indicated that if the funds are not used this year, they could be carried over
to next year. Clerk Zaban suggested that some crack fill be done and carry the
remaining funds over to be earmarked for Barry Road. Supervisor Martin reviewed
past practice used for Mitchell, Vanneter and James Ave. Options were
discussed. There was general Board consensus to try some crack filling this
year and carry over the remaining funds for Barry Road and Oakleaf Hills.
Trustee Wilbrink made a motion to crack fill Mapleshade, Golfview, Red Cedar
Manor and Pine Knoll Estates and to carry over the remaining funds to be
possibility applied to Barry Road and/or Oakleaf Hills if agree to by the
County Road Commission. Trustee Treasurer LeBlanc supported the motion and it
passed unanimously.
COPIES
Supervisor Martin reviewed a public request from the May 10, 2005, regular
board meeting and provided a history of past and current procedures for
distributing public materials and reviewed her memo dated May 6, 2005,
regarding public meetings and materials. She asked for input from the Board.
Treasurer LeBlanc asked for clarification of the FIOA request. Supervisor
Martin indicated that FIOA request allow for specific documents to be requested
instead of sending materials that may not have been wanted.  
Ruth Templeton (1435 Epley Road): Offered public comment in regards to copies
for the public. In her opinion, she felt copies of items that are very detailed
and are hard to follow along with during board discussion such as the budget
should be provided in multiple copies.
Trustee Wright suggested that a number of copies be determined of the whole
packet and be provided at each meeting. Supervisor Martin suggested that the
Clerk’s office start by providing extra copies of important documents and if
not sufficient then the Board move towards providing full packets if needed.
Trustee Wilbrink supported that suggestion with some discussion from Board
members.
Trustee Wilbrink made a motion to provide six copies of important documents for
all Regular Board meetings. Trustee Wright second the motion and it passed
unanimously.
TREASURER LEBLANC’S MEMO DATED 5/10/05
Supervisor Martin instructed the Board in discussind  that they should not
discuss  an employee’s performance without the employee’s consent to do so in
open session. Treasurer LeBlanc indicated that he needed no discussion of the
memo, but only to have it as part of the public record.
Ruth Templeton (1435 Epley Rd.): Offered public comment regarding this issue.
Clerk Zaban responded that the Township attorney is being consulted regarding
any Board liability and options regarding this matter.
OTHER
Supervisor Martin asked Trustee Wilbrink for his input regarding the placement
of a water heater at the office kitchen sink. Trustee Wilbrink reviewed the
quotes received to date. However, he questioned the type of heater needed and
will obtain additional quotes for instant on demand water heater.
Supervisor Martin made a motion to adjourn the meeting. Clerk Zaban seconded
the motion and it passed unanimously.
Meeting adjourned at 6:10.
CLERK STEVE ZABAN                  DATE
JUNE 7, 2005
CALL TO ORDER:
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order at 7:30 pm and reviewed
the agenda.
PLEDGE
ROLL CALL
Trustee Wilbrink; Treasurer LeBlanc; Trustee Wright; Supervisor Martin; Clerk
Zaban.
CONSENT AGENDA:
Minutes of 5/10/05 Regular Meeting
Page one: Treasurer’s Report , Paragraph two, Fourth sentence. Sentence should
read: Supervisor Martin indicated that the auditors would need to be
“contacted.”
Page three: Roll Call. Change “Trustee Martin” to “Trustee Wright.”
Page three: Change “the motion failed: 3 to 5” to “the motion failed: 3 to 2.”
Page five: Paragraph five, third sentence. Sentence should read: “He believes
the Township has ordinances to control this activity and that he ‘should’ be
given an end date when he can expect these activities to stop.”
Minutes of 5/17/05 Workshop Meeting
Page one, first motion, sentence two. Sentence should read: “ ’Treasurer’
LeBlanc supported the motion and it passed unanimously.”
Page two, paragraph three, first sentence. Sentence should read: “Supervisor
Martin instructed the board ‘that they should not discuss’ an employee’s
performance without the employee’s consent to do so in open session.”
May Activity
No comment.
Treasurer’s Report (April)
Treasurer LeBlanc reported that there are several CD’s maturing early August
and late September. Treasurer LeBlanc is considering laddering the CD’s so they
mature throughout the year instead of all at once. He is also considering
multi-banking for CD’s. Multi-banking is a strategy that will consider multiple
banks for investment in order to get the best rate. Trustee Wilbrink questioned
if the multi-banking strategy is approved for government funding? Supervisor
Martin suggested a discussion of multi-banking be placed on a later agenda.
Treasure LeBlanc reported that the at-large drain assessment fees have been
paid and the tax account with the Country Treasurer has been settled.
Accounts Paid/Payable
No comment
Building Inspector
No comment
Clerk Zaban made a motion to approve the consent agenda with corrections to the
5/10/05 Regular Board Meeting and the 5/17/05 Workshop Meeting. Treasurer
Leblanc supported the motion.
No discussion on the motion and it passed unanimously.
PUBLIC COMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS:
Roger Philip (5350 Barton Rd.): Submitted and read a letter to the board dated
June 7, 2005.
George Durak (116 Feldspar Drive): Submitted and read letter to the board dated
June 7, 2005.
Ruth Templeton (1435 Epley Rd.): Cited (Authorities and Responsibilities of
Michigan Township Officials, Boards and Commissions) regarding elected officers
written consent to transfer their duties to others
Velma Osterle (1931 Epley Rd.): Asked for clarification of the constable’s
duties and why do residents need to make a complaint before an ordinance
violation is investigated versus the Township enforcing its’ own ordinances
without complaint.
NEW BUSINESS
Library Annual Report – JoAnn Hegedus
JoAnn, Head Librarian for the Williamston Library, introduced Nancy Bujold,
from the Capital Area District Library. She then distributed CADL’s 2004 Annual
Report. She noted that a recent district contest was won by a Williamston
student. She then reviewed the Branch highlights for the Williamston library.
These highlights included: Over 65,000 patrons enjoyed the Williamston library.
In part due to the Tweens program, Connect at the Library Programs, visiting
authors, summer reading, etc. The library also does community work such as:
reading stories in classrooms, booth at Family night for library card
registrations, senior center activities, etc.
Planning Commission Meeting minutes 5/17/05
Planning Commission chair, Bob Hayes, reported that the Planning Commission
deliberated on Joseph D. Perkins’ rezoning request from RE to AG-C and made a
recommendation that the Board approve the rezoning. Supervisor Martin indicated
that Mr. Perkins will be seeking a variance before requesting Board approval of
the rezone.
Mr. Hayes reported that there was a Public Hearing and Deliberation for the
Subdivision Control Ordinance. He indicated that these changes are in
compliance with state law, so there was little discussion. The Planning
Commission made a recommendation that the Board approve the changes. He
indicated that the only dissent was that these changes are mandated by the
State and there is no choice in accepting them.
Mr. Hayes reported that the Planning Commission discussed scaling back the
original Master Plan revision timeline due to the results of the survey. He
indicated that the planner will prepare a revised timeline for Master Plan
revisions along with the cost for consideration.
Subdivision Control Ordinance Revision Final Approval
Supervisor Martin indicated that it is a legislative act mandating these
revisions to the ordinance and if not approved, then the Township will be out
of State compliance. The changes streamline the platting process of the
subdivision control ordinance.
Treasurer LeBlanc made a motion that the Board approved the revisions to the
Subdivision Control Ordinance as stated in McKenna and Associates letter to the
Planning Commission dated 2/28/05. Trustee Wilbrink supported the motion.
There was no discussion on the motion and it passed unanimously.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Audit
Bill Tucker, Abraham and Gaffney. Reviewed a letter dated 6/2/05 from Aaron
Stevens, Principle CPA, regarding reasons for why they cannot complete the
2003-04 Annual Audit. The reasons reviewed were:
∙   Beginning fund balances for the General Fund and the Cemetery Fund do not
agree with the ending fund balances reported in the audited financial
statements for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2004.
∙   Several receipt transactions have been inappropriately posted by the
Treasurer to a line item on the General Fund Balance Sheet titled “service
receivable.” That line item total was a negative (credit balance) $133,453 as
of March 31, 2005. These receipts should have posted as a debit to cash (i.e.,
the “Bank One” line item in QuickBooks) and a credit to various revenue line
items (i.e., “Sales and Use Tax,” Township Levy,” etc.).
∙   Several other asset line items on the Balance Sheets also have negative
balances.
∙   Several liability line items on the Balance Sheets have negative balances.
∙   It is my understanding that the Treasurer has not formally reconciled the
bank statements with the general ledger for the months of November 2004 through
April 2005. The timely reconciliation of the bank statements with the general
ledger is an extremely important internal control. A breakdown of such an
internal control increases the Township’s susceptibility for fraud. The
Township Board must realize and accept that a greater risk in safeguarding
assets will exist if the monthly bank statements are not reconciled with the
general ledger in a timely manner.
Mr. Tucker indicated that the issues outlined in their letter are not all
inclusive and there could be other errors. Given the current condition of the
financial records, Abraham and Gaffney is unable to suggest the necessary
journal entries to be posted and still maintain a level of independence that
would allow them to conduct the audit. Therefore, they suggest the Township
consider contracting a consultant to assist with the various financial
reporting and they return to audit when the records are reconciled. He
indicated that the final audit is due to the state by 9/30/05.
Treasurer Leblanc made a motion to hire a consultant to assist with the various
financial reporting as stated in Abraham and Gaffney’s letter dated 6/2/05 and
to scheduled training to be paid from the contingency budget. Trustee Wilbrink
supported the motion.
Discussion on the motion: Supervisor Martin suggested that the Board seek bids
for training and review the budget for funding. Treasurer LeBlanc asked if the
consultants could train while they were reconciling the records? Mr. Tucker
indicated that would most likely be difficult to reconcile and train
simultaneously. Treasurer LeBlanc then suggested that the consultants keep a
log of errors so that training areas could be identified.
Trustee Wilbrink amended the motion to have the Clerk and Treasurer determine a
consultant to assist with the various financial reporting as stated in Abraham
and Gaffney’s letter dated 6/2/05 and to seek training at a later date.
Treasurer Leblanc supported the motion.
There was no discussion on the amended motion and it passed unanimously.
COMPLAINTS
1780 Sherwood Rd
Supervisor Martin reported that the complaint at 1780 Sherwood Road was for
repairs. She indicated that currently there are no ordinances pertaining to
maintenance of property. Building Inspector, Walt Aven, confirmed that by
Michigan Building Code, unless the property looks like a dangerous building,
then action cannot be taken. Clerk Zaban indicated that the complainant would
like someone to ask the resident if she needs some help and the residents will
help to clean up. Supervisor Martin indicated that other townships/cities have
ordinances for lawn mowing etc., but to date the Board has not taken steps to
have such an ordinance. If the Board would like to look at enacting an
ordinance to address this issue, they could discuss it at a later meeting along
with revisions to the Building Permit process and rental properties. Clerk
Zaban said he would look into the complaint further to see if it can be
resolved.
Velma Osterle (1931 Epley Rd.). Offered public comment to support her earlier
statements regarding these types of ordinances and the Township’s ability to
enforce them.
SECOND PUBLIC COMMENT
John Kennedy (4787 Barton Rd.):  Questioned if hiring a consultant to assist
with the various financial reporting needs would satisfy the auditor’s needs.
He cautioned the Board in hiring an independent consultant if it did not serve
the needs of the auditors.
Harold Husse (5415 Barton Rd.): Asked if the Township had experienced past
financial problems as are being suggested in Abraham and Gaffney’s letter and
if this is the first time, then why is this happening? Supervisor Martin
responded that the records have always been able to be audited. Past Treasurer
Nancy Fink responded that the Township started using the Quickbooks program in
2001-02 and although there are other townships that use this program for
accounting it is not the best program for governmental accounting. She
indicated that unless you are trained to use the software it is difficult
because of it’s’ quirks. Supervisor Martin added that the current Township
staff has received Quickbooks training. Trustee Wilbrink indicated that the
Clerk, Deputy Clerk, Treasurer, and Deputy Treasurer are new and this may be
contributing to any errors.
Ruth Templeton (1435 Epley Rd.): Asked that the Board return to open session to
make any motions from the closed session.
Trustee Wright made a motion for the Board to go into closed session to review
legal opinion regarding a personnel issue. Clerk Zaban supported the motion.
There was no discussion on the motion.
Roll Call:   Trustee Wilbrink    Yes
      Treasurer LeBlanc   Yes
      Trustee Wright    Yes
      Supervisor Martin    Yes
      Clerk Zaban       Yes
The Motion passed unanimously.
The Board moved to closed session at 9:55 p.m.
The Board returned from closed session at 10:50 pm.
Trustee Wilbrink made a motion to defer any decisions regarding the attorney’s
opinion until further review scheduled for June 21, 2005, at 5:00 pm. Clerk
Zaban supported the motion.
There was no discussion on the motion.
Roll call:   Trustee Wilbrink   Yes
      Treasurer Leblanc   Yes
      Trustee Wright   Yes
      Supervisor Martin   Yes
      Clerk Zaban      Yes
The motion passed unanimously.
Supervisor Martin review the meeting by indicating that the Board has received
a lot of agenda/public information and asked Board members if they have any
additional comments regarding the information received.
Trustee Wilbrink agree that a lot of agenda/public information had been
received and that some of the information is accurate and some is not and he
would like to see the issues resolved as soon as possible.
George Durak (116 Feldspar Drive): Asked what are the issues that were
discussed in closed session and why would the Board move to close session and
not make a decision? Clerk Zaban responded that they are confidential and
cannot be discussed.
Supervisor Martin confirmed that per procedure the issues were discussed in
closed session and voted on in open session.
Trustee Wilbrink responded to Mr. Durak that the issues he cited in his letter
is the issue that the Board is trying to resolve.
ADJOURNED 11:00 p.m.
Clerk Steve Zaban                        Date
JULY 5, 2005
CALL TO ORDER
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order at 7:30 pm and reviewed
the agenda.
PLEDGE
ROLL CALL
Trustee Wilbrink; Treasurer LeBlanc; Trustee Wright; Supervisor Martin; Clerk
Zaban
CONSENT AGENDA:
Minutes of 6/7/05 Regular Meeting
Page two: Treasurer’s Report , paragraph two, add: tax account with the
County…..
Minutes of 6/21/05 Workshop  Meeting
No Changes
June Activity
No Comment.
Treasurer’s Report: Explanations and comments by Treasurer LeBlanc included:
Footnote D applies to CD for (banks) he is now adding interest monthly even
through it does not get paid monthly per suggestion of the auditors; Footnote C
explains why the Cemetery account could not be reconciled; and noted interest
rate of 2+% for the general funds through Bank One.
Accounts Payable and Paid: Treasurer LeBlanc questioned where Mr. Moline’s pay
is allocated. Clerk Zaban responded under Cemetery Sexton.
Building Inspector:   
No Comment.
Treasurer Leblanc made a motion to approve the consent agenda with the change
noted to the 6/7/05 minutes. Clerk Zaban seconded the motion.
There was no discussion and the motion passed unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Gary Gillespie (4701 Jadestone Dr.): Commented on several topics: Board packets
and minutes; the Township office hours (he asked that the board hold a
discussion regarding the hours); and the recording of the Board minutes as they
apply to public comment.
Susan Stuwe (900 E. Sherwood Rd.): Commented on the Township office hours.
NEW BUSINESS
Planning Commission:
Meeting Minutes of 6/21/05. Chairman, Robert Hayes, reported that the Planning
Commission held two public hearings for special use and site plan approval:
Wallace Storage Center at 1099 E. Grand River and Shafer Pole Barn at 1524
Sherwood Road.
There was little discussion and the Planning Commission made recommendation to
the Board to approve with conditions listed in McKenna’s letter dated June 10,
2005, the Shafer Pole Barn Special Use and Site Plan.
Treasurer LeBlanc made a motion to approve the Special Use and Site Plan for
1524 Sherwood Road with conditions listed in McKenna’s letter dated June 10,
2005. Trustee Wright seconded the motion.
Discussion: The applicant offered that the property in the CRP is approximately
22 acres with a potential for 40 acres. It will be restored with evergreens,
hardwoods and native grasses. The project is ready for restoration as early as
this fall, but will most likely start in the spring. You must own the property
for one year before starting the program.
The motion passed unanimously.
Chairman Hayes reported that a special meeting was held on June 28, 2005, to
deliberate the special land use and site plan for Wallace storage facility at
1099 E. Grand River. The Planning Commission made recommendation to the Board
to approve with conditions as stated in McKenna’s letter dated June 28, 2005.
There was discussion regarding the community need, drainage problems that will
be resolved, and the overall landscaping. Trustee Wilbrink asked for
clarification of why a sidewalk was needed. Trustee Wright responded that
sidewalks will be required of all future projects connecting to Township Park.
Trustee Wright made a motion to approve the special land use of Wallace mini
storage at 1099 E. Grand River with conditions as outline in McKenna’s letter
of June 28, 2005. Treasurer Leblanc seconded the motion.
There was no discussion and it passed unanimously.
Trustee Wright made a motion to approve the Wallace mini storage site plan at
1099 E. Grand River with four restrictions indicated in McKenna’s letter of
June 28, 2005. Trustee Wilbrink seconded the motion.
There was no discussion and it passed unanimously.
Chairman Hayes reported that the Planning Commission also reviewed a revised
budget presented by McKenna and Associates for revising the Master Plan.
Supervisor Martin offered that the presented budget had been reduced by
approximately half of the original proposed budget. The reduction is a result
of less revisions needed as identified in the Community Survey.
Memorial:   
Supervisor Martin reported that Jim Graham, son of Tom and Shirley Graham, has
passed away. The family would like a memorial in his honor at the Township.
Supervisor Martin asked the Board to give her suggestions within the next two
weeks and the Board should consider developing a list of needed memorial items
for any future donations.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Audit
Supervisor Martin gave an update of the Audit status. She indicated that the
contracted accountants worked last week to clean-up the 2004-05 records so that
the Audit could resume. She indicated that they will be submitting a report of
their findings.
Investigation
Supervisor Martin reviewed the Board’s motion made at their July 19, 2005,
workshop meeting and indicated that to date the attorney’s have been unable to
work on this issue due schedules. Treasurer LeBlanc indicated that he would be
contacting his attorney at the end of the week. Supervisor Martin asked how the
Board would like to proceed.
Trustee Wright made a motion to table the issue until the July 19, 2005, Board
Workshop. Trustee Wilbrink seconded the issue.
There was no discussion. The motion passed 4 to 5.
COMPLAINTS
1780 Complaint Beeman Rd.
Clerk Zaban reported that he had made an onsite inspection of the property and
took pictures. It is his opinion that the property has improved since the
initial complaint. He also reported that he spoke with the resident and she
indicated that she would be cutting the grass, however she presented several
reasons why maintaining her property is difficult. Supervisor Martin reported
that she and Cindy Davis had recently attended a code enforcement conference
and their recommendation for this type of complaint was to tread lightly.
Blight ordinances are one of the toughest ordinances to enforce. There
recommendation was to incorporate blight into their ordinances instead of a
stand alone ordinance. However, this will not ensure successful enforcement
should the case be taken to a judge, it will only give merit to the Township’s
authority to enforce such an ordinance.
Public comment from Nancy Ording (1710 Haslett Rd.) suggested that a committee
be convened to look at blights and volunteer to help the resident resolve the
blight.
Clerk Zaban reviewed the Township’s policy for following up on blight
complaints. There was public comment on this policy and discussion of past
practices.
REPORTS
NIESA   
Trustee Wilbrink reported that there is not much new information to share.
NIESA is in the process of making a counter offer on some land to purchase for
a new building.
Parks   
Trustee Wilbrink reported that the committee is getting quotes for a new
pavilion. The American Legion has offered to donate some money for the
construction of a pavilion. Eagle Scout candidate Nathan Goodman made a
presentation to widen the paths as part of his Eagle Scout project. The
committee asked him to do more research and provide a revised project before
the committee could make recommendation to the Board.
Library   
Treasurer LeBlanc had no report.
Watershed   
Supervisor Martin reported that Trustee Wilbrink will be attending an upcoming
meeting.
Newsletter  
Supervisor Martin reported that the Newsletter will be sent out within the next
two weeks. It will consist of the Survey results. She indicated that the
website will also host the Newsletter. She asked the Board to provide
recommendation as to how to proceed with the newsletter. She checked with other
Townships and they send their newsletter out twice a year with tax and
assessment statements. Updates would be posted between newsletters on the
website.
JBOR
The July Board of Review is scheduled for July 19, 2005. July Board of Review
is to correct errors or process late homesteads. There will be four reviews.
Board Workshop 
The Board Workshop was rescheduled to 4:00 p.m on the July 19, 2005, due to the
July Board of Review and Planning Commission meetings.
Other
Supervisor Martin reviewed an essay presented by Brian Powell as part of his
eighth grade social action project. The essay has been posted to the website.
Treasurer LeBlanc announced that the Summer Tax bills were sent out July 1,
2005. Reviewed the collection process and thanked volunteers who helped with
the mailing.
Treasurer LeBlanc indicated that a $100,000 CD is coming due in early August.
He asked the Board to consider the reinvestment of that CD. Should it be
reinvested at the current bank or should the Township consider a multi-banking
service? Supervisor Martin asked Treasurer LeBlanc to provide a proposal for
the Board to consider at another meeting.
Clerk Zaban reported that he met with the Ingham County Genological Society.
They are proposing to microfilm the Township records. He asked the Board to
consider this project. Supervisor Martin asked Clerk Zaban to provide a
proposal for the Board to consider at another meeting.
SECOND PUBLIC COMMENT
Ruth Templeton (1435 Epley Rd.): Asked who calls for a Planning Commission
public hearing? Supervisor Martin responded that when a special meeting is
called by an applicant, the applicant pays all cost associated with the
meeting. She also indicated that the Planning Commission is scheduled to meet
twice a month.
John Kennedy (4787 Barton Rd.): Provided public comment regarding closed
meetings and the recent closed meeting regarding the investigation.
Trustee Wright made a motion to adjourn.
The meeting adjourned at 8:50 p.m.
Clerk Steve Zaban                        Date
JULY 19, 2005
PRESENT
Trustee Wilbrink (late); Treasurer LeBlanc; Trustee Wright; Supervisor Martin
and Clerk Zaban.
CALL TO ORDER
Supervisor Martin opened the meeting and reviewed the agenda and noted that
Trustee Wilbrink will be late because of a watershed meeting. Treasurer LeBlanc
requested an agenda item be added—multi-banking.
GENEALOGY GROUP PRESENTATION:
Clerk Zaban introduced John Castle of the Geneology Group.
John Castle, Lynn Castle and President David Hell were present and reviewed
their program for preserving old Township records on microfilm. They are a
nonprofit organization located in Mason, MI. Mr. Castle reviewed their proposal
to microfilm the Township records. These records would not include any tax
bills, invoices or other financial records. There intent is to preserve names
and places prior to 1975. There is no expense to the Township. Future uses
could be for public viewing.
Supervisor Martin thanked Mr. Castle for his presentation and indicated that
they will conduct a reference check with the other Township’s they have worked
with, notify the historical committee for their interest and bring a resolution
before the board for Board approval.
NATHAN GOODMAN, EAGLE SCOUT PROJECT
Nathan Goodman reviewed his Eagle Scout project. He is proposing an upgrade to
the current park trails and the construction of a new 3.1 mile trail.
Eventually, he would hope that the cross-country team would use the trail for
future meets. The new trail would have mile marker posts and entrance posts. He
indicated that the project would be completed in October. Supervisor Martin
felt this project would improve the trail and provide good use for the
residents. However, there were questions regarding the use of the trail by the
cross-country team. Tom Trepky, Park Committee respresentative, will supervise
the project for the Parks Committee. Supervisor Martin recommended that Mr.
Trepky move forward with supervising the project and if the school would like
to use the trail, then they would need to contact the Township and request that
use.
INVESTIGATION
Supervisor Martin reviewed the status of this investigation as it pertains to
the Board’s postponement on June 21, and July 5. She indicated that a letter
had been received from Mr. Brookover indicating that they do not believe there
are any controversy between Treasurer LeBlanc and the Township Board.
Supervisor Martin asked if there were any questions. She reviewed that this
issue is not an investigation of a controversy between the Township Board and
Treasurer LeBlanc, but an employee issue that needed to be addressed through an
internal investigation.
Clerk Zaban made a motion to censure Al LeBlanc through a Board resolution for
the following reasons:
1) Many attempts to force Clerk to write a check for the approximate sum of
$80,000, without proper detailed documentation, to Ingham County.
2) Treasurer’s tantrum like style, shaking both clinched fists, pointing
fingers, yelling, screaming and swearing at Clerk. Treasurer’s inability to
stop, preceded to still yell in the hallway, and be seen and heard by public
and fellow workers.
3) Treasurer’s inability to work with the supervisor, again yelling, swearing
and making accusations against Supervisor.
4) Treasurer swearing, screaming and making derogatory comments to Deputy Clerk
over a very minor item and “demanding respect from her” were his words. Again
other employees in the office were scared and very threatened of his actions.
5) Many Township office employees will not work alone with Treasurer unless a
third or more persons are present.
6) Treasurer has hired a second lawyer which has caused delays.
7) In order to remedy the situation, the work environment has to be improved,
through Treasurer’s guarantee that these situations will never happen again
(for which no evidence on Treasurer’s part has been brought forward).
The resolution would read:
At a regularly scheduled meeting of the Township Board of the Township of
Williamstown, Ingham County Michigan, held in the Board Room of the Township at
4990 N. Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan, 48895-9609, on Tuesday, July 19,
2005, at ________ pm, there were:
   PRESENT:
   ABSENT:
At a said meeting of the Township Board, the following Resolution was offered
by member _____________ and supported by member ___________________.
WHEREAS, Al LeBlanc is a Williamstown Township Board Member and is the duly
elected Treasurer of Williamstown Township, and
WHEREAS, The Board has received various complaints from Township employees and
Board Members that Mr. LeBlanc has engaged in a pattern of abusive or abrasive
conduct. On March 29, 2005 the Township Board responded by requesting its legal
counsel to conduct an investigation into the various complaints. A written
legal opinion with detailed factual findings was placed on the record at the
June 21, 2005, Board meeting, and
WHEREAS, according to the factual investigation, Mr. LeBlanc’s alleged behavior
has resulted in complaints made by Township employees and Trustees. Certain
employees have expressed to Township officials their anxiety and apprehension
of being left alone with Mr. LeBlanc in the Township offices due to his angry
and unpredictable outbursts, and
WHEREAS, for the reasons more fully detailed in the aboved-mentioned legal
opinion and factual investigation, the Board finds that Mr. LeBlanc has
demonstrated an inability to work effectively with Township employees. He has
engaged in episodes of verbally abusive and physically threatening behavior
during confrontations with certain Township employees and Board Members, and
WHEREAS, the Board finds that Mr. LeBlanc has engaged in objectionable and
inappropriate behavior unbecoming to his elected position of Treasurer and
detrimental to the governance of Williamstown Township, and
THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED that the Williamstown Township Board does hereby
publicly censure Township Treasurer Al LeBlanc for his misconduct as
Williamstown Township Treasurer.
Trustee Wright seconded the motion.   
Discussion on the motion: Trustee Wilbrink indicated that point one of the
reasons to censure does not have anything to do with the original complaint and
asked that it be struck from the motion. Clerk Zaban agreed to strike item one.
Trustee Wilbrink asked for the clarification of what a censure is. Clerk Zaban
responded that it is an official reprimand by his fellow board member.
Supervisor Martin added that a censure is an acknowledgement that something
like swearing is not appropriate and the Board does not acknowledge it as an
approved Board behavior.
Treasurer LeBlanc responded that people remember things differently and he does
not recall any swearing, however he does recall having heated arguments. He
cited other relevant information such as a letter dated 7/1/05 written to the
Board by Trustee Wilbrink summarizing other incidents in which board members
have been criticized for having angry interchanges with hourly employees of the
Township and members of the public at public meetings and have been criticized
of contributing to the creation of a hostile work environment. Treasurer
LeBlanc also indicated that there has been letters stating these facts and he
has heard people resign and give those statements publically. As far as he can
tell the only board member that has not had angry interchanges with hourly
staff, been involved in the creation of a hostile work environment, or had
angry interchanges with the public is Trustee Wilbrink. Therefore, he
questioned why one censure when you have four people who have been involved in
all these types of incidences? He indicated that in fairness equal treatment
would be needed.
Supervisor Martin responded that she has never experienced swearing nor does
she recall any loud angry outburst to Township employees in the Township
office. Clerk Zaban indicated that previous to this motion to censure,
Treasurer LeBlanc has had weeks to address this issue and there has been no
action in terms of an apology, etc. Treasurer LeBlanc indicated that he has
apologized.
Supervisor Martin indicated that this issue needs closure. The Township is
liable for the situation, therefore an investigation was conducted to protect
the Township from any liability or other possible future action. By bringing
closure to this issue, the Township will be showing good faith to the employees
and provide some stability to move forward.
Ruth Templeton (1435 Epley Rd.): Offered public comment regarding department
responsibility for this situation.
Susan Stuwe (900 E. Sherwood Rd.): Offered public comment regarding a personal
situation.
John Kennedy (4787 Barton Rd.): Offered public comment regarding when action
would be taken regarding this issue.
Nancy Ording (1710 Haslett Rd.): Offered public comment regarding how
individuals handled the incident.
Supervisor Martin responded to the public comment and indicated that she would
hope that if this issue can be resolved.
Supervisor Martin asked Treasurer LeBlanc for clarification regarding his
request for stamps and was there a need for the stamps. Treasurer LeBlanc
reviewed his policy for stamp supplies. Treasurer LeBlanc also reviewed the
process for delinquent tax collection. No he did not need the stamps for the
delinquent tax mailing in question. No, it turned out that he did not need the
stamps for the delinquent tax mailing in question. However, there was no way
for him to have known this at the time he made his request for stamps.
Nancy Ording (1710 Haslett Rd.): Asked if the Township had considered a postage
meter. Supervisor Martin reviewed the history of the Township’s use of a
postage meter. She also reviewed the new procedure for requesting stamps in
response to this incident occurring.
George Durak (116 Feldspar Dr.): Asked that the offender apologize to the
offended.
Gwen Brandon (1600 Osprey): Offered public comment regarding her opinion for
resolution to this issue.
Nancy Ording (1710 Haslett Rd.): Offered public comment regarding elected
officials versus hourly employees.
John Kennedy (4787 Barton Rd.): Offered public comment regarding unprofessional
conduct.
Supervisor Martin indicated that she is committed to future board training. She
indicated that she has attempted to schedule board training in the past to no
avail, but she will schedule future board training and everyone will be
required to attend. She indicated that as an employer, the Township has to
maintain a good work environment that is not offensive to employees
George Durak (116 Durak): Offered public comment regarding apologies
Clerk Zaban amended the motion to strike the seven reasons for censure and to
vote on the board resolution for censure as read above.
Discussion on the amended motion: Treasurer LeBlanc asked for the resolution to
be read again. Clerk Zaban read the resolution again.
Treasurer Wilbrink asked that the reference to “physical” threatening behavior
be struck from the resolution. Clerk Zaban struck the work “Physically” from
the proposed resolution.
Roll Call Vote:
Trustee Wilbrink   No
Treasurer LeBlanc   No
Trustee Wright      Yes
Supervisor Martin    Yes
Clerk Zaban      Yes
The motion passed 3 to 2.
In conclusion to the passing of the motion to censure Treasurer LeBlanc through
Board Resolution, Supervisor Martin reviewed that going forward she would asked
that Board members bring concerns forward immediately if there are problems
with employees. And employees should do the same with their superiors. She
indicated that she will continue to reflect on each meet to improve it and she
will schedule a board training meeting.
Treasurer LeBlanc read a letter to the record dated July 19, 2005, regarding
his goal as Treasurer and that he is consistently working to improve his
skills.
LADDERING SECURITY
Treasurer LeBlanc reviewed his handout from Multi-Bank Securities. He also
noted that Flagstar bank has a good rate without going through Multi-bank
Securities. He asked the Board to consider the options for reinvestment of
maturing CDs. Trustee Wilbrink suggested that the Board use the local banks
that the Treasurer indentifies as having the best interest rates instead of
paying a company to search best interest rates.
Trustee Wilbrink moved to adjourn the meeting at 5:43.
CLERK STEVE ZABAN                           DATE
AUGUST 2, 2005
CALL TO ORDER
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order at 7:30 pm and reviewed
the agenda.
PLEDGE
ROLL CALL
Trustee Wilbrink; Treasurer LeBlanc; Trustee Wright; Supervisor Martin; Clerk
Zaban
CONSENT AGENDA:
Minutes of 7/5/05 Regular Meeting
No Comment.
Minutes of 7/19/05 Workshop Meeting
Treasurer LeBlanc, submitted changes in writing. Supervisor Martin indicated
that the minutes are an overview of what is said and they are not intended to
be verbatim. She suggested that MTA should be consulted regarding minute format
and the Board could discuss at a later meeting. She asked for Board input.
Trustee Wilbrink agreed #3 should be changed as requested because it is a
correction of what a Board member said and requested by that Board member.
Trustee Wright and Clerk Zaban agreed to the #3 correction, but not correction
of public comment.
July Activity
No Comment.
Treasurer’s Report:   
No Comment.
Accounts Payable and Paid:   
Trustee Wilbrink asked for clarification of Maner, Costerisan & Ellis expense.
Supervisor Martin indicated that expense was for the auditors to clean up the
accounting books. She reviewed Audit status. Treasure LeBlanc appreciated the
general fund register as it shows a detailed picture of what happened last
month.
Building Inspector:   
No Comment.
Trustee Wright made a motion to approve the consent agenda. Trustee Wilbrink
seconded the motion.
There was no discussion and the motion passed unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Susan Stuwe (900 E. Sherwood Rd.): Public comment regarding minutes of 7/19/05.
NEW BUSINESS
Park Use:
Supervisor Martin introduced a request from Mid-Michigan Rocket Society to
launch their rockets twice monthly. Supervisor Martin read their proposal for
review. McKenna has reviewed the request as it applies to the Park Ordinance
and it is an allowed use.
Forest Ray, President of the Mid-Michigan Rocket Society reviewed his
organization. The society currently has approximately 10 members and is open to
the pubic. Clerk Zaban asked if an insurance certificate could be provided and
Supervisor Martin asked for a calendar of launch dates. Supervisor Martin then
reviewed with the Board that this request does allow the Board to charge a fee,
however since there will be no maintenance to the Township, she would suggest
it be waived.
Trustee Wright made a motion to allow a Special Use Permit for the Mid-Michigan
Rocket Society upon receiving a current insurance certificate and a calendar of
dates. Trustee Wilbrink seconded the motion.
There was no discussion on the motion and it passed unanimously.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Treasurer Investments
Treasurer LeBlanc distributed a summary of interest rates and various other
consideration regarding certificates of deposit (CD). He reviewed the
procedures for investing and recommended Dart Bank of Mason and National City
Bank as additional approved depositories. He suggested that the maturing
Capitol National Bank CD be cashed out and put in the general fund until
National City Bank is approved as a Township depository. He also stated that
currently all Township CD’s are a one year investment and he would suggest
laddering the CDs so they do not all come due at the same time. Investing for
15 months could do this. The Board also needs to consider an updated investment
policy.
Treasurer LeBlanc made a motion to authorized cashing cash the Capitol National
Bank CD upon its maturity and move it to the general fund. When National City
Bank becomes an approved depository, then invest the funds for 11 months. Roll
over the Flagstar Bank CD upon maturity for 12months. Trustee Wilbrink seconded
the motion.
Discussion: Trustee Wilbrink asked for clarification regarding a 12 month
investment with Flagstar Bank when he is suggesting staggering the CDs.
Treasurer LeBlanc indicated that, depending on when you invest, they may have
incentives for different months of investment.
Treasurer LeBlanc amended the motion to authorize flexibility in how many
months to invest based on the best deal (e.g., National City up to 12 months
and Flagstar up to 12 to 15 months or more) and to secure a signed
disclaimer receipt of the existing investment policy for from National City
Bank if our money is invested with them.
Discussion on the amended motion: Clerk Zaban asked if Capital National Bank is
aware that the money will be cashed and have they been given the opportunity to
match the rates of other banks. Treasurer LeBlanc indicated that they have.
Motion passed unanimously.
REPORTS
Parks   
Nancy Fink (535 E. Sherwood Rd.): Provided public comment regarding the funding
for the park pavilion. Supervisor Martin indicated that the Board would wait
for a proposal from the parks committee before they responded. Supervisor
Martin provided updates regarding Nathan Goodman’s Eagle Scout proposal.
NIESA
Trustee Wilbrink reported on the success of the collection  rate for ambulance
calls. They are still working on a new building and the purchase of property as
well as their billing process for past due accounts. Clerk Zaban commented on
their budget amount from Williamstown Township.
Library   
Treasurer LeBlanc had no report. Supervisor Martin indicated that another draft
of the Building Authority document would be looked at soon.
Watershed   
Trustee Wilbrink attended a training session that identifies illegal discharge
of polluted water to storm drains and provided a short report of how it impacts
Williamstown Township very little.
Other
Supervisor Martin announced that the Township Newsletter was mailed last week
reporting a summary of the Township’s recent community survey. She indicated
that there have been many positive comments. Supervisor Martin thanked Robert
Jacobowitz, Wendell Proudfoot, and Cindy Davis for their help inputting survey
data into the data software and writing of the report.
Trustee Wilbrink commented that he thought the report would be reported by area
and sent out by region per their responses. Supervisor Martin responded that
the survey was distributed in that manner for use by McKenna.
Ruth Templeton (1435 Epley Rd.): Asked for clarification of who approved and
distributed the report. Supervisor Martin indicated that the Board and Planning
Commission were charged with conducting the survey and reporting the results.
Cemetery
Supervisor Martin reported and showed deed documents that the Cemetery
Committee found archived. These documents are the deeds from people who gave
land for the cemeteries dating back to the 1860s.
Conrad Taschner (Harvey Drive) provided an update report of cemetery
activities.
Republic Bank Trust & Agency
Treasurer LeBlanc made a request to the Board to close  approve closing  the
Republic Bank Trust & Agency checking account because beginning in September
they will assess a $10.00 inactive service charge. It is a small account
previously used to hold trailer pad taxes and payments of delinquent personal
property tax. Independent Bank is now used to hold these payments. Trustee
Wilbrink asked what is the minimum balance needed to keep the account inactive?
Treasurer LeBlanc will report at the next meeting specifics for this account
before any board decision is made.
SECOND PUBLIC COMMENT
None
Clerk Zaban made a motion to adjourn.
The meeting adjourned at 8:50 p.m.
_______________________________________________________________________
Clerk Steve Zaban                        Date
AUGUST 16, 2005
PRESENT
Trustee Wilbrink; Treasurer LeBlanc; Trustee Wright; Supervisor Martin and
Clerk Zaban.
CALL TO ORDER
Supervisor Martin opened the meeting and reviewed the agenda. Trustee Wilbrink
requested “Park Pavilion” be added to the agenda.
GENEALOGY GROUP
Supervisor Martin indicated that the Historical Committee has met and is
interested in working on this project. Supervisor Martin asked Trustee Wilbrink
if committee members are willing to volunteer time to this project. Trustee
Wilbrink indicated they are interested as time permits and have information
they would like to offer for microfilming. Supervisor Martin reviewed the
resolution and asked for corrections to paragraph three to read: “…to property
ownership history, no individual taxes, bills paid, receipts and/or other
financial information will be copied. From only the beginning of township
existence up to 1976.” The project will begin Friday, August 19, 2005.
Clerk Zaban made a motion to accept the proposed resolution dated Tuesday,
August 16, 2005, with corrections as noted, which will allow the Ingham County
Genealogical Society to microfilm/microfiche and inventory Williamstown
Township, Summit Cemetery and Foote Cemetery historical records. Trustee
Wilbrink seconded the motion.
There was no discussion on the motion. Roll call vote:
Trustee Wilbrink:   Yes
Treasurer LeBlanc:   Yes
Trustee Wright:      Yes
Supervisor Martin:   Yes
Clerk Zaban:      Yes
Motion passed 5 to 0.
INVESTMENT POLICY
Treasurer LeBlanc reviewed his letter to the Board dated August 2, 2005,
regarding a proposed Township Investment Policy. Supervisor Martin asked if
paragraph five, second sentence should read, “government approved financial
institutions.”? Treasurer LeBlanc responded that governmental approval is
addressed in the preceding paragraphs. However, the sentence could be revised
to read, “Township Board approved financial institutions.” Supervisor Martin
asked if third party brokers are addressed in the proposed Township Investment
Policy? Treasurer LeBlanc responded that they are not, but should the Board
elect to use a third party broker such as multi-banking, then the Board would
have to approve those banks.
Nancy Fink (535 E. Sherwood Rd.): Provided public comment regarding updates to
the proposed Township Investment Policy; necessity of third party language; and
defining mutual funds.
Treasurer LeBlanc responded that the proposed Township Investment Policy is the
same as MTA’s August 2005 prototype. He summarized what the legal definition of
mutual funds states as written in the proposed Township Investment Policy.
However, he noted that he has no plans for investing in mutual funds.
Currently, there is one fund in mutual funds. Currently, policy allows for
mutual funds and he would consider using the old language if that is what is
satisfactory.
John Kennedy (4787 Barton Rd.): Provided public comment regarding updates to
MTA’s prototypes and cited statutes.
Supervisor Martin asked if other prototype options for the proposed Township
Investment Policy should be researched before the Board makes any decisions?
Treasurer LeBlanc responded that he would recommend the Board approve the
proposed Township Investment Policy as presented.
Trustee Wilbrink asked what is the benefit of the proposed Township Investment
Policy versus the old policy? Treasurer LeBlanc responded that the proposed
policy is written more clearly and would provide an updated current version of
Township policy.
Supervisor Martin asked that page two, item “g” be revised to read:
“….Investment Company Act of 1940, or as amended,  Title…..”
Treasurer Leblanc made a motion to accept the proposed resolution dated August
2, 2005, updating the Williamstown Township Investment and Depository
Designation with corrections as noted. Trustee Wright seconded the motion.
There was no discussion on the motion. Roll call vote:
Trustee Wilbrink:   Yes
Treasurer LeBlanc:   Yes
Trustee Wright:      Yes
Supervisor Martin:   Yes
Clerk Zaban:      Yes
Motion passed 5 to 0.
457 PLAN
Rick Gladding unable to attend.
PARK PAVILLION
Trustee Wilbrink reviewed the Park Committee’s request to construct a park
pavilion. The pavilion will cost approximately $34,000 to be funded by the
American Legion. However, the American Legion funds will not be available prior
to the start of construction. Therefore, the Park’s Committee is requesting the
Board to provide the funds that will be reimbursed by the American Legion when
their CD’s mature in October, February and May. Supervisor Martin asked
Treasurer LeBlanc if there were funds it the general fund to support this
project? Treasurer LeBlanc indicated there are funds available. There was
general Board consensus to support the pavilion project. However, they
requested the Park’s Committee to submit a proposal for review with a formal
agreement to repay the funds at the regular September Board meeting. Supervisor
Martin will provide Trustee Wilbrink with ordinance regulation for site plan
approval of the pavilion.
Ruth Templeton (1435 Epley Rd.): Provided public comment regarding the funding
of the pavilion.
Nancy Fink (535 E. Sherwood Rd.): Responded as a member of the Parks Committee
that they are willing to fund the project from the Parks budget, if the Board
does not authorize the funds from general fund.
Susan Stuwe (900 E. Sherwood Rd.): Requested time for public comment, read and
submitted an undated letter to the Board.
Ruth Templeton (1435 Epley Rd.): Provided public comment regarding Township
policy for letter retention.
John Kennedy (4787 Barton Rd.): Provided public comment regarding posting of
agendas on the Township’s website ; openness in local government; and public
participation.   
Clerk Zaban moved to adjourn at 6:00 pm.
CLERK STEVE ZABAN                           DATE
SEPTEMBER 20, 2005
CALL TO ORDER
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order at 5:00 p.m. and reviewed
the agenda.
PRESENT
Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer LeBlanc, Trustee Wright, Supervisor Martin, and
Clerk Zaban.
ABSENT
None
PUBLIC COMMENT:
Kathi Proudfoot--(5380 Barton Road): Gave public comment regarding conduct at
public meetings.
Amy Scripter--(5582 Shoeman Road): Applicant for Clerk’s position. Reviewed her
qualifications for the position and indicated that she would like the
opportunity to learn about the Township and township government.
Gary Gillespie--(4701 Jadestone Drive): Gave public comment regarding the
Clerk’s duties and Ms. Davis’ current duties.
Bob Lombardini--(1500 Epley Road): Gave public comment supporting applicant
Cindy Davis and his concern for conduct at public meetings.
Roger Philip--(5350 Barton Road): Gave public comment regarding concerns he has
for applicant Cindy Davis
George Durak--(116 Feldspar Drive): Gave public comment regarding legal costs.
John Kennedy--(4787 Barton Road): Gave public comment regarding Open Meetings
Act and requested the Board follow the Open Meetings Act.
Susan Stuwe--(900 Sherwood Road): Gave public comment regarding the Freedom of
Information Act and indicated that residents can seek assistance through MTA.
Bob Hayes--(1240 Sherwood Road): Gave public comment supporting applicant Cindy
Davis and indicated that he hoped the board would not become deadlock in their
decision.
Wendell Proudfoot--(5280 Barton Road): Gave public comment supporting the Board
and their hard work, dedication and commitment to their positions. He also gave
public comment supporting applicant Cindy Davis.
Fred Haring--(3988 Woodcove Lane): Gave public comment supporting applicant
Cindy Davis.
Bob Hayes--(1240 Sherwood Road): Gave public comment for Maurice Veenstra who
asked to have his voice of support for applicant Cindy Davis.
Susan Stuwe--(900 Sherwood Road): Gave public comment urging that the interview
process be honest and open and that the Board find the best candidate to
fulfill the position.
Cindy Davis--(1375 Epley Road): Gave public comment responding to public
comments regarding statements she had made and the context in which they were
made
Supervisor Martin reviewed the list of applicants for Township Clerk as
follows:
   Roy Turbett, 5232 Meridian Road
   Rutgar Hoag, 2100 E. Sherwood Road
   Jerry Rosher, 5115 Barton Road
   Amy Scripter, 5582 Shoeman Road
   Ruth Templeton (withdrawn)
   Howard Dahlstrom, 4075 Vanneter
   Cheri Vaupel, 3938 Beeman, (withdrawn)
   Cindy Davis, 1375 Epley Road
APPLICANTS FOR TOWNSHIP CLERK
Roy Turbett--(5232 Meridian Road): Provided public comment regarding his
qualifications for the position of Clerk.
Rutgar Hoag--(2100 E. Sherwood Road): Provided public comment regarding his
qualifications for the position of Clerk.
Amy Scriptor--(5582 Shoeman Road): Provided public comment regarding her
qualifications for the position of Clerk.
Trustee Wilbrink thanked all candidates who applied for the Township Clerk
position. He felt there was many qualified candidates and suggested that those
candidates who are not selected for the Township Clerk position continue to
support the Williamstown Township. Supervisor Martin agreed and supported
Trustee Wilbrink’s comments.
Supervisor Martin shared that all the candidates materials have been received
and reviewed, the candidates have had time to speak at this meeting and called
for a motion. She indicated that Clerk Zaban would not be participating in the
vote for Township Clerk per township law.
Supervisor Martin shared a letter of withdrawal from applicant Cheri Vaupel for
Township Clerk, two letters of support for Cindy Davis, and letter of
resignation from Township Clerk Steve Zaban.
Treasurer Al LeBlanc shared with the community that the votes cast this evening
by the Board of Trustees will be for the person who best fits the Townships
needs at this time.
MOTION: Treasurer LeBlanc, supported by Trustee Wilbrink, moved that the Board
close the application process and vote for appointment of clerk.
Ayes: 5            Nays: 0         Motion carried.
Supervisor Martin and Trustee Wilbrink shared once again the candidate selected
for the Township Clerk position will be the one that best fits the needs of the
Township Board at this time. Both are looking for someone with experience and
knowledge, someone that will bring a positive outlook to the Township Board and
someone that exemplifies stability and commitment.
MOTION: Trustee Wilbrink, supported by Treasurer LeBlanc, moved to appoint Mr.
Roy Turbett to fulfill the Township Clerk appointment.
DISCUSSION: Supervisor Martin and Trustee Wright expressed their concerns for
candidate Roy Turbett and reviewed their criteria of a clerk
Trustee Wilbrink and Treasurer LeBlanc reviewed their criteria of a clerk.
Ayes: Trustee Wilbrink         Nays:    Supervisor Martin      Motion failed.
Treasurer LeBlanc         Trustee Wright
MOTION: Trustee Wright, supported by Supervisor Martin, moved to appoint Ms.
Cindy Davis to fulfill the Township Clerk appointment.
DISCUSSION: Supervisor Martin and Trustee Wright indicated that they felt no
candidate should be discounted because they have prior Township knowledge. They
also indicated that there needs to be a commitment of stability and re-election
after one year.
Trustee Wilbrink and Treasurer LeBlanc indicated that candidates with prior
Township experience have a disadvantage because of the history of the Township
Board and the negative influences. Treasurer LeBlanc also indicated he is
looking for a candidate to balance the board.
Ayes:    Supervisor Martin      Nays: Trustee Wilbrink         Motion failed.
   Trustee Wright Treasurer LeBlanc
Trustee Wright suggested that the two candidates, Roy Turbett and Cindy Davis,
schedule a time to interview with the Board of Trustees in order to narrow the
choice to one. This request was denied.
MOTION: Trustee Wilbrink, supported by Treasurer LeBlanc, moved to appoint Mr.
Rutgar Hoag to fulfill the Township Clerk appointment.
DISCUSSION: Supervisor Martin and Trustee Wright expressed their concern of
time commitment to the position of clerk.
Trustee Wilbrink and Treasurer LeBlanc reviewed the qualifications of applicant
Hoag.
Ayes:    Trustee Wilbrink      Nays: Supervisor Martin      Motion failed.
Treasurer LeBlanc       Trustee Wright
MOTION: Trustee Wilbink, supported by Treasurer LeBlanc, moved to appoint Mr.
Jerry Rosher to fulfill the Township Clerk appointment.
DISCUSSION: Supervisor Martin and Trustee Wright expressed their concerns for
candidate Jerry Rosher and reviewed their criteria of a clerk
Trustee Wilbrink and Treasurer LeBlanc reviewed the qualifications of applicant
Rosher and felt that the person should have a willingness to learn.
Ayes:    Trustee Wilbrink         Nays: Trustee Wright      Motion failed.
Treasurer LeBlanc            Supervisor Martin
Supervisor Martin suggested that the Board take more time to individually
interview all the applicants for the Township Clerk and that the Board convene
Tuesday, September 27, 2005, to appoint a new Township Clerk.
Trustee Wilbrink, was in favor, but Treasurer LeBlanc would not be available to
meet on that date and felt the appointment needed to occur now. He felt that
the deadlines had already been extended, the job has been advertised in public
papers, and there had been plenty of opportunity to speak with every candidate.
Treasurer LeBlanc suggested that the appointment be referred to the County
Clerk for general election. He indicated it would only cost the Township
approximately $7000.
Supervisor Martin reviewed the time period that the Board has to appoint a
clerk. She expressed that it is unfortunate that the vote is not agreeable, but
if more time is needed in order to come to an agreement than that is what is
necessary. That she has been advised by MTA that the Board is to make every
attempt to appoint a clerk.
MOTION: Treasurer LeBlanc, supported by Trustee Wilbrink, moved to appoint Mr.
Howard Dahlstrom to fulfill the Township Clerk appointment.
DISCUSSION: Supervisor Martin and Trustee Wright expressed their concerns for
applicant Dahlstrom and reviewed their criteria for a clerk.
Trustee Wilbrink and Treasurer LeBlanc reviewed the qualifications of applicant
Dahlstrom.
Ayes: Trustee Wilbrink      Nays: Supervisor Martin      Motion failed.
   Treasurer LeBlanc       Trustee Wright
Trustee Wilbrink recommended each board member choose a member of the community
to assist with the public interviews for the position of Township Clerk. Each
Board member was asked to submit the name of their choice to Supervisor Martin
by Wednesday, September 21, 2005. The office personnel will then set up the
interviews with the candidates. He also recommended that Clerk Zaban choose a
community member for this process.
MOTION: Trustee Wilbrink, supported by Treasurer LeBlanc, moved for each Board
of Trustee to pick one person from the community that does not work for the
Township or is not a member of any advisory committee, to help the Board of
Trustees choose a new Township Clerk. The interviews will take place within the
next 7-10 days and the appointment is to be made by the next Board Meeting of
October 4, 2005.
DISCUSSION: None
Ayes: 4            Nays: 0         Motion carried.
Mr. Zaban read a letter to the Board of Trustees. He thanked them for his 18
years of service to the board. He shared Mickey is an asset to the Township
along with Gwen, Michelle, Cindy and Jennifer and he is proud of the jobs they
are doing. Clerk Zaban indicated that his current job is growing and he has
some other personal plans he wants to attend to and wishes the Board the best
of luck, as they will endure.
Trustee Wilbrink, supported by Treasurer LeBlanc, moved to adjourn.
Ayes: 5            Nays: 0         Motion carried.
The meeting adjourned at 6:50 p.m.
CLERK STEVE ZABAN                        DATE
OCTOBER 4, 2005
CALL TO ORDER
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order at 7:32 pm and reviewed
the agenda.
In the absence of a Clerk, Trustee Wilbrink was appointed to take the minutes.
PLEDGE
ROLL CALL
Supervisor Martin; Treasurer LeBlanc; Trustee Martin; Trustee Wilbrink.
CONSENT AGENDA:
Minutes of 9/6/05 Regular Meeting:
None
Minutes of 9/20/05 Workshop Meeting:
None
Treasurer Report:
Treasurer LeBlanc reported that there were CDs reinvested at a higher interest
rate of 4.15% and 4.25% with a laddering of due dates.
Building Inspector:
No Comment.
September Activity:
No Report
Accounts Paid & Payable:
No Report
Treasurer LeBlanc made a motion to approve the consent agenda with the
corrections stated. Trustee Wright seconded the motion.
There was no discussion and the motion passed unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS:
Supervisor Martin opened the floor for public comment.
Gary Gillespie (4701 Jadestone Dr.): Public comment regarding Clerk
appointment, Salaries, and availability of documents from other townships.
George Durak (116 Feldspar Dr.): Public comment regarding legal expenses and
previous public comment .
Roger Philip (5350 Barton Rd.): Public comment regarding multiple issues of
concern.
Robert a Jacobowitz (5721 Zimmer Rd.): Public comment regarding public comments
and focusing on survey results.
John Kennedy (4787 Barton Rd.): Public comment regarding recent special meeting
and requests .
Ruth Templeton (1435 Epley Rd.): Public comment regarding board members.
Supervisor Martin Closed Public Comment Closed At: 8:06 pm
CLERK VACANCY
Supervisor Martin asked for any public comment regarding the Clerk Vacancy.
Ruth Templeton (1435 Epley Rd.): Public comment regarding interviews of all
candidates.
Bob Hayes (1240 E. Sherwood Rd.): Public comment regarding deadlock and
importance of Advisory Committee.
Supervisor Martin asked if any member of the Advisory Committee wanted to make
public comment.
Bob Lombardini (1500 Epley Rd.): Public comment regarding his appreciation for
each candidate and desire for the Board to take the recommendation of the
Committee.
Susan Stuwe (900 E. Sherwood Rd.): Public comment regarding her desire for the
Board to take time in their consideration of the Clerk appointment and her
concern for bias of two Advisory Committee members.
Susan Miel-Uken (4060 Meridian Rd.): Public comment regarding her desire for
the Board to move forward with a decision and her appreciation for being asked
to serve on the Advisory Committee.
Brad Sharp (6158 Lounsbury Rd.): Public comment regarding his knowledge of
candidates and the Advisory Committees process.
Each Board member commented on their process for reviewing the recommendations
of the Advisory Committee. Trustee Wilbrink expressed his concern for the
Committee not making a recommendation. Supervisor Martin reviewed the process
prior to the Advisory Committee meeting and the input and/or lack of input from
each Board member regarding that process. Trustee Wilbrink had given no comment
regarding the process.
Treasurer LeBlanc made a motion to appoint Roy Turbett to the position of
Clerk. Trustee Wilbrink seconded the motion.
Discussion: Supervisor Martin expressed her concerns for candidate Turbett.
Roll Call Vote:
Trustee Wright      No
Supervisor Martin      No
Treasurer LeBlanc      Yes
Trustee Wilbrink      Yes
The motion failed 2 to 2.
Trustee Wright made a motion to appoint Cindy Davis to the position of Clerk.
Supervisor Martin seconded the motion.
Discussion: Trustee Wilbrink and Treasurer LeBlanc expressed their concerns for
candidate Davis.
Roll Call Vote:
Trustee Wright      Yes
Supervisor Martin      Yes
Treasurer LeBlanc      No
Trustee Wilbrink      No
The motion failed 2 to 2.
Treasurer LeBlanc made a motion to appoint Jerry Rosher to the position of
Clerk. Trustee Wilbrink seconded the motion.
Discussion: Supervisor Martin expressed her concerns for candidate Rosher.
Roll Call Vote:
Trustee Wright      No
Supervisor Martin      No
Treasurer LeBlanc      Yes
Trustee Wilbrink      Yes
The motion failed 2 to 2.
Treasurer LeBlanc made a motion to appoint Howard Dahlstrom to the position of
Clerk. Trustee Wilbrink seconded the motion.
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Trustee Wright      No
Supervisor Martin      No
Treasurer LeBlanc      Yes
Trustee Wilbrink      Yes
The motion failed 2 to 2.
Supervisor Martin acknowledged Trustee Wilbrink’s concern that the Advisory
Committee did not make a recommendation for one candidate and suggested that
the meeting be adjourned until a later date, that the Advisory Committee meet
and present one candidate as their recommendation to the Board. Trustee
Wilbrink agreed with the suggestion, but disagree with adjourning until another
date. He suggested the Board break while four out of five of  the Advisory
Committee met to make a recommendation of one candidate and for the Committee
to consider the comments made during the meeting as part of their
recommendation. There was Board consensus to break and to convene the Advisory
Committee for a final recommendation.
Meeting recessed at 9:40 pm (Advisory Committee meeting minutes under separate
cover).
Meeting reconvened at 10:10 pm
Brad Sharp spoke for the interview committee and indicated that each committee
member would give public comment regarding their choice for Clerk along with
their reasons for their choice.
Brad Sharp (6158 Lounsbury Rd.): Reviewed his process for rating his top two
candidates, Cindy Davis and Roy Turbett, and his score for each candidate.
Based on his ranking he recommended Cindy Davis for Clerk.
Trustee Wilbrink presented additional questions to Brad Sharp to clarify his
recommendation.
Susan Miel-Uken (4060 Meridian Rd.): Reviewed her process for rating her top
two candidates, Cindy Davis and Roy Turbett. Based on her ranking she
recommended Cindy Davis for Clerk.
Trustee Wilbrink presented additional questions to Susan Miel-Uken to clarify
her recommendation.
Bob Lombardini (1500 Epley Rd.): Reviewed his process for rating the candidates
and based on his ranking he recommended Cindy Davis for Clerk.
Trustee Wilbrink presented additional questions to Bob Lombardini to clarify
his recommendation.
Susan Stuwe (900 E. Sherwood Rd.): Reviewed her process for rating the
candidates and based on her ranking she did not recommend Cindy Davis for
Clerk.
Supervisor Martin presented additional questions to Susan Stuwe to clarify her
ranking of candidate Davis.
Trustee Wright made a motion to appoint Cindy Davis as Clerk. Supervisor Martin
seconded the motion.
Discussion: Trustee Wilbrink and Treasurer LeBlanc presented their concerns for
candidate Davis.
Roll Call Vote:
Trustee Wright      Yes
Supervisor Martin      Yes
Treasurer LeBlanc      No
Trustee Wilbrink      No
The motion failed 2 to 2.
Trustee Wilbrink questioned why Supervisor Martin and Trustee Wright did not
interview each candidate. Supervisor Martin and Trustee Wright responded that
they used a screening process for candidates and only interviewed the
candidates they felt were qualified for the position. Trustee Wilbrink
indicated that since the pool of candidates was not excessive then each
candidate should have been interviewed by Supervisor Martin and Trustee Wright.
Supervisor Martin and Trustee Wright agreed to adjourn the meeting, interview
Roy Turbett, and reconvene after the interview in an attempt to break the split
decision for Clerk.
Meeting adjourned at 11:10 pm.
Meeting reconvened at 12:35 am.
Supervisor Martin reviewed the interview with Roy Turbett and his
qualifications for Clerk. She also commented on candidate Turbett’s
qualifications for other positions within the Township such as Supervisor or
Trustee . Based on her interview, she supported Cindy Davis for Clerk.
Trustee Wright made a motion to appoint Cindy Davis as Clerk. Supervisor
Martin Trustee Wilbrink seconded the motion.
Discussion: Treasurer LeBlanc expressed his concerns for candidate Davis.
Roll Call Vote:
Trustee Wright      Yes
Supervisor Martin      Yes
Treasurer LeBlanc      No
Trustee Wilbrink      Yes
The motion passed 3 to 1.
Trustee Wilbrink commented on the process of appointment for Clerk. His
concerns and his hopes for the future.
Signature Cards
Treasurer LeBlanc submitted a Bank Signature Card Resolution to add and remove
names from the signature cards of current banks used by the Township.
Treasurer LeBlanc made a motion to approved the Bank Signature Card Resolution.
Trustee Wright seconded the motion.
There was no discussion on the motion and it passed unanimously.
Other
A Special Meeting date was set to approve the September Activity and the
Accounts Paid and Payable for October 6, 2005, at 11:00 am.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Kathy Proudfoot (5380 Barton Rd.): Provided public comment regarding the
Board’s unwillingness to compromise during the Clerk appointment process and
the public’s continued negative comments.
Connie Taschner (1787 Harvey Dr.): Provided public comment regarding Treasurer
LeBlanc’s statement regarding cost of legal fees.
Treasurer LeBlanc responded to Mr. Taschner’s public comment.
Cindy Davis (1375 Epley Rd.): Provided public comment regarding her
appreciation of the Board and their decision to appoint her Clerk.
Bob Hayes (1240 E. Sherwood Rd.): Provided public comment regarding his
appreciation of the board for making an appointment to the Clerk’s position.
Trustee Wright made a motion to adjourn the meeting. Supervisor Martin seconded
the motion.
The meeting was adjourned at 12:47 am.
Recording Secretary, Trustee Wilbrink               Date
OCTOBER 18, 2005
CALL TO ORDER
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order at 5:00 pm and reviewed
the agenda adding the Chamber of Commerce if times permits. Trustee Treasurer
LeBlanc absent.
PUBLIC COMMENT
None
Genealogy Group
John Castle of the Genealogy Group presented the microfilm of the records
scanned and a record of the documents scanned. He indicated that these are
being given to the Board as a donation and thanked the Board for their support
of this project. A picture was taken of Mr. Castle presenting the films to the
Board. Mr. Castle indicated that if additional old records are found, to call
and they will also scan those documents.
FOIA Policy
Clerk Davis presented a draft FOIA procedure packet to be given to the public
when making a FOIA request. She reviewed the document in detail and asked that
the Board take some time to review the document and pass any additions and/or
corrections to her before the next Board meeting. It is her intent to finalize
the procedure and present it to the Board at the November meeting as a Board
resolution.
There was Board comment and questions regarding the document worksheet of
available documents without a FOIA request.
Ruth Templeton (1435 Epley Rd.): Provided public comment regarding the fees
charged for realtors and how much time does it take to provide realtor
requests.
Susan Stuwe (900 E. Sherwood Rd.): Provided public comment regarding charges
for her past personal record FOIA request.
Jerry Rosher (5115 Barton Rd.): Provided public comment regarding posting the
fees.
Jacqueline Rosher (5115 Barton Rd.): Provided public comment regarding the fees
and asked if different rates could be charged for residents and non-residents.
Supervisor Martin responded to public comment regarding the costs and the
possibility of posting the FOIA procedure and forms on the Township website.
She asked the Board to provide additional comment regarding the procedure to
Clerk Davis by 10/25/05.
Trustee Wright made a motion to put the FOIA Coordinator position back to Clerk
Davis. Trustee Wilbrink seconded the motion.
There was no discussion on the motion and it passed unanimously.
Response to Public Comment:
Supervisor Martin reviewed the current practice for responding to public
comment and asked the Board how they would like to respond. She indicated that
past practice has been to listen and not respond. However, she noted that she
does respond to some  in writing to public comment. She suggested that there
are several options that could be considered such as referring the public
comment to the Board member who may have the answer and have them respond to
the comment in writing with a carbon copy to each Board member.
Trustee Wilbrink suggested that some public comment can be responded to
immediately at the meeting.
Ruth Templeton (1435 Epley Rd.): Provided public comment regarding the
procedure that the Planning Commission uses for public hearings.
Trustee Wright supported Supervisor Martin’s suggestion that an individual
Board member be given the question and leave it up to that member whether to
respond immediately at the meeting and/or later in writing.
Clerk Davis asked if “Response to Public Comment” could be added as a standard
agenda item to give time for Board members to follow-up on public comment from
a previous meeting.
Supervisor Martin asked Clerk Davis to draft a policy/procedure for responding
to public comment for review by the Board. It should include a response within
two weeks, carbon copy of requests to all Board members, and a procedure for
filing the responses.
Susan Stuwe (900 E. Sherwood Rd.): Provided public comment regarding a
procedure for filing the responses.
Ruth Templeton (1435 Epley Rd): Provided public comment asking if responses
would be put in both minute records. Clerk Davis responded by indicating that
there is only one record of the minutes in the Board minute book and that all
past Board Packets are also kept.
Dan Dapkus (878 E. Sherwood Rd.): Provided public comment regarding a procedure
for following specific public comment issues.
Attorney Expenses
Trustee Wilbrink introduced this agenda item by asking each Board member to
suggest ways in which the Board can contain legal costs.
There was Board consensus that legal costs need to be contained. However, each
year legal costs are an estimate from year to year and when you have a large
issue or legal action then those estimates may not be good. Supervisor Martin
reviewed the average legal cost from 1997 to 2000 to be $42,190 and 2000 to
2004 to be $25,780 and indicated that the current legal costs are not out of
line in comparison to these averages.
Trustee Wilbrink gave specific examples of legal cost related to Treasurer
LeBlanc and questioned those costs. Supervisor Martin responded that the Board
has to rely on their legal counsel and their advice/judgment in those type of
matters because of any future litigation and their ability to defend those
issues. She also cited recent court cases that would support the Board’s
decision to seek legal advice and incur cost relating to the LeBlanc matter.
Trustee Wilbrink indicated that he is not questioning the need for legal
advice, but he would suggest that in the future the Board should try and call
the MTA before seeking legal counsel.
Trustee Wilbrink proposed that any future legal expenses be approved by the
Board. Supervisor Martin responded by indicating that all complaints do come to
the Board before any major legal action is taken.
Clerk Davis indicated that part of the solution to a problem is recognizing the
problem. She suggested that the Board agrees that legal cost are currently over
budget; the Board agrees to contain future legal costs; and when preparing next
year’s legal expenses the Board can look at other options.
Supervisor Martin will bring complaints to the Board as in the past. However,
there are other sensitive and/or timely matters that need immediate action such
as contracts, FOIA requests, etc. Trustee Wright and Trustee Wilbrink agreed
that those issues do not need specific board approval. She suggested that Board
members individually review the invoices monthly and notify her of any
questions regarding the charges.
Clerk Davis asked if it is possible to do a mid-year budget review? Supervisor
Martin indicated that we are heading into the budget planning process and will
be reviewing the budget in preparation for approving next year’s budget. This
process will start in November in which the Board will be reviewing this budget
to recommend approval for 2006-07.
Trustee Wilbrink suggest special meetings to approve charges if time is an
issue. Supervisor Martin responded that special meetings are a possibility and
would call for if needed for large or unusual legal needs. Trustee Wilbrink
suggested that a special meeting currently needs to be called to review a
current FOIA request. He will let Supervisor Martin know when the FOIA is due
so a special meeting can be called.
Chamber of Commerce   
Dawn Marie Joseph, Chamber Representative, presented to the Board a resolution
they are asking the Board to pass allowing the Chamber of Commerce to hold a
fifth Texas Hold-um Tournament at Dietz Pool and Patio for the Kathy Ellsworth
Foundation. They indicated that the Kathy Ellsworth Foundation already had
Board resolution to hold four tournaments.   for various nonprofit events.
They have held those tournaments and now the Chamber is asking for one
tournament approval.
Trustee Wright made a motion to approve a resolution for a gaming license for
the Williamston Chamber of Commerce. Trustee Wilbrink seconded the motion.
There was no discussion on the motion.
Roll Call Vote:      Trustee Wilbrink      Yes
            Trustee Wright      Yes
            Supervisor Martin      Yes
            Clerk Davis         Yes
The motion passed 4 to 0.
Public Comment
Supervisor Martin opened the floor for public comment.
John Kennedy (4787 Barton Rd.): Provided public comment questioning the name of
the Board meetings and whether policy level decisions can be held at all
meetings, had the names changed, and does that constitute a change in the
regular schedule of meetings.
Supervisor Martin indicated that she has responded to Mr. Kennedy in writing.
Ruth Templeton (1435 Epley Rd.): Provided public comment regarding the Boards
responsibility per Statute 42.29 to provide profit and loss statements to the
Board.
Ms. Templeton also provided public comment regarding the reporting of accounts
paid and payable.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:05 pm.
The meeting adjourned at 7:10 pm.
OCTOBER 21, 2005
CALL TO ORDER
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order at 8:15 am and reviewed
the agenda.
ATTENDANCE
Supervisor Martin, Trustee Wilbrink, Trustee Wright, Clerk Davis. Absent:
Treasurer LeBlanc.
PUBLIC COMMENT
None
Closed Session
Supervisor Martin indicated that the Board would be going into closed session
to review client-privileged matter per section 152.66H.
Trustee Wright made a motion to go into closed session. Clerk Davis seconded
the motion.
There was no discussion on the motion and it passed unanimously.
CLOSED SESSION
(Under Separate Cover.)
The Board came out of closed session at 8:55 am.
Trustee Wilbrink made a motion to respond to a FOIA request with some pertinent
information blacked out as reviewed by the Board and to have Clerk Davis review
February ‘05’s invoice, using the same criteria identified by the board, to
determine what pertinent information will be blacked out. Trustee Wright
seconded the motion.
There was no discussion on the motion and it passed unanimously.
Public Comment
Supervisor Martin opened the floor for public comment.
Ruth Templeton (1435 Epley Rd.): Provided public comment regarding how Clerk
Davis will determine what to black out.
John Kennedy (4787 Barton Rd.): Provided public comment regarding the legality
of this special meeting.
Darrell Brown (6500 Shoeman Rd.): Provided public comment questioning whether
these matters were personal matters involving individual and the protection of
the Township.
Ruth Templeton (1435 Epley Rd.): Provided public comment questioning why this
FOIA had not been responded to within 5 days if the Attorney General had been
consulted.
John Kennedy (4786 Barton Rd.): Provided public comment regarding the
Township’s legal counsel.
Supervisor Martin closed public session at 9:08 am.
The meeting adjourned at 9:09 am.
CLOSED SESSION
Supervisor Martin reviewed the attorney’s opinion regarding this matter and the
procedures the Board would have to take if they decided to waive the attorney-
client privilege. She indicated that another option would be for the attorney
to re-review the material, but he felt he was very conservative the first time
he reviewed the material. She also stated that if the Board chose to waive any
of the attorney-client privileged material relating to the LeBlanc matter, then
Treasurer LeBlanc should provide a statement to hold harmless the Township for
any future litigation.
Trustee Wilbrink indicated he had spoken to the MTA attorney and they are
suppose to be providing something in writing regarding the attorney-client
privilege.
Trustee Wright indicated that he did believe there was some material that could
be released.
Supervisor Martin suggested that if Trustee Wilbrink and Trustee Wright had any
additional questions regarding this matter than they should meet with the
attorney for explanation. Both Trustee Wilbrink and Trustee Wright indicated he
did not need any further explanation.
There was Board consensus to unblock all library references and public purchase
references. No Ciolek references should be unblocked.
Invoices March 05 through August 05 were reviewed line by line. The following
dates were identified as areas to unblock:
3/8/05      4/21/05   5/02/05 (Partial)      6/3/05 Roberts Rules
3/14/05   4/22/05   5/4/05 (Hitch)         6/6/05 (1 & 2)
      4/25/05               6/16/05
Trustee Wilbrink made a motion to go back into public session. Trustee Wright
seconded the motion.
There was no discussion on the motion and it passed unanimously.
NOVEMBER 1, 2005
CALL TO ORDER
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order at 7:30 PM and reviewed
the agenda. Trustee Wilbrink asked for Legal Expenses to be added to the
agenda. Supervisor Martin declined due to a full agenda and it had already been
discussed at the October 18 meeting.
PLEDGE
ROLL CALL
Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer LeBlanc, Trustee Wright; Supervisor Martin, Clerk
Davis
CONSENT AGENDA:
Minutes of 10/4/05 Meeting
Trustee Wilbrink requested the following changes: Under Public Comment for Non-
agenda Items, George Durak …….expenses and previous public concern.  Change
Robert Jacobowitz to Roberta Jacobowitz.  John Kennedy…..meeting and requests.
Page 3, first paragraph deleted last sentence “Trustee Wilbrink had given no
comment regarding the process.”
Add motion: Trustee Wilbrink made a motion to appoint Howard Dahlstrom to the
position of Clerk. Treasurer LeBlanc seconded the motion.
Discussion: None
Roll Call Vote:
Trustee Wright      No
Supervisor Martin      No
Treasurer LeBlanc      Yes
Trustee Wilbrink      Yes
Motion failed 2 to 2.
Page 4, paragraph one, sentence three, …..Board break while four out of five
of the…. Paragraph two, … Committee try to request  meeting…. Page five,
paragraph 8, second sentence, ….within the Township such as supervisor or
trustee.  Paragraph 9, Supervisor Martin  Trustee Wilbrink seconded….
Minutes of 10/6/05 Meeting
Under September Activity, third paragraph, add Trustee Martin ….. Under Office
Staffing change Gwen Brandon-Chirico to Gwen Chirico-Brandon.
Minutes of 10/18/05
Under Call to Order change Trustee LeBlanc to Treasurer LeBlanc. Page 2, under
Response to Public Comment, third sentence, …..does respond to some  in
writing….. Page 4, first paragraph change, …for the Kathy Ellsworth Foundation.
They indicated that the Kathy Ellsworth Foundation already had Board resolution
to hold four tournaments. To …Patio for various nonprofit events.
Minutes of 10/21/05
None
Treasurer Report
Treasurer LeBlanc reported that the Township continues to benefit from rising
interest rates on their CDs. You can see the comparison in interest rates from
old to new on the report. The Mason State Bank CD will mature on 11/16/05 for
$100,000. Treasurer LeBlanc will be reinvesting the CD at a local bank on the
approved list of depositories.
Building Inspector Report
No Comment
Accounts Payable
Clerk Davis reported that the Board will be approving checks 14654 through
14706 from the General Fund for a total of $19,170.92 and checks 5180 through
5190 from the Cemetery Fund for a total of $2,607.16.
Clerk Davis reported that this is a new report format in compliance with the
auditor’s suggestions. She indicated that the report gives them more
information regarding each check written. If Board members need to see the
actual bill, the bills will be held in a file for 30 days for viewing before
being filed permanently.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS (8:00 PM)
George Durak (116 Feldspar): Submitted a letter to Trustee Wright and reviewed
it for the Board regarding concern for legal expenses and past hostile work
environment.
Ruth Templeton (1435 Epley Rd.): Provided public comment regarding concern for
cost of legal expenses.
Susan Stuwe (900 E. Sherwood Rd.): Provided public comment questioning Clerk
Davis’ resignation from former positions.
Clerk Davis responded that she has resigned to Supervisor Martin as her
assistant and receptionist. She has also resigned as planning commissioner.
However, she is currently continuing her planning assistant duties and
recording secretary at no charge until future notice.
Katie Lo (290 E. Sherwood Rd.): Provided public comment regarding Clerk Davis’
appointment.
Bob Lombardini (1500 Epley): Provided public comment regarding the
appropriateness of legal costs.
Trustee Wilbrink responded that Mr. Lombardini should meet with those concerned
over legal expenses to understand their perspective.
Public Comment ended at 8:10 pm
PLANNING COMMISSION
Minutes 10/18/05
Correct Cindy Davis as Planning Commission to Cindy Davis as staff. Supervisor
Martin stated that the Board does not correct the minutes of the Planning
Commission.
Hundred Acre Woods Site Plan/Special Land Use
Planning Commission Chair, Bob Hayes, presented the Planning Commission’s
recommendation for approval of site plan and special land use for Hundred Acre
Woods. He indicated that approval is based on the conditions that there be no
dumpster, dirt, etc. be covered, approval of drain commission, approval of
health department and the plans are signed and sealed.
Supervisor Martin indicated that the signed and sealed plans and health
department approval had been received. Trustee Wilbrink asked the applicant how
they would handle their trash. The applicant responded with residential
service.
Clerk Davis made a motion to approve the special land use subject to site plan
approval. Trustee Wright seconded the motion.
There was no discussion on the motion and it passed unanimously.
Clerk Davis made a motion to approve the site plan conditional on drain
commission approval. Treasurer LeBlanc seconded the motion.
There was no discussion on the motion and it passed unanimously.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
FOIA Policy
Clerk Davis presented a revised FOIA Policy based on comments from Board
members. She reviewed the changes, proposed that the Board consider revising
the FOIA cost at a future meeting if there is a need, and a recommendation that
the Board accept the policy through a formal resolution.
Trustee Wilbrink questioned the FOIA costs. He reviewed that the costs cannot
be higher than the actual cost otherwise the Township would be in violation of
FOIA laws. Clerk Davis indicated that she is currently researching cost of
services provided by the Township and would be prepared to review those costs
at the next meeting. Treasurer LeBlanc supported the policy and suggested that
the Board approve the policy through resolution and agree to review the cost at
a future meeting.
Clerk Davis made a motion to accept the Resolution to Use FOIA Policy Dated 11/
2005 for processing FOIA requests. Trustee Wright seconded the motion.
There was no discussion on the motion.
Roll Call Vote:      Trustee Wilbrink      No
            Treasurer LeBlanc      Yes
            Trustee Wright      Yes
            Supervisor Martin      Yes
            Clerk Davis         Yes
The motion passed 4 to 1.
Trustee Wilbrink challenged the motion because it did not state that the fees
would be excluded from the resolution. Clerk Davis indicated that they are not
to be excluded, but by Board consensus will be reviewed at the next meeting.
NEW BUSINESS
Hideaway Woods #5 Final Tentative Preliminary Plat Approval
Supervisor Martin reviewed the request and indicated that there is a new
engineer and they are moving forward. Since there have been no major changes in
the plan, the Board can approve a one-year extension.
Mr. Arnold, from Capital Consultants, Hideaway Woods representative, indicated
that there were two conditions at Tentative Preliminary Plat Approval and they
are working on them. He expects that they will be ready to move forward in the
next 4-6 weeks. Trustee Wilbrink asked if this is part of the 425 agreement.
Supervisor Martin responded that they need city sewer approval as part of the
425 and they will have their own wells.
Trustee Wright made a motion to extend, for one year, Hideaway Woods #5 Final
Preliminary Plant Approval. Trustee Wilbrink seconded the motion.
There was no discussion on the motion and it passed unanimously.
Audit
Aaron Stevens, of Abraham and Gaffney, presented the 2004-05 Audit to the
Board. He indicated that there were challenges with the audit because of the
condition of the records. The Audit was postponed while the Township hired an
outside accountant to clean up the records for audit. He highlighted some key
points in the Financial Statements. He indicated that the Township is
financially sound, but needs to reconcile the accounts on a timely basis,
segregate duties in the cash receipting process, and work on their internal
controls as stated in the management letter. Reconciling the accounts on a
timely basis is the most important aspect.
Trustee Wilbrink asked if the Board needs to address any issues, or is that a
Clerk and Treasurer Function. Aaron responded that those that handle the day-
to-day operations should address any stated issues. Trustee Wilbrink questioned
why budget amendments were not posted in the financial statements. Aaron
responded that the financial statements do not show that level of detail.
Trustee Wilbrink also questioned why the auditors communicate with the
Supervisor and not the Clerk or Treasurer regarding the audit. Aaron responded
that the Supervisor is the one person who has consistently been available for
communications and therefore has become their contact person.
Ruth Templeton (1435 Epley Rd.): Provided public comment regarding last year’s
audit and the similarities of this year’s audit. She questioned why the
auditors would allow the time to clean up the books and not just report the
auditable status to the State. Aaron responded that their report is sent to the
State, but it is at the Board’s discretion to hire an outside accountant, not
the auditors.
Treasurer LeBlanc reported that the Clerk and Treasurer are working together to
identify any training that is needed and are willing to look at internal
controls as recommended in the audit.
COMPLAINTS
2327 Grand River
Supervisor Martin reviewed the complaint. She indicated that there were junk
cars on the property as well as old fence material. Constable Dahlstrom
reported that some of the cars have been moved and some of the fence has been
taken away. They are not in compliance yet. He requested another two weeks for
them to come into compliance. There was Board consensus to allow two more weeks
with a follow-up from Constable Dahlstrom at that time with a report and
pictures.
4350 Red Maple Dr.
Supervisor Martin reviewed the complaint. Constable Dahlstrom reported that
everything had been cleaned up by either removing it or neatly stacking and
therefore in compliance. Supervisor Martin asked Constable Dahlstrom to take
pictures and to follow-up with the complainant. There was Board consensus to
consider this complaint resolved upon the submission of new pictures and final
report from Constable Dahlstrom.
REPORTS
NIESA
Trustee Wilbrink reported that NIESA has hired Wieland-Davco to be the general
contractor for a new fire station in Williamston. They will be going to the
public for a mileage to fund this project. Other discussion included:
exercising the option to purchase on the property, options on the proposals,
the feasibility of purchasing Leroy Hall and Leroy Hall renovations for future
ambulance service.
Parks
Trustee Wilbrink reported that the Park’s committee has suggested a split rail
fence at the park to curb parking or grass. The Pavilion is on hold until next
year because the American Legion was unable to provide a proposal for the
Board’s review. The Board would like the Parks to look at more durable options
like posts similar to what has been placed in other parks. Constable Dahlstrom
indicated that the Rotary had $3000 to contribute to the Park fund.
Zimmer/Grand River
Supervisor Martin reviewed a letter of concern from Nicole Remington regarding
the intersection at Zimmer and Grand River. She indicated that she does not
know if Ms. Remington has made a progress with her concerns, but would take any
suggestions from the Board regarding this matter.
Watershed
Treasurer LeBlanc reported on the last Watershed meeting. He indicated that the
Township is involved with Looking Glass and Red Cedar. He indicated that they
are generally working on education for taking care of watersheds. He indicated
that he has materials available regarding this if anyone is interested.
Cable Commission
Treasurer LeBlanc reported that the cable contract is coming up for re-
negotiation in the Spring. The Commission is planning a public opinion poll of
the residents. They will do this by writing articles for the local newspapers
and hold an open meeting for suggestions.
Other
Treasurer LeBlanc provided additional information regarding ING, Cemetery Fund,
Delinquent Summer Taxes, and Maner, Costerisan and Ellis report.
Supervisor Martin announced that the office will be closed November 11. She
also proposed that the office open 10-4 pm the Wednesday before Thanksgiving
instead of the regular 1-7 pm.
Trustee Wilbrink made a motion to change the office hours as proposed on the
Wednesday before Thanksgiving. Trustee Wright seconded the motion.
There was no discussion on the motion and it passed unanimously.
Next meeting scheduled for 11/15 at 5:00 pm.
11/16 Library Building Authority Meeting at 7:30, which all Board members must
attend so they can finalize the document.
Supervisor Martin indicated that she attended a meeting regarding the 14-point
review and will be sharing what she learned with the Board at their next
meeting.
PUBLIC COMMENT (10:15 PM)
Ruth Templeton (1435 Epley Rd.): Provided public comment regarding legal bills
provided to George Durak and the legality of the Special Meeting.
Public commented closed at 10:20 pm.
Trustee Wright made a motion to adjourn. Supervisor Martin seconded the motion
and it passed unanimously.
The meeting adjourned at 10:25 pm.
Clerk Cindy Davis                           Date 
NOVEMBER 15, 2005
CALL TO ORDER
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order at 5:00 pm and reviewed
the agenda adding a letter from Foster Swift to the agenda.
PUBLIC COMMENT:
Supervisor Martin opened public comment at 5:05 pm. There was no public
comment. Public comment was closed at 5:06 pm.
Rick Gladding, Ing
Supervisor Martin reviewed the history of the Township’s 457(b) plan and
indicated that it is currently administered with Ing for Township employees.
Rick Gladding, financial advisor for the plan, reviewed the definition and
other key points of a 457(b) plan. He also provided an update for possible
future revisions to the plan, fees associated with the plan, and performance of
current funds available within the plan.
Discussion included: Trustee Wilbrink asked if participants had an option to
enroll in the plan or to participate in social security. Supervisor Martin
indicated that the 418 agreement requires all elected officials to either
participate in the plan or social security.
Trustee Wilbrink asked if the plan is written through MTA or the Township? Mr.
Gladdings responded that MTA sets up the master plan and the Township signs a
joiner agreement to participate.
Supervisor Martin thanked Mr. Gladding for his presentation and indicated that
all information regarding this plan is with the Clerk’s office.
Response to Public Comment Policy
Supervisor Martin introduced the agenda item as a response to a Board request
for guidelines in responding to public comment. Clerk Davis gave an overview of
the proposed policy to include response to public comment as well as guidelines
and procedures for public comment using a new format for all policies that will
track them by number, date, subject and who it pertains to.
Discussion included: Clarification of written responses to public comment; use
of Public Comment Form; and wording of Guidelines. Treasurer LeBlanc presented
written suggestions to be considered.
After reviewing Treasurer LeBlanc’s suggestions and further discussion
regarding the definition of “breach of the peace” and who enforces, there was
Board consensus that the policy needs to be refined and brought back for
further review.
Meeting Procedures and Structure
Supervisor Martin presented a proposal to possibly rework Board meeting
procedures and structure. She proposed that every meeting contain certain
elements such as a time and place for public comment, consent agenda when
needed, etc.
Discussion included: review of minutes with corrections made before meeting,
clarification of public comment, and deadlines for submitting agenda items.
There was Board consensus to move forward with this proposal. Clerk Davis will
formalize it into the new policy and procedure format for Board approval at a
future meeting.
Library Authority
Supervisor Martin reminded the Board that there is a Library Building Authority
meeting scheduled for Wednesday, November 16, 7:30 p.m., at Wheatfield Township
hall. The City of Williamston, Williamstown Township and Wheatfield Township
boards will be present. She reviewed the issues to be discussed, the concerns
posed, and the possibility of bringing a millage proposal to the public. She
indicated that there have been no substantial changes to the original document.
  Foster & Swift Letter   
US 1 Motor Sales has retained Foster & Swift to represent them regarding the
outdoor display of vehicles at 1436 E. Grand River with special land use.
Supervisor Martin reviewed the history of this lot and asked for Board approval
to retain legal counsel in this matter.
Trustee Wilbrink questioned the use of legal counsel and felt that the Township
should be able to work this out with US 1 Motor Sales. Supervisor Martin
responded that may not be wise since he has chosen to take this issue to the
next level by retaining an attorney.
There was Board consensus that after Trustee Wilbrink reviews the file, then
Supervisor Martin will move forward with responding to this letter with legal
review.
Other
Supervisor Martin reported that there has been some storm damage to the hall, a
bid for repairs has been received, and she will move forward to have the damage
repaired.
Clerk Davis announced that she has hired a deputy clerk, Bob Cwiertniewicz. He
is a certified municipal clerk and will bring lots of experience to the
Township.
Public Comment
Supervisor Martin opened the floor for public comment.
John Kennedy (4787 Barton Rd.): Provided public comment regarding his desire to
give public comment on the proposed “response to public comment” policy and
procedure.
Susan Stuwe (900 E. Sherwood Rd.): Provided public comment regarding her
concern for the proposed “response to public comment.”
Clerk Davis responded to Ms. Stuwe’s concerns by indicating that in part this
policy and procedure is being brought forward to address concerns expressed by
the public.
Supervisor Martin responded that this proposal was brought forward as a Board
issue, not an individual issue, and the Board will be reworking it until there
is a final policy and procedures to be approved by the body.
Treasurer LeBlanc offered that public packets need to be available at workshop
meetings as well as regular meetings for the public to follow the Board
discussion.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:14 pm.
The meeting adjourned at 7:15 pm.
DECEMBER 6, 2005
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 7:30 PM at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the agenda.
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer LeBlanc, Trustee Wright, Supervisor
Martin, Clerk Davis
Absent: None
CONSENT AGENDA
   Minutes of 11/01/05 Meeting
   Minutes of 11/15/05 Meeting
   Treasurer Report
Treasurer LeBlanc reported that the QuickBooks records were all correct and
that the CD listed on the written report as Dart Bank, should now be listed as
Mason State Bank and the interest amount listed for that CD should be $203.84.
   Building Inspector Report
No Comment
   Accounts Payable
Clerk Davis reported that the Board would be approving checks 14708 through
14779 from the General Fund for a total of $15,569.92 and checks 5191 through
5201 from the Cemetery Fund for a total of $1960.28. Trustee Wilbrink
questioned the pay for Clerk Davis’ work for the Planning Commission, stating
that he was under the impression that once appointed to the Clerk position, she
would continue her planning assistant duties and recording secretary duties at
no charge until future notice. Supervisor Martin stated that Davis was placed
back into the position of Planning Commission assistant because of her
experience and willingness to continue those responsibilities, and that
decision did not need Board approval. Discussion ensued.
Motion by Wilbrink to remove payment to the Planning Commission assistant from
the Accounts Payable section of the Consent Agenda.
Supported by LeBlanc.
Carried unanimously.
Motion by Wilbrink to pass the Consent Agenda.
Supported by Davis.
Carried unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Ruth Templeton (1435 Epley Rd.): Provided public comment regarding concern for
legal expenses for 2005 and revenue/expenditure reports.
Susan Stuwe (900 E. Sherwood Rd.): Read a prepared statement urging public
discussion of Board items.
PLANNING COMMISSION
Minutes 11/15/05
Site Plan Approval-5110 N. Williamston
In the absence of the Planning Commission Chair, Supervisor Martin commented on
the plan and explained setbacks for the proposal. Supervisor Martin said that
she had reviewed the application submitted by Lynnman Construction for resident
Pam Omer for a riding stable. Supervisor Martin explained that it would be
appropriate for the Board to vote on this issue, conditional upon the Zoning
Board of Appeals approval at its meeting of December 14, 2005.
Motion by Wright to approve the site plan, contingent upon the Zoning Board of
Appeals approval at its meeting of December 14, 2005.
Supported by Wilbrink.
Carried unanimously.
Rezoning of 1072 E. Sherwood
Supervisor Martin explained that the Planning Commission has held a public
hearing and discussions regarding this issue and are in favor of the rezoning
of this 40.17-acre parcel from Commercial Agriculture (AG-C) to Rural Estate
(RE). A written recommendation for approval from McKenna Associates is on file.
Discussion ensued regarding the zoning history of the parcel and soil testing
of the property.
Motion by LeBlanc to approve the rezoning of the parcel located at 1072 E.
Sherwood from Commercial Agriculture (AG-C) to Rural Estate (RE).
Supported by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
LIBRARY AUTHORITY
Supervisor Martin explained that the authority has determined that if this idea
were to go forward, at some point the financial aspect would have to be
considered. All three entities would have to take the same financial steps,
whether it be a millage vote by the people, special assessments or to float a
bond and make the payments using General Fund money. Supervisor Martin stated
that the Townships approximate responsibility, if Bonds were let, would be
$550,000. Williamston has said they are in favor of the Bond/General Fund
repayment scenario, and Supervisor Martin felt this procedure, or the special
assessment, would be the best way for the Township. Leblanc urged fiscal
conservatism, stating that the Township would have additional General Fund
expenditures in the future including the addition of Board members. LeBlanc
further offered that it would be best to put a millage to the vote of the
people and let them decide, or perhaps use a special assessment for the
financing. Davis was in favor of a millage vote and Wright preferred the Bond/
General Fund repayment. Supervisor Martin would express the thoughts of the
Board to the Authority at their next meeting.
NEW BUSINESS
Environmental Task Force Proposal
Ger Schultink, from the Task Force, commented regarding the proposed amendment
to the Zoning Ordinance. The changes would deal with Wetlands setbacks and the
issuance of Wetland Use permits for certain activities in these areas.
Discussion ensued with Supervisor Martin stating that if the Board approves,
submission of this amendment language to the Planning Commission, the Planning
Commission would further discuss the specifications to be included, as well as
hold a public hearing regarding the matter.
Motion by LeBlanc to submit the proposed Zoning Ordinance amendment to the
Planning Commission for their review and procedure.
Supported by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
The Task Force also submitted concerns regarding the language of the Township
Blight Control resolution, saying that it fails to specifically identify
nuisance conditions in relation to noise. They are recommending that the
Planning Commission revise the language pertaining to noise, thereby making it
easily enforced by sheriffs and other law enforcement personnel. Discussion
ensued with concerns that perhaps the entire Blight resolution needs to be
revised and that enforcement of noise ordinances may entail many subjective
caveats that are not easily discernable. LeBlanc stated the he worked on this
issue with Lansing and that it is very involved and was the subject of lengthy
detail, thereby making it an expensive undertaking. It was suggested that
Supervisor Martin talk with the Sheriffs Department and do further research
regarding this matter and return for future consideration and deliberation.
Natural Beauty Roads
Davis explained that the designating of certain country roads in the Township
as “Natural Beauty Roads” would be consistent with the preservation of the
rural character of the Township and is currently a desire as stated in the
Master Plan. Once this designation is assigned, the County Road Commission must
take all measures to preserve native vegetation in a natural beauty road right-
of-way from destruction or damage while performing maintenance tasks. A Task
Force needs to be assembled to identify the roads that should receive this
designation, and then petition the Road Commission to follow through with the
designation.
Motion by Wright to request that the Planning Commission assemble said Task
Force and allow this process to begin.
Supported by LeBlanc.
Carried unanimously.
Zoning of Parcels 36 451 002 & 36 451 010
Discussion ensued regarding the zoning history of these properties, with
Supervisor Martin stating that they had been rezoned to R1 back in 1995. They
were previously zoned Light Industrial. Typically, the process would be for the
applicant to petition the Planning Commission for the rezoning. Further
discussion debated the idea of waiving the fees for this applicant because of
the purported lack of notice in 1995.
Motion by Wilbrink to inform the owner that he would need to apply to the
Planning Commission for rezoning and to waive any and all fees associated with
this procedure.
Supported by Davis.
Yes: Wilbrink
No: LeBlanc, Wright, Supervisor Martin & Davis – MOTION FAILS
Further discussion regarding fees led to the following motion.
Motion by Wright to inform the owner of the need to apply to the Planning
Commission for rezoning.
Supported by LeBlanc.
Carried unanimously.
AT&T Metro Act Resolution
Davis explained that this request for a right-of-way permit was in conjunction
with PA48, the Metro Right of Way Act. Davis and legal counsel had reviewed all
aspects of the contract and would recommend the Board approve a motion to enter
into the contract with AT&T.
Motion by LeBlanc to issue a Right-of-Way Telecommunications Permit to Michigan
Bell Telephone D.B.A. AT&T Michigan.
Supported by Wilbrink.
Carried unanimously.
COMPLAINTS
2327 Grand River
Supervisor Martin is awaiting further photographic documentation, requested at
a previous Board Meeting, from the Township Constable to enable review and
resolution of this complaint.
4350 Red Maple Dr.
Supervisor Martin is awaiting further photographic documentation, requested at
a previous Board Meeting, from the Township Constable to enable review and
resolution of this complaint.
Capitol City Rifle Club – hours
Discussion ensued. Wilbrink stated he has been unable to contact the club by
phone and will send a written communication requesting that the Club clarify
their hours of operation.
REPORTS
NIESA
Trustee Wilbrink reported that NIESA has met with the general contractor for a
new fire station in Williamston and that a feasibility study will take place
regarding the project.
Parks
Trustee Wilbrink reported that the “do not slide” signs have been removed for
the south side of the hill. The Committee determined that there is no danger
present and that sledding should be allowed on both sides of the hill. Davis
will check to ensure there are no liability issues with this situation.
Cable Commission
LeBlanc announced that there is a meeting of the Cable Commission scheduled for
December 15, 2005 to receive public comment regarding the renegotiation of the
franchise agreement with Millennium Digital Media. He encouraged public
participation and input.
Treasurer Report
LeBlanc reported on current interest rates and the re-investment of the matured
Mason State Bank CD, stating that the CD is now registered with Dart Bank in
Mason at a desirable interest rate. The Board was informed of the resignation
of Gwen Chirico-Brandon from the Deputy Treasurer position and appreciation for
her service was expressed. Hiring new personnel is under review at this time.
Gratitude was also extended to those who helped stuff the newsletter into the
December tax bills, thereby saving the cost of an extra mailing.
Supervisor Martin announced that new, round tables have been purchased for the
hall and relayed information regarding the schedule of upcoming meetings,
announcing that the next Board meeting would be at 5:00 PM on Tuesday, December
20, 2005.
Supervisor Martin initiated discussion regarding the need for an assistant to
the Planning Commission, stating that Cindy Davis should be allowed to
determine the feasibility of retaining those duties in conjunction with her
responsibilities of Township Clerk. Wilbrink contended that in effect, there
would be two Board members on the Commission. Supervisor Martin stated that is
not correct because Davis would have no voting power and the retention of those
duties by Davis would eliminate any need for training a new person. Supervisor
Martin said that the MTA does not see any problem with the situation as is, and
she added that if there were any efficiency problems they would quickly become
evident to the Supervisor and Planning Commission. Lengthy discussion ensued,
with Wilbrink adding that he was under the impression that once appointed to
the Clerk position, Davis would resign all other posts. Davis said that was not
her statement, and that she has always maintained that she would like to
continue the Planning Commission assistant duties at the present time and
offered to work with Wilbrink to enable an assessment of the work load and
responsibilities.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Ruth Templeton (1435 Epley Rd.): Provided public comment regarding maps and
written complaints in relation to the Blight Resolution.
Supervisor Martin adjourned the meeting at 9:56 pm.
__________________
Cindy Davis
Township Clerk
DECEMBER 9, 2005
PRESENT:    Supervisor Martin, Trustee Wright, Trustee Wilbrink, and Clerk
Davis.
ABSENT:    Treasurer LeBlanc
A special meeting of the Williamstown Township Board was called to order at 8:
08 a.m. by Supervisor Martin to review poverty exemptions and the applicability
of social security income in determining eligibility. Supervisor Martin
confirmed with MTA that social security income is to be use in determining
eligibility. Using the current federal guidelines and applying social security
income to those guidelines would make all applicants ineligible for the
exemption. The federal guidelines are the minimum guidelines that a township
can use. A township can increase those levels at their discretion. Therefore,
Supervisor Martin proposed that Williamstown Township increase their guidelines
by 50%. Raising the guidelines by 50% would qualify each applicant except one.
Trustee Wilbrink made a motion to set the poverty guidelines at 150% of the
federal poverty guidelines with a note that the Board of Review has discretion
to apply exceptions to deviate from the policies and guidelines as stated in
Act 206, Section 7u. (5) of 1893. Trustee Wright seconded the motion.
There was no discussion on the motion and it passed unanimously.
Supervisor Martin also discussed the procedures for accepting poverty exemption
applications. She noted that each applicant should be given the Township’s
policy and guidelines at application and that only the Supervisor and/or public
notary is authorized to sign the applications. She indicated that she was
unclear of the current procedures and that she had not signed the applications.
Supervisor Martin indicated that Treasurer LeBlanc had signed her name without
her knowledge or consent.
There was no public comment.
The meeting adjourned at 8:34 a.m.
Cindy Davis
Township Clerk
DECEMBER 20, 2005
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 5:00 PM at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer LeBlanc, Trustee Wright, Supervisor
Martin, Clerk Davis
Absent: None
PUBLIC COMMENT
Ruth Templeton (Epley Rd.): Commented regarding computer policies, passwords
and employee “bonus checks” to be distributed by the Cemetery Board
At this point LeBlanc asked that a distributed memo regarding checks for
cemetery expenditures be added to the agenda.
Motion by LeBlanc that his distributed memo regarding checks for cemetery
expenditures be added to the agenda for discussion.
Supported by Wilbrink.
Carried unanimously.
Jeff Beach (Germany Rd.): Provided public comment regarding ordinance
amendments recommended by The Environmental Task Force. He also commented on
wetlands enforcement.
LIBRARY FOUNDATION BUILDING PRESENTATION
Ernie St. Pierre commented on the project and introduced Leo Sheets who
provided additional information regarding property acquisition, ideal building
sizes, project location, grant money from CADL and fundraising activities that
will help with the economics of the project.
COPY CHARGES
Davis commented on the submitted information regarding FOIA cost
considerations. LeBlanc commented that the information was a good analysis and
that there was a lot of information regarding tax amounts being dispensed over
the phone. Discussion ensued.
Motion by Davis to sustain current FOIA related charges, including .25 cents
per page for copies and change the cost of envelopes to .05-letter size; .10-
large clasped.
Supported by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
Motion by Davis to adopt the copy and fax policy 002 regarding copy and fax
charges, as submitted by Clerk Davis
Supported by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
PENSION PLAN
Supervisor Martin explained that currently only the Supervisor and Treasurer
were enrolled in the pension plan with ING. The other three board members need
to be enrolled, but some felt that there has been a lack of response from the
company’s representative. Further explanation stated that the Board had
received information from Mr. Gladding of ING and Mr. Rozelle from Retirement
Plan and Advisor during the past year. Discussion ensued, including comments
regarding a possible switch from ING to another company.
Motion by LeBlanc to maintain the pension plan with the current company, ING.
Supported by Wilbrink.
Yes: LeBlanc, Wilbrink
No: Wright, Supervisor Martin & Davis – MOTION FAILS
Clerk Davis will research the Board’s options for staying with ING, but
changing representatives. This information will be brought to the Board meeting
on 1/3/06 for discussion.
CHECKS FOR CEMETERY EXPENSES
LeBlanc commented on his written submission, asking direction from the Board
regarding issuing checks for equipment purchases and bonuses for three cemetery
employees. Supervisor Martin stated that the Cemetery Board had included the
bonuses in their budget, but the equipment purchases would have to be
incorporated into their budget proposal for next fiscal year. Wilbrink stated
that the bonuses were not included in a separate line item, and were most
probably lumped into “miscellaneous” with no explanation. Wilbrink stated that
if the Cemetery Board wants to give bonuses, it should be included as a
separate line item so that Board members can be aware of this expenditure.
Supervisor Martin stated that the Township Board should look at the idea of
giving out bonuses to employees as a reward for service.
LeBlanc initiated discussion regarding Treasury department computer problems
and the difficulty involved with workstations in the Township Hall using the
same printer. Discussion ensued, with Davis suggesting that the Treasurer
include a printer purchase in the Treasurer’s Office budget for next year if he
wanted exclusive use of a printer.
The meeting adjourned at 7:00 pm.
__________________
Cindy Davis
Township Clerk
 
2006 Meeting Minutes
January 3, 2006
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 7:30 PM at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the agenda.
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer LeBlanc, Trustee Wright, Supervisor
Martin, Clerk Davis
Absent: None
CONSENT AGENDA
   Minutes of 12/06/05 Meeting
   Minutes of 12/09/05 Meeting
   Minutes of 12/20/05 Meeting
LeBlanc stated that he was unable to attend the December 9, 2005 meeting
because of the snow, and added that he would comment later on the issue of
poverty exemption applications.
   Treasurer Report
Supervisor Martin asked LeBlanc if there was a breakdown of the deposits/
interest for the Bank One deposit of $66,758.64 and LeBlanc replied that there
was, but he did not have that information at the meeting. Trustee Wilbrink
requested that it be broken down on future reports and LeBlanc replied that it
would take more of his time. LeBlanc went on to further explain the format of
the Treasurer’s Report submitted to the Board.
   Building Inspector Report
No Comment
   Accounts Payable
Clerk Davis reported that the Board would be approving checks 14780 through
14861 from the General Fund for a total of $78,724.08 and checks 5202 through
5220 from the Cemetery Fund for a total of $7,035.79. Davis explained that
while processing payroll tax payments for the third and fourth quarter of 2005,
it was discovered these taxes were not paid in previous quarters. Working with
Abraham & Gaffney, the IRS and the Michigan Unemployment Agency, the
reconciliation of the Township’s federal payroll and Michigan unemployment
taxes took place. Clerk Davis stated that work continues with the parties
involved, but interest and penalties had accrued and these bills had to be
paid. Abatements have been requested, and possible future refunds would be in
order if successful. Clerk Davis indicated that the problems were traced back
to 2003.
Motion by Trustee Wright to approve the consent agenda as submitted.
Supported by Trustee Wilbrink.
Carried unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Susan Stuwe (E. Sherwood Rd.): Commented on the need for an annual meeting and
inquired about training costs. Clerk Davis responded that training costs
referenced were to gain an understanding of the accounts used by the Township.
Al LeBlanc (Jadestone Drive): Distributed a written communication regarding
poverty exemption applications and expounded upon its contents, stating that
the Supervisor is empowered by law to process these issues and that the
Treasury Department is withdrawing all involvement except for granting
deferment of summer taxes to eligible applicants and the posting of Board of
Review changes to the tax roll.
Norma Johnston (Barry Rd.): Commented that after paying her property taxes she
noticed that she was taxed for the Lansing Community College millage, and had
never been charged this tax in the past because she lives in the Perry School
District. She stated that she conferred with neighbors and they were unaware of
this charge and that she had not paid this LCC millage in 20 years. She would
like to know why she was taxed, and if there is an error, how is this
corrected. Treasurer LeBlanc stated that she was assuming that an error was
made and that he would double-check that information to determine if an error
occurred, and if so a refund would be in order. Supervisor Martin clarified
that the lady lives in the Perry School District and that she has never voted
regarding LCC issues.
George Durak (Feldspar Dr.): Commented on the Treasurers Report, citing over
budget items. He requested a better, easier to understand, budget format that
incorporates a line item explanation and status. He also stated he was in favor
of holding the Annual Township Meeting, as was done in the past. Supervisor
Martin stated that the Township is not required to hold this meeting any longer
and that attendance by the public was negligible.
Ruth Templeton: (Epley Rd.) Commented on contract labor costs, her previously
requested revenue/expenditure report and late fee and auto-pay issues.
PLANNING COMMISSION
Minutes 12/20/05
Site Plan Approval/Special Land Use Permit-1040 E. Grand River (Young Kim
Greenhouse)
Bob Hayes, Planning Commission Chair, commented on the plan and stated that the
Commission had voted for approval of both issues for this applicant. The
applicant handed out a business plan to the Board to explain their future goals
for the location. Discussion ensued leading to the following motions.
Motion by LeBlanc to approve the Special Land Use Permit as submitted by Kim’s
Greenhouse of 1040 E. Grand River.
Supported by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
Motion by Wright to approve the Site Plan by Kim’s Greenhouse of 1040 E. Grand
River, with the caveat that the applicant post a surety bond for construction
of the sidewalk prior to the Township issuing any building permits.
Supported by LeBlanc.
Carried unanimously.
Discussion ensued regarding the Planning Commission’s Public Hearing on January
17, 2005 regarding changes to the Zoning Ordinance pertaining to the Right To
Farm Act.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Pension Plan
Discussion ensued regarding the pension plan with ING, with Clerk Davis stating
that she had contacted the company and it is possible to keep the current plan
and switch agents, provided that the Township inform the company which agent
was preferred.
Motion by Wilbrink to maintain the current pension plan with ING, with Clerk
Davis to select a new agent.
Supported by LeBlanc.
Carried unanimously.
NEW BUSINESS
Cemetery Budget Presentation
Conrad Taschner, chairman of the Cemetery Board, explained the equipment needs
and quotes for the same, being requested by the Cemetery Board for purchase
now. Discussion ensued. Motion by Davis to authorize the purchase of a utility
vehicle Polaris Utility Vehicle for the purchase price of $11,464.00 from Deer
Creek Sales using Cemetery funds, with an allocation of $1000.00 in Township
funds to be used toward the purchase.
Supported by Wright.
Yes: LeBlanc, Wright, Supervisor Martin & Davis
No: Wilbrink
Motion carried.
Chairman Taschner explained the request for the purchase of a new mower by
Simplicity, which will be included in the 2006-07 Cemetery Budget. Discussion
ensued.
Senior Citizens Budget Presentation
Virginia Taschner, in reference to the upcoming budget, explained that there
would be a request to fund $7,000.00 of the Director’s salary, due to budget
cuts from other resources. Discussion ensued regarding the programs offered to
seniors, fundraising, remaining at the current location and establishing
budgetary priorities.
Budget Amendment-General Fund
Supervisor Martin explained the need to amend the Township Government and
Liability portions of the budget, referencing additional costs in audit and
legal fees. Discussion ensued.
Motion by Wright to amend the Township Budget by transferring $3,586.00 from
the contingency fund (890-965) to audit fees (101-801) and transferring
$11,414.00 from the contingency fund (890-965) to legal fees (101-802).
Supported by Davis.
Carried unanimously.
Discussion ensued regarding other financial issues including comments from
Clerk Davis referencing penalties and payments for past errors in payroll taxes
and unemployment. Clerk Davis stated that the auditors have told her the
township needs to create a “prior year expense” line item that will facilitate
more efficient audit work.
Motion by Davis to create a “prior year expense” line item in the township
budget. Supported by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
COMPLAINTS
2327 Grand River/MJB Fence Woods Property – Pictures presented; considered
resolved.
4350 Red Maple Dr. (Blight) – pictures presented; considered resolved.
Capitol City Rifle Club (hours) – Trustee Wilbrink submitted a communication
dealing with this issue, stating that the hours of the Club are 9am-8pm Monday
thru Friday & 9am-6pm Saturday and Sunday. It was also reaffirmed that no
automatic gunfire is allowed. – considered resolved.
1298 E. Grand River (Blight) – Constable Dahlstrom stated this has been
resolved.
REPORTS
NIESA
Trustee Wilbrink commented on NIESA issues.
Parks
Trustee Wilbrink commented on Parks issues.
Cable Commission
Treasurer LeBlanc commented on Cable Commission issues.
14 Point Review
Supervisor Martin commented on this State of Michigan review of our operations.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Howard Dahlstrom (Vanneter Rd.): Announced a Talent Show fundraiser being held
in February for the benefit of the Williamston Area Beautification Fund.
Susan Stuwe (Sherwood Rd.): Commented on committee assignments for Board
members and thanked the Treasurer for his explanation of cost overruns.
Katie Lo (Sherwood Rd.): Commented on the updating of computers, cooperation
between the Clerk and Treasurer regarding financial issues, as suggested by the
auditors and the hiring of a Deputy Treasurer. Clerk Davis said that the
Treasurer has pointed out some discrepancies when reconciling the bank
accounts, but she felt that they were moving forward. Treasurer LeBlanc said
that due to bank reconciliation timelines, he does let the Clerk know of
issues, but not until the day after reconciliation. He felt that the auditors
meant well when they made that recommendation, but that its not feasible and
just slows the work of the Clerk and Treasurer.
Supervisor Martin adjourned the meeting at 10:50 pm.
__________________
Cindy Davis
Township Clerk
January 17, 2006
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 5:00 PM at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer LeBlanc, Trustee Wright, Supervisor
Martin, Clerk Davis
Absent: None
PUBLIC COMMENT
None
POVERTY EXEMPTION RESOLUTION
Supervisor Martin explained that the township must set income levels for their
poverty exemption guidelines before March BOR and that those income levels
cannot be lower than the federal guidelines. Discussion ensued regarding the
inclusion of Social Security income and other assets as part of this decision.
Supervisor Martin will further research this issue with legal counsel and
report back to the Board.
1438 GRAND RIVER VIOLATION
Supervisor Martin explained the discussions that were held in an attempt to
remedy the outstanding zoning issues at this property. She stated that a
lawsuit has been threatened, and that the parties involved do not seem to want
to follow the proper procedures. It was suggested that our attorney contact the
owners and their representatives to try and resolve this issue.
GILLESPIE CORRESPONDENCE
Supervisor Martin explained that the Township attorney will respond
acknowledging receipt of the letter distributed to the Board last month, and
Trustee Wright agreed that a response was necessary. Further action would be
dependant upon future communications.
PUBLIC COMMENT/RESPONSE POLICY AND PROCEDURE
Discussion ensued, including comments and written submissions from the public.
Treasurer LeBlanc supported public comment by indicating that the he supports
the current policy’s flexibility and looseness of meetings. Clerk Davis
explained her proposed procedure and sign in form, stating that it would be
optional to fill in the form and that the procedure was drafted to enable more
orderly meetings. Further discussion showed that the Board was in favor of
having the sign-in form optional, with the exception of Treasurer LeBlanc who
suggested a clipboard at the podium for sign-in, and to keep public comment for
agendas items at the time of the specific issue, as opposed to at the beginning
of the meeting. Clerk Davis will incorporate the suggestions and return a new
draft.
CONSTABLE/REIMBURSEMENT
Clerk Davis explained the issues of different rates for work performed by the
Constable and the lack of clarity regarding when a pay rate/salary is used.
Discussion ensued including comments regarding the Constable’s pay for
attending meetings, assistance on election days and possible work for the
Treasurer. The board agreed to maintain the current rates of pay with the
addition of $65 for meeting attendance (up to 12 per year, others upon board
approval) and $14.00/hr for miscellaneous work outside of complaints and
follow-ups. It was agreed that Clerk Davis and Constable Dahlstrom would meet
to clarify fees, and other variables involved with reimbursements to the
Constable.
Supervisor Martin stated that the anonymous complaints that are received are
not responded to because of lack of information for follow-up from the
complainant. She also stated that perhaps it is time for the Constable to
conduct another sweep for abandoned vehicles.
Treasurer LeBlanc stated that new bank signature cards were necessary to enable
the new Deputy Clerk and Deputy Treasurer to be signatories, and offered the
following resolution.
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP RESOLUTION 43
January 17, 2006
Resolution by Treasurer LeBlanc.
Be it resolved that all bank account and money market account signature cards
will be submitted with four authorized signers. These signers will be the
current Clerk and Deputy Clerk, and the current Treasurer and Deputy Treasurer.
It will be the policy of this township that any check or withdrawal order will
require two signatures: one from the Clerk department and one from the Treasury
department, and one of these two signatures must be that of the Clerk or the
Treasurer. Because of her resignation as Deputy Treasurer, former Deputy
Treasurer Gwen Chirico-Brandon’s name will be removed from the signature cards.
Whenever possible, investment accounts such as bank certificates of deposit
will be set up as book entry instruments in the name of Williamstown Township
and without signature cards. New signature cards will be submitted with the
following authorized signers:
Clerk: Cindy S. Davis       Deputy Clerk: Robert J. Cwiertniewicz
Treasurer: Albert LeBlanc Deputy Treasurer: Harold P. Husse
Supported by: Trustee Martin Wright
Roll call vote:
Supervisor Mickey Martin: yes
Clerk Cindy Davis: yes
Treasurer Albert LeBlanc: yes
Trustee Frans Wilbrink: yes
Trustee Martin Wright: yes
The Supervisor declared the resolution: Adopted
BUDGET CALL FOR HEARING
Treasurer LeBlanc inquired where a budget line for cable broadcast of Township
meetings would be placed in the budget. Supervisor Martin responded that no
formal proposal has been brought forward for the Board to consider and
therefore is not in the proposed budget. Supervisor Martin stated that a Budget
Public Hearing would need to be scheduled and the following motion was offered.
Motion by Supervisor Martin to schedule a public hearing on the 2006-07-
Township budget for Wednesday, February 22, 2006 at 7:30 p.m.
Supported by Davis.
Carried unanimously.
Supervisor Martin, looking for guidance from the Board, read a certified letter
she received on January 17, 2006 from a Michael Warsco stating that he had paid
his tax bill by depositing a check and tax stub into the drop box outside the
township hall, but never received credit for his payment. He stated that he had
stopped by to talk to Treasurer LeBlanc but the Treasurer said that there was
no evidence of payment and that there was nothing he could do. Treasurer
LeBlanc stated that his books were closed for December and that he could not
issue a December receipt for payment received today. Mr. Warsco stated that if
he did not receive credit for paying his bill before December 31, 2005 it would
cost him at least $1500.00 more in income taxes. He stated that he could not
see how his payment could have been lost, but this is the only excuse the
Treasurer could give him. Treasurer LeBlanc responded by saying that Mr. Warsco
was incorrect in stating a check was lost on the ground, but that a check was
found on the carpet two days after the date on the check. Clerk Davis
questioned the check lying for two days on the carpet. Treasurer LeBlanc agreed
that it was highly improbable that the check had been on the carpet for two
days. Treasurer LeBlanc continued that the gentleman wanted him to backdate a
receipt and that he cannot legally do that. He further stated that if people
want to be sure that the payment is received then they would have to pay in
person at the township hall and receive a receipt. Supervisor Martin said that
since the letter was addressed to her she would respond by saying that the
township will check on the legality of the situation. Treasurer LeBlanc said
that this was a Treasury decision and that he would decide and respond.
Supervisor Martin stated that she and Clerk Davis would be attending the
Michigan Township Association Conference in Grand Rapids being held January
24th through January 27th.
The meeting adjourned at 7:05 pm.
__________________
Cindy Davis
Township Clerk
February 7, 2006
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 7:30 PM at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the agenda.
Motion by LeBlanc to add the purchase of a printer to the agenda.
Supported by Wilbrink.
Carried unanimously.
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer LeBlanc, Trustee Wright, Supervisor
Martin, Clerk Davis
Absent: None
CONSENT AGENDA
§   Minutes of 1/3/06 Meeting
It was agreed to add the word “budget” to pg.2, George Durak comments, second
line, after the words “easier to understand” and before the word “format”.
§   Minutes of 1/17/06 Meeting
§   Treasurer Report
Treasurer LeBlanc noted that pages three and four of his report were listed
later in agenda.
§   Building Inspector Report
No Comment
§   Accounts Payable
Clerk Davis reported that the Board would be approving checks 14862 through
14972 from the General Fund for a total of $42,074.86 and checks 5221 through
5227 from the Cemetery Fund for a total of $17,174.99. Discussion ensued.
Motion by Wright to approve and pass the consent agenda with the noted addition
to the 1/3/06 minutes.
Supported by Wilbrink.
Carried unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Gary Gillespie (Jadestone Dr.): Provided public comment regarding agendas on
the website.
Ruth Templeton (Epley Rd.): Provided public comment regarding assessment and
treasurer work/duties.
Wendell Proudfoot (Barton Rd.): Provided public comment regarding the agenda
appearing on the WRAP website.
Susan Stuwe (E. Sherwood Rd.): Provided public comment regarding agendas and
packets on the website.
Bob Lombardini (Epley Rd.): Provided public comment regarding the work
environment at the township hall and urged all to move forward.
PLANNING COMMISSION
Planning Commission Chairperson Bob Hayes commented on the previous commission
meetings and the Right to Farm act public meeting scheduled for 2/28/06.
Minutes 1/17/06 & 1/24/06
Right to Farm Update
Supervisor Martin briefly synopsized the issue and invited everyone to attend
the Right to Farm Act Planning Commission public meeting being held on February
28, 2006 at 7:30pm.
PENSION PLAN
Clerk Davis explained her conversations with ING regarding a perceived lack of
service and the township’s desire to change agents. Discussion ensued with it
being agreed that if the Township is unable to change ING agents, Rick Gladding
of ING should be asked to bring the township into compliance with the plan
before the March board meeting. If he fails to do so, paperwork and information
about changing plans to another company should be presented at that meeting.
The preference of the Board was to remain with ING because of its lower
investment costs.
LIBRARY AUTHORITY
Supervisor Martin explained that the resolution before the Board would
establish a Joint Building Authority, approve and adopt the Articles of
Incorporation for the same and authorize the Supervisor and Clerk to execute
the Articles of Incorporation on behalf of the township. Discussion ensued,
leading to the following resolution.
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP RESOLUTION 45
Resolution by Board Member Martin Wright.
   WHEREAS, the Township Board of the Township of Williamstown, County of
Ingham, State of Michigan (the “Township”), deems it advisable and necessary to
provide for the acquisition and construction of a library building and the
necessary site therefore for the combined use of the Township, the City of
Williamston and the Township of Wheatfield; and
   WHEREAS, the Township deems it advisable and necessary and in the best
interest of the Township to create and establish an Authority under the
provisions of Act 31, Public Acts of Michigan, 1948 (First extra Session), as
amended, for the purpose of accomplishing the aforesaid; and
   WHEREAS, Articles of Incorporation of such Joint Authority under said Act
have been prepared and carefully reviewed by the Township Board.
   NOW THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED THAT:
      1.   The attached Articles of Incorporation of the Williamston Library
Joint Building Authority are hereby approved and adopted.
      2.   The Supervisor of the Township and the Township Clerk are hereby
authorized and directed to execute said Articles of Incorporation for and on
behalf of the Township.
All resolutions and parts of resolutions insofar as they conflict with the
provisions of this resolution be and the same are hereby rescinded to the
extent of each conflict.
Resolution supported by Board Member LeBlanc.
AYES: Frans Wilbrink, Albert LeBlanc, Mickey Martin, Martin Wright, Cindy
Davis.
NAYS: None
RESOLUTION DECLARED ADOPTED FEBRUARY 7, 2006.
NEW BUSINESS
Eagle Scout Proposal – Bike Racks
Eagle Scout David Ash commented on his proposal to build and install bike racks
at the cemetery. It was suggested that perhaps a better location would be near
the water fountain on the Township Hall grounds. Discussion ensued regarding
the materials to be used and other anchoring and construction suggestions.
Scout Ash said that he would be doing fundraising for the project and he hopes
to complete the project in July. Further discussion led to the following
motion.
Motion by LeBlanc to approve the bike rack project submitted by Eagle Scout
David Ash with the proviso that he submit final design and an anchoring system
to the Board.
Supported by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
 
Hideaway Woods No. 5 Land Exchange
Gary Arnold of Capital Consultants, appearing on behalf of Charles Perkins of
Hideaway Woods, Inc. explained the request before the Board to exchange open
land area modifying an agreement entered into by the principals and the
Township in 1995. Mr. Arnold stated that Hideaway Woods, Inc. would absorb all
documentation and related costs regarding the agreement amendment. Discussion
ensued leading to the following motion.
Motion by Wilbrink to grant the request to swap open space and instruct the
township’s attorney to draft the authorization document.
Supported by Davis.
Carried unanimously.
 
Tri-County Office on Aging
Supervisor Martin explained that the agency, due to funding problems, is
requesting that the Township donate to help the continuation of the Meals-on-
Wheels program in the Township. The agency said that the full cost of serving
meals to township homebound seniors in the past fiscal year was $18,128.75.
They are requesting that the township donate $1,800.00 to help this program
continue. Discussion ensued leading to the following motion.
Motion by Martin to approve a donation of $1,800.00 to the Tri-County Office on
Aging to help continue Meals-on-Wheels program in the Township.
Supported by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
 
Motion by Martin to transfer $1,800.00 from the contingency fund to recreation
line item 751-000 to be used for the donation to Tri-County Office on Aging.
Supported by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
 
Planning Commission Appointment
Motion by Martin to appoint Wanda Bloomquist to the Planning Commission seat
for the balance of the term vacated by the appointment of Cindy Davis to
Township Clerk.
Supported by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
 
Library Foundation Appointment
Motion by Martin to re-appoint Jeff Bartrem to the Library Foundation.
Supported by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
 
Treasurer LeBlanc will speak to the Foundation regarding compliance with by-law
timeframes for appointments.
 
Public Access Channel – Township Board Meetings
LeBlanc stated that his initial proposal to have a company provide cable
broadcast of Board meetings would not apply any longer due to scheduling
conflicts on the part of the group who was proposed to do the taping. Other
options will be explored. Discussion ensued and Treasurer LeBlanc agreed to
research and provide information regarding how many cameras would be needed;
FOIA implications; where cable service is available in the Township and the
number of current subscribers.
COMPLAINTS
2450 E. Grand River – Waste Management
Supervisor Martin explained that the complaint dealt with reported trash,
allegedly flying off of collection trucks owned by Waste Management. Constable
Dahlstrom conducted a review of the complaint and was unable to determine that
this trash came from the Waste Management trucks. It appeared to be local trash
thrown from cars driving through the area. Discussion ensued and Constable
Dahlstrom was directed to talk to the manager at Waste Management to attempt to
enable a “good neighbor” policy regarding the possible clean up near the route
and reported areas of the trash. He was also directed to talk to the Ingham
County Health Department to determine if there are any requirements or
guidelines for the transport of trash and subsequent cleanup of any inadvertent
littering.
REPORTS
NIESA
Trustee Wilbrink reported recent awards presented to NIESA personnel, the
progress of the building committee and financial and incident statistics.
 
Parks
No report.
 
Treasurer Report
LeBlanc elaborated on pages three and four of his submitted report and stated
that the Treasury department would like to purchase a printer. Discussion
ensued and it was determined to discuss the printer purchase at a subsequent
meeting.
 
Clerk Report
Davis elaborated on her submitted report regarding upcoming elections, security
breaches to the cemetery file cabinets, the Red Cedar Recreation Association
and the Township’s hosting of the upcoming Local Township Association meeting/
dinner. A report regarding seminars attended at the Michigan Township
Association Conference was included.
 
Supervisor Report
Supervisor Martin elaborated on her submitted report regarding seminars
attended and information received at the Michigan Township Association
Conference. An emphasis was put on the importance of broadband access in
townships to keep them growing. It was also stated that a special Board meeting
would be needed to address issues in a closed session, and that the meeting
would be scheduled for 8:00 am on February 16, 2006.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Steve Zaban (Mapleshade Dr.): Provided public comment regarding upcoming
elections.
 
Supervisor Martin adjourned the meeting at 10:10 pm.
 
__________________
Cindy Davis
Township Clerk
February 16, 2006
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 8:00 AM at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the agenda and asked to
add an email from Mr. Warsco, and purchase of a Treasury printer to the agenda.
CLOSED SESSION
Trustee Wright made a motion to go into closed session to discuss confidential
attorney-client privilege opinion. Clerk Davis seconded the motion.
ROLL CALL VOTE:
Trustee Wilbrink      Yes
Treasurer LeBlanc      Yes
Trustee Wright      Yes
Supervisor Martin      Yes
Clerk Davis         Yes
Motion passed unanimously.
(Closed Session minutes under separate cover.)
Clerk Davis made a motion to come out of closed session. Trustee Wright
seconded the motion and it passed unanimously.
Trustee Wright made a motion to direct legal counsel to move forward with legal
opinion. Trustee Wilbrink seconded the motion. There was no discussion and the
motion passed unanimously.
WARSCO
Supervisor Martin reviewed correspondence from Mr. Warsco asking to be placed
on the board agenda regarding a tax receipt complaint. Discussion ensued
regarding Township procedures for tax receipting and the taxpayer’s burden to
prove receipt of tax payments.
There was board consensus to write Mr. Warsco a letter indicating that the
Treasurer has research every avenue, is unable to back date tax payments and
measures have been taken to ensure proper tax receipting. Mr. Warsco will also
be invited to attend the next board meeting and give public comment on the
issue.
TREASURY PRINTER
Treasurer LeBlanc reviewed a proposal to purchase a treasury printer
immediately and another in the new budget year. There was board consensus that
the printer should have network capability.
Treasurer LeBlanc made a motion to purchase a printer for the treasury
department out of the supply line item. Trustee Wilbrink seconded the motion.
There was no discussion and the motion passed unanimously.
Supervisor Martin adjourned the meeting.
 
__________________
Cindy Davis
Township Clerk
February 22, 2006
CALL TO ORDER
After proper publication of notice, the Williamstown Board of Trustees convened
a public hearing regarding the proposed 2006-07 Township and Cemetery Budgets
at 7:30 PM at the Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road,
Williamston, Michigan.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer LeBlanc, Trustee Wright, Supervisor
Martin, Clerk Davis
Absent: None
Supervisor Martin called the public hearing regarding the Township budget to
order and explained various components, including tax rates.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Ruth Templeton (Epley Rd.): Provided public comment regarding Planning
Commission expenditures and said that the Constable salary should be raised.
Bob Lombardini (Epley Rd.): Provided public comment regarding his support of
the grant to the senior center, raises for staff and officials and the training
costs for staffs, and consultants to support master plan.
Donna Anton (Williamston): Provided public comment regarding her support of the
grant for the senior center and commented on the worthwhile programs offered to
township seniors.
Darrell Brown (Shoeman Rd.): Provided public comment regarding his concerns
with an apparent deficit comparing revenues to expenditures, workman’s
compensation, building inspection revenues and payments to the pension plan.
John Schwartz (Turner Rd.): Provided public comment regarding the township
government being the closest contact for local residents and said that he hoped
the Board would continue to preserve the lifestyle now afforded township
residents.
Lorraine Swartz (Turner Rd.): Provided public comment in support of the grant
to the Senior Center.
John Kennedy (Barton Rd.): Provided public comment regarding the process of
adopting the budget, the separation of officers’ salaries from the budget,
building inspection fees, Planning Commission expenditures/revenue and interest
on trust funds.
Susan Stuwe (E. Sherwood Rd.): Provided public comment regarding expenditures
for legal services and support of seniors or Meals On Wheels programs.
Roger Philip (Barton Rd.): Provided public comment against the Clerk salary
increase.
Mike Fielek (Sherwood Rd.): Provided public comment regarding his support of
the budget, especially the allocation for the senior center. He stated that the
salary increases were justified because of the amount of work being done, which
is not always concluded when the township hall is open.
Bob Hayes (Sherwood Rd.): Provided public comment regarding his support of the
budget, stating that the figures seemed reasonable and that the Clerk salary
increase is justified.
There being no further public comment, the following was offered.
Motion by Wright to close the public hearing on the proposed 2006-07 Township
budget.
Supported by Martin.
Carried unanimously.
Supervisor Martin called the public hearing regarding the Cemetery budget to
order and explained various components.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Steve Zaban (Maple Shade Dr.): Provided public comment regarding office staff
salary allocations and cemetery record software.
There being no further public comment, the following was offered.
Motion by Wright to close the public hearing on the proposed 2006-07 Township
budget.
Supported by LeBlanc.
Carried unanimously.
Discussion ensued among the Board members regarding various aspects of the
proposed budgets discussed, including proposed changes to some line items.
Supervisor Martin was to introduce proposed changes into a new draft and
present it to the Board for review.
Supervisor Martin adjourned the meeting at 11:00 pm.
 
_________________
Cindy Davis
Township Clerk
February 28, 2006
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 8:00 AM at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the agenda.
PUBLIC COMMENT
None
PENSION PLAN
Clerk Davis reviewed the status of moving the pension plan enrollment forward
by March 7, 2006. On February 17, 2006, Trustee Wilbrink issued a letter to the
board contrary to the actions being taken by Clerk Davis. In order to ensure
that Clerk Davis was acting on behalf of the board’s direction, this special
meeting was called to confirm the board’s desire to pursue ING as the carrier
of the Township’s pension plan with a new agent.
Supervisor Martin, Trustee Wright and Treasurer LeBlanc were in consensus that
it is the Board’s desire to continue with ING and a new agent.
Discussion ensued regarding Trustee Wilbrink’s understanding and concerns
regarding changing ING representatives.
Trustee Wright made a motion to continue with ING and to secure a new agent of
record. Treasurer LeBlanc seconded the motion. There was no discussion on the
motion and it passed unanimously.
Clerk Davis apologized to the Board if there had been any misrepresentation of
actions taken to secure a new agent with ING.
The meeting was adjourned.
March 7, 2006
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 7:30 PM at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the agenda.
Motion by Wilbrink to add discussion regarding videotaping of meetings and
cable commission items to the agenda under unfinished business.
Seconded by LeBlanc.
Carried unanimously.
Motion by Wilbrink to add discussion regarding a township annual meeting to the
agenda under new business.
Seconded by LeBlanc.
AYES: Albert LeBlanc, Frans Wilbrink, Cindy Davis.
NAYS: Mickey Martin.
Motion Carried.
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer LeBlanc, Supervisor Martin, and Clerk
Davis
Absent: Trustee Wright
CONSENT AGENDA
§   Minutes of 2/7/06, 2/16/06, 2/22/06 and 2/28/06 Meetings
§   Treasurer Report
Treasurer LeBlanc elaborated on his submitted report.
§   Building Inspector Report
No Comment
§   Accounts Payable
Clerk Davis reported that the Board would be approving checks 14973 through
15067 from the General Fund for a total of $41,837.23 and checks 5238 through
5247 from the Cemetery Fund for a total of $1,762.27. Discussion ensued.
Motion by LeBlanc to approve and pass the consent agenda.
Seconded by Wilbrink.
AYES: Albert LeBlanc, Mickey Martin, Cindy Davis.
NAYS: Frans Wilbrink.
Motion carries.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:45 p.m.
Katie Lo: Provided public comment regarding the passing of George Durak and
about her visit to the Township Hall for information.
Judge Thomas P. Boyd: Introduced himself as the 55th District Court Judge and
provided information regarding his background and services offered by the
Court.
County Treasurer Eric Schertzing: Provided a handout listing properties with
property tax forfeitures and foreclosures and provided an explanation of the
county’s Land Bank project.
Ruth Templeton: Provided public comment regarding absentee ballots and property
issues.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:58 p.m.
PLANNING COMMISSION
Planning Commissioner Rex Lamore commented on 1072 Sherwood, Future Land Use
Map, Broadband Access and the Right to Farm Act discussed at their public
meeting held on 2/28/06.
It was noted that the minutes of the most recent Commission meeting were not
yet available.
Motion by Wilbrink to approve a 1-year extension of the tentative preliminary
plat approval for Brookstone Development.
Seconded by LeBlanc.
Carried unanimously.
Motion by Wilbrink to approve a 1-year extension of the preliminary plat
approval and a 1- year extension of the Zoning Board of Appeals approval for
the water and sewer lines crossing the Suttell Drain and the adjacent wetland.
Seconded by LeBlanc.
Carried unanimously.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Pension Plan
Clerk Davis explained that she and others had met with representatives of
Burnham & Flowers and enrollment for ING is underway and will continue through
mid March, concluding with a special meeting to review the plan as presented by
Burnham & Flowers.
 
Videotaping of Meetings
Treasurer LeBlanc indicated that Haslett High School may be able to provide the
equipment, but were unsure about the availability of workers. The township
would pay their wages and for the rental of the equipment. Further information
would be forthcoming regarding the availability of the students. LeBlanc also
indicated that there were 1095 Millennium subscribers, but did not know the
number of potential subscribers. There are maps available indicating coverage
areas. There was Board consensus that more information and a proposal would be
needed to move forward with the videotaping project.
NEW BUSINESS
Credit Card Resolution
Clerk Davis explained her submitted resolution stating that the Platinum Plus
card account will be closed and the new card, from Independent Bank, will
enable one invoice for all purchases by all qualified cardholders. This will
result in better bookkeeping, easier payments and individual cards for each
holder making it more convenient for them. Clerk Davis explained the changes
from Resolution #28, including the removal of the office manager card.
Discussion ensued regarding clauses in the resolution, including spending
limits and whether the Board or the Supervisor would determine which
individuals will receive a township credit card.
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP RESOLUTION #46
CREDIT CARD USE POLICY
Resolution by Board Member Cindy Davis.
   WHEREAS, Public act 266 of 1995 authorizes a township to be a party to a
credit card arrangement if the township board has adopted by resolution a
written policy governing The control and use of credit cards, and
   WHEREAS, the Williamstown Township Board deems that it is in the best
interest of the township to make certain financial transactions by using a
credit card as described in the Act.
NOW THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED THAT the following policy shall govern the use of
credit cards:
a)   At the discretion of the Supervisor, credit cards may be issued to the
following individuals with the following limits:
·   Sexton - $500.00
·   Maintenance/Caretaker - $100.00
·   Supervisor - $2500.00
·   Clerk - $2500.00
·   Treasurer - $2500.00
b)   The Township Clerk is responsible for issuing, accounting for, monitoring,
retrieving and generally overseeing compliance with the townships credit card
policy.
c)   Township credit cards may be used only by an officer or employee of the
township for the purchase of goods or services for the official business of the
township. Employees involved in the purchasing process may not use credit cards
for any personal expenditure.
d)   Township officers and employees who use a township credit card shall, as
soon as possible, submit a copy of the vendor’s credit card slip to the
Township Clerk. If no credit card slip was obtained that described the
transaction, the employee shall submit a signed voucher that shows the name of
the vendor or entity from which goods or services were purchased, the date and
amount of the transaction, the official business that required the transaction.
All credit card slips shall also include this information. Vouchers shall also
include a statement explaining the reason that a credit card slip was not
obtained.
e)   An officer or employee who has been issued a credit card shall return said
credit card to the Township Clerk upon termination of his or her employment or
service with the township.
f)   The Township Clerk shall maintain a list of all credit cards owned by the
township, along with the name of the officer and employee who has been issued
the credit card, the credit limit established, the date issued and that the
employee has received and read a copy of this policy. The Township Clerk shall
review each credit card statement as soon as possible to ensure that
transactions comply with this policy. Any transactions that appear on the
statements that are not documented with a credit card slip or signed voucher
shall be immediately investigated. Transactions that do not appear to comply
with this policy shall be reported to the Board.
g)   The Township Board shall not approve a payment to the entity issuing the
credit card until all transactions have been verified including the approval of
all transaction invoices if issued.
h)   The balance including interest due on an extension of credit under the
credit card arrangement shall be paid for within sixty days of the initial
statement date.
i)   Officers and employees who use a Township credit card in a manner contrary
to this policy shall be subject to the following disciplinary actions, as
deemed appropriate by the Township Board: verbal counseling, written reprimand,
suspension, termination and reimbursement to the Township for all unauthorized
expenditures. (The above disciplinary procedure shall not supercede the
Township’s at-will policy of the employee manual.)
This resolution replaces Resolution #28, previously adopted by the Township
Board.
Seconded by Board Member Mickey S.Martin
Yeas: Davis, Martin
Nays: Wilbrink, LeBlanc
RESOLUTION FAILS
 
Meeting Dates 2006-2007
Discussion ensued with the following resolution being offered.
Motion by Wilbrink to approve the following 2006-07 schedule of meeting dates
and times.
Unless otherwise posted, the first meetings are at 7:00pm and second informal
meeting of the month are at 5:30pm at the Williamstown Township Hall, corner of
Germany and Zimmer roads.
 
First Meeting                      Second Meeting
Tuesdays at 7:00 pm                Tuesdays at 5:30 pm
---------------------------------  ---------------------------------------
April 11, 2006                     April 18, 2006
May 9, 2006                        May 16, 2006
June 6, 2006                       June 20, 2006
July 11, 2006                      July 18, 2006
August 8, 2006                     August 15, 2006
September 5, 2006                  September 19, 2006
October 3, 2006                    October 17, 2006
November 14, 2006                  November 21, 2006
December 5, 2006                   December 19, 2006
January 9, 2007                    January 16, 2007
February 6, 2007                   February 20, 2007
March 6, 2007                      March 20, 2007
Seconded by LeBlanc.
Carried unanimously.
 
Social Security Resolution
Discussion ensued with the following resolution being offered.
Motion by LeBlanc to adopt the following Social Security Number Privacy Policy
and Procedure.
Policy: It is the policy of the Township to protect the confidentiality of
Social Security numbers obtained in the ordinary course of township business
from employees, vendors, contractors, customers or others. No person shall
knowingly obtain, store, transfer, use, disclose, or dispose of a Social
Security number that the Township obtains or possesses except in accordance
with the Act and this Privacy Policy.
Applies To:   The Township of Williamstown restricts access to information or
documents containing Social Security numbers to Township staff members who have
a legitimate Township business reason to access such information or documents.
The Township Clerk is responsible for implementing this restriction through
training and oversight procedures.
Purpose: The Township of Williamstown (the "Township") is required by the
Michigan Social Security Number Privacy Act, Public Act 454 of 2004, MCL 445.81
et seq., (the "Act") to create a privacy policy concerning the Social Security
numbers that it possesses or obtains.
Pursuant to the Act, the privacy policy must at least:
a. Ensure to the extent practicable the confidentiality of the Social Security
numbers.
b. Prohibit unlawful disclosure of the Social Security numbers.
c. Limit who has access to information or documents that contain the Social
Security numbers.
d. Describe how to properly dispose of documents that contain the Social
Security numbers.
e. Establish penalties for violation of the privacy policy.
This Privacy Policy sets forth the Township's policies and procedures regarding
how Social Security numbers are obtained, stored, transferred, used, disclosed
and disposed.
Procedure:
a. Obtaining Social Security Numbers. Social Security numbers should be
collected only where required by federal and state law or as otherwise
permitted by federal and state law for legitimate reasons consistent with this
Privacy Policy.
Legitimate reasons for collecting a Social Security number include, but are not
limited to:
·   Applicants may be required to provide a Social Security number for purposes
of a pre-employment background check.
·   Copies of Social Security cards may be obtained for purposes of verifying
employee eligibility for employment.
·   Social Security numbers may be obtained from employees for tax reporting
purposes, for new hire reporting, for purposes of enrollment in any Township
employee benefit plans or to authorize township officials and employees to sign
township checks.
·   Social Security numbers may be obtained from creditors or vendors for tax
reporting purposes.
·   Social Security numbers are required on Principal Residence Affidavit
forms.
b. Public Display. All or more than four sequential digits of a Social Security
number shall not be placed on identification cards, badges, time cards,
employee rosters, bulletin boards, permits, licenses or any other materials or
documents designed for public display. Documents, materials or computer screens
that display all or more than four sequential digits of a Social Security
number shall be kept out of public view at all times. Public display includes
open view on a computer device, computer network, website or other electronic
medium or device, to members of the public or in a public manner. All of the
foregoing comprise prohibited disclosures and shall not be so displayed by any
township staff members.
c. Account Numbers. All or more than four sequential digits of a Social
Security number shall not be used as a primary account number for an
individual.
d. Computer Transmission. All or more than four sequential digits of a Social
Security number shall not be used or transmitted on the Internet or on a
computer system or network unless the connection is secure or the transmission
is encrypted.
e. Mailed Documents. Township documents containing all or more than four
sequential digits of a Social Security number shall only be sent in cases where
state or federal law, rule, regulation, or court order or rule authorizes,
permits or requires that a Social Security number appear in the document.
Documents containing all or more than four sequential digits of a Social
Security number, that are sent through the mail, shall not reveal the number
through the envelope window or otherwise be visible from outside the envelope
or package.
f. Freedom of Information Act. Where all or more than four sequential digits of
a Social Security number are contained within a document subject to release
under the Freedom of Information Act, the Social Security number shall be
redacted or otherwise rendered unreadable before the document or copy of a
document is disclosed.
g. Storage. All documents containing Social Security numbers shall be stored in
a physically secure manner. Social Security numbers shall not be stored on
computers or other electronic devices that are not secured against unauthorized
access.
h. Access to Social Security Numbers. Only personnel who have legitimate
business reasons to know will have access to records containing Social Security
numbers. The department heads having access to records containing Social
Security numbers shall determine which other personnel within their departments
have a legitimate reason in the Township's ordinary course of business to have
access to such Social Security numbers. Personnel using records containing
Social Security numbers must take appropriate steps to secure such records when
not in immediate use.
i. Authorized Uses. This policy does not prohibit the use of Social Security
numbers where the use is authorized or required by state or federal statute,
rule, regulation, or court order or rule, or pursuant to legal discovery or
process.
This policy does not prohibit the administrative use of Social Security numbers
in the ordinary course of business, by a person or a vendor or contractor of a
person to do any of the following.
1.   Verify an individual’s identity, identify an individual, or accomplish
another similar administrative purpose related to an existing or proposed
account, transaction, product, service, or employment.
2.   Investigate an individual’s claim, credit, criminal, or driving history.
3.   Detect, prevent, or deter identity theft or another crime.
4.   Lawfully pursue or enforce the Township’s legal rights.
5.   Provide or administer employee or health insurance or membership benefits,
claims, or retirement programs.
6.   Other exceptions that are approved by the Supervisor or Clerk and that
comply with state or federal law.
This policy also does not prohibit the use of Social Security numbers for
criminal investigation purposes or the provision of Social Security numbers to
a Title IV-D agency (child support/support orders), law enforcement agency,
court, or prosecutor as part of a criminal investigation or prosecution.
j. Disposal of Social Security Numbers. Documents that contain Social Security
numbers shall be properly destroyed when those documents no longer need to be
retained pursuant to Township document retention policies. Paper documents
containing Social Security numbers will be shredded. Electronic files
containing Social Security numbers will be deleted and the recycle bin will be
emptied.
k. Unauthorized Use or Disclosure of Social Security Numbers. The Township
shall take reasonable measures to enforce this Privacy Policy and to correct
and prevent the reoccurrence of any known violations. Any employee, who
knowingly obtains, uses or discloses Social Security numbers for unlawful
purposes or contrary to the requirements of this privacy policy shall be
subject to discipline up to and including discharge. Additionally, certain
violations of the Act carry criminal and/or civil sanctions. The Township will
cooperate with appropriate law enforcement or administrative agencies in the
apprehension and prosecution of any person who knowingly obtains, uses or
discloses Social Security numbers through the Township for unlawful purposes.
l. Violations. Violations of this Policy may result in disciplinary action, up
to and including dismissal. Individuals who violate this Policy may also be
subject to the civil and criminal penalties provided for in the Michigan Social
Security Number Privacy Act (PA 454 of 2004), MCL 445.81 – 445.86
Questions regarding this Policy may be directed to the Township Clerk.
Seconded by Wilbrink.
Carried unanimously.
 
Poverty Exemption Resolution
Supervisor Martin explained the guidelines, which are based on those, set by
the federal government.
Motion by Martin to adopt the federal guidelines with an increase of 50% in all
sections as shown below, and to limit assets to one principle residence and one
licensed vehicle for each resident, with a maximum of two.
Size of family unit Poverty Guidelines
1                   $14625.00
2                   $19245.00
3                   $24135.00
4                   $29025.00
5                   $33915.00
6                   $38805.00
7                   $43695.00
8                   $48585.00
Each add. Person    $4890.00
Seconded by Wilbrink.
Carried unanimously.
 
Audit – May 30 – June 2
Supervisor Martin informed the Board of the dates of the annual audit.
 
Annual Meeting
Wilbrink initiated discussion regarding the scheduling of a Township Annual
Meeting. Discussion ensued with the following motion being offered.
Motion by Wilbrink to schedule a Township Annual Meeting for Saturday, March
25, 2006 at 10:00am.
Seconded by LeBlanc.
AYES: Albert LeBlanc, Frans Wilbrink.
NAYS: Mickey Martin, Cindy Davis.
Motion fails.
COMPLAINTS
2450 E. Grand River – Waste Management
Constable Dahlstrom talked to the manager at Waste Management who stated that
the area in front of the company property is cleaned periodically. Constable
Dahlstrom stated that it was not possible to determine whether or not the
complaint was a result of Waste Management work.
1298 Grand River
Constable Dahlstrom stated that there were two bags of trash involved in this
complaint and they were gone by Friday of the same week.
1835 Epley Rd.
Constable Dahlstrom stated that as of March 1, 2006, this problem had already
been resolved.
REPORTS
NIESA
Trustee Wilbrink reported on NIESA issues, the Williamston Bucket fire and gave
a building update.
 
Parks
No report.
 
Treasurer Report
LeBlanc elaborated on the news that Millennium Cable is being taken over by
Wave Broadband, and commented on the impact of contract talks in view of this
transaction. There was board consensus to forward the contract to legal counsel
and possible the auditors for review. LeBlanc also commented on his submitted
Treasurer’s report.
 
Clerk Report
Davis elaborated on her submitted report including issues such as upcoming
elections, election training, Quickbooks, IRS issues, work with ING regarding
enrollment and the revamped credit card policy.
 
Supervisor Report
Supervisor Martin elaborated on her submitted report including issues such as
Board of Review training, the Michigan Township Association Ingham County
Chapter meeting held here in Williamstown Township on February 23, 2006 and her
attendance at a press conference where Governor Granholm announced recipients
of grants for Centers of Regional Excellence designation.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 9:57 p.m.
Ruth Templeton: Provided public comment on the Social Security Number Privacy
Policy.
Darrell Brown: Provided public comment regarding Accounts Payable issues.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 10:00 p.m.
Supervisor Martin reviewed the meeting and ordered an adjournment at 10:12 pm.
 
__________________
Cindy Davis
Township Clerk
March 9, 2006
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 8:00 AM at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the agenda.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 8:03 a.m.
John Kennedy (Beeman Rd.): Provided public comment regarding the stated purpose
of the meeting not being noticed.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 8:04 a.m.
BUDGET
Supervisor Martin reviewed the updated budget per meeting of 2/21/06 and budget
figures for the General Fund as follows: Expenses at $700,411, Revenues at
$677,331 with a $30,000 Contingency Fund. She also indicated that in 2004 there
was a budget surplus of $32,352 and it is expected that there will be a budget
surplus again in 2005 with a fund balance of approximately $1,164,282 per the
Treasurer’s report of 3/7/06. She also provided a letter with signatures in
support of the Senior Center proposed request.
Discussion ensued among the Board members regarding various aspects of the
proposed budgets discussed, including proposed changes to some line items.
Special Meeting was called for March 21,2006, for the purpose of approving the
2006-07 Township Budget and adopting a salary resolution.
Supervisor Martin adjourned the meeting at 11:40 a.m.
 
__________________
Cindy Davis
Township Clerk
March 21, 2006
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 5:00 PM at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer LeBlanc, Trustee Wright, Supervisor
Martin, Clerk Davis
Absent: None
PUBLIC COMMENT
Wendell Proudfoot asked that the credit card proposal, submitted by Clerk Davis
be reconsidered.
The meeting adjourned at 5:03 pm.
 
__________________
Cindy Davis
Township Clerk
March 21, 2006
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 5:10 PM at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer LeBlanc, Trustee Wright, Supervisor
Martin, Clerk Davis
Absent: None
PUBLIC COMMENT
Ruth Templeton spoke regarding meeting procedures and determining consensus
among the trustees.
Katie Lo spoke regarding budget issues.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment.
Supervisor Martin explained that there was a previous public hearing regarding
the budget and as a result, the proposed budget submitted includes those Board
consensus changes.
Motion by Wright to approve the 2006-07 township budget as submitted.
Seconded by Davis.
Treasurer LeBlanc spoke regarding proposed changes to the submitted budget.
Supervisor Martin asked LeBlanc to make copies of the documents he was
referencing, to allow the Board to better understand the changes.
To enable copying, the meeting was recessed at 5:17pm and reconvened at 5:25pm.
Changes were discussed, with Supervisor Martin requesting an affirmative
consensus to add, delete or change items in the submitted budget. Both the make
and supporter of the motion agreed to all consensus changes.
AYES: Frans Wilbrink, Albert LeBlanc, Martin Wright, Mickey Martin, Cindy
Davis.
NAYS: none.
Motion carries.
Supervisor Martin explained that there was a previous public hearing regarding
the cemetery budget and the proposed cemetery budget submitted includes any
Board consensus changes.
Discussion ensued, yielding the following motion.
Motion by Wright to approve the 2006-07 cemetery budget as submitted.
Seconded by Davis.
AYES: Martin Wright, Mickey Martin, Cindy Davis.
NAYS: Albert LeBlanc, Frans Wilbrink.
Motion carries.
Supervisor Martin explained the purpose of the salary resolutions for elected
officials and discussion ensued leading to the following resolutions.
Williamstown Township RESOLUTION #46
Resolution by Davis.
Pursuant to MCLA 41.95(3), the Board of Williamstown Township brings forth the
following resolution.
Be it resolved, that as of April 1, 2006, the salary for the township office of
SUPERVISOR, shall be an annual rate of $22,743.00.
Seconded by Wright.
Roll Call Vote:
 
Frans Wilbrink Al LeBlanc Martin Wright Mickey S. Martin Cindy Davis
NO             YES        YES           YES              YES
 
Williamstown Township RESOLUTION #47
 
Resolution by Wright.
Pursuant to MCLA 41.95(3), the Board of Williamstown Township brings forth the
following resolution.
Be it resolved, that as of April 1, 2006, the salary for the township office of
CLERK, shall be an annual rate of $22,145.00.
Seconded by LeBlanc.
 
Roll Call Vote:
 
Frans Wilbrink Al LeBlanc Martin Wright Mickey S. Martin Cindy Davis
NO             YES        YES           YES              YES
 
 
Williamstown Township RESOLUTION #48
 
Resolution by Davis.
Pursuant to MCLA 41.95(3), the Board of Williamstown Township brings forth the
following resolution.
Be it resolved, that as of April 1, 2006, the salary for the township office of
TREASURER, shall be an annual rate of $22,145.00.
Seconded by Wright.
 
Roll Call Vote:
 
Frans Wilbrink Al LeBlanc Martin Wright Mickey S. Martin Cindy Davis
NO             YES        YES           YES              YES
 
Williamstown Township RESOLUTION #49
 
Resolution by LeBlanc.
Pursuant to MCLA 41.95(3), the Board of Williamstown Township brings forth the
following resolution.
Be it resolved, that as of April 1, 2006, the salary for the township office of
TRUSTEE, shall be an annual rate of $16,545.00, with a base pay of $5,328.00
plus $65.00 for any third meeting held in a month, with a maximum of twelve
meetings.
Seconded by Davis.
 
Roll Call Vote:
 
Frans Wilbrink Al LeBlanc Martin Wright Mickey S. Martin Cindy Davis
NO             YES        YES           YES              YES
 
The meeting adjourned at 6:20 pm.
 
__________________
Cindy Davis
Township Clerk
March 31, 2006
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 10:00 AM at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the agenda.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer LeBlanc, Trustee Wright, Supervisor
Martin, Clerk Davis
Absent: None
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 10:03 a.m.
Susan Stuwe: Provided public comment regarding posting notice of special
meetings on the website.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 10:05 a.m.
BUDGET
Supervisor Martin explained the need for the budget amendments: two extra
elections and the work of the Cable Commission working on a new franchise
agreement. The following motion was offered.
Motion by LeBlanc to transfer $65.00 from the contingency fund (890-965) to
election expenses (191-725) and to transfer $131.00 from the contingency fund
(890-965) to Cable Commision Salary (425-702).
Seconded by Wilbrink.
Supervisor Martin adjourned the meeting at 10:07 a.m.
 
__________________
Cindy Davis
Township Clerk
April 11, 2006
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 PM at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the agenda.
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer LeBlanc, Trustee Wright,
Supervisor Martin and Clerk Davis
Absent: none
CONSENT AGENDA
§   Minutes of 3/7/06, 3/9/06, 3/21/06, 3/21/06 and 3/31/06 Meetings
For the 3/7/06 minutes, suggested comment changes were approved and it was
asked to re-check numbering on the resolutions.
§   Treasurer Report
Treasurer LeBlanc elaborated on his submitted report and questions regarding
notation c and d items in the footnotes was placed on the regular agenda for
discussion. Noting a typo, Treasurer LeBlanc corrected the Fifth Third Bank CD
closing balance to read $104,450.30 and the total of closing balances to read
$2,357,253.19
§   Building Inspector Report
   No Comment
§   Accounts Payable
Clerk Davis explained voided check numbers and reported that the Board would be
approving checks 15068 through 15162 from the General Fund for a total of
$99,425.55 and checks 5248 through 5258 from the Cemetery Fund for a total of
$7,973.37. Discussion ensued.
Motion by Wright to approve and pass the consent agenda with the noted changes.
Seconded by LeBlanc.
   AYES: Albert LeBlanc, Martin Wright, Mickey Martin, Cindy Davis.
   NAYS: Frans Wilbrink.
Motion carried.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:20 p.m.
·   Katie Lo: Regarding Freedom of Information Act requests and hall rental
refunds.
·   Susan Stuwe: Regarding personal information appearing in the minutes
online.
·   Constable Howard Dahlstrom: Regarding payroll and job agreement items.
·   John Kennedy: Regarding minutes and scheduling of previous meetings.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:31 p.m.
PLANNING COMMISSION
Planning Chairperson Bob Hayes commented on commission business including a
sketch plan review for Hide-A-Way Woods Estates, conceptual plan review for
Ashton Meadows PUD and the Master Plan as submitted by the Planning Commission
and McKenna Associates. Discussion ensued, noting that the law requires
neighboring communities a time frame to review the township’s Master Plan and
submit comments before final approval of the plan. Chairman Hayes asked that
the master plan be returned to the Planning Commission for thirty days for
further review. Discussion ensued
Motion by Wright to approve the distribution of the proposed Master Plan to
neighboring communities for their review and comment.
Seconded by Davis.
Roll call vote:
 
Wilbrink LeBlanc Wright Martin Davis
No       No      Yes    Yes    Yes
 
Motion carries.
Because of the late arrival of the applicant, the site plan for 1475 Epley Road
was delayed till later in the meeting.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Cable Commission Agreement/Extension
Motion by Wilbrink to extend the current franchise agreement between the
township and Millennium Digital Media Systems to midnight on August 11, 2006.
Seconded by Davis.
Roll call vote:
 
Wilbrink LeBlanc Wright Martin Davis
Yes      Yes     Yes    Yes    Yes
 
Rick Williams from the Cable Commission presented the Cable Franchise agreement
to the Board for approval. He indicated that the agreement is sound, with one
outstanding issue pertaining to density standards.
Rick Clark of Millennium Cable was in attendance and explained various aspects
of cable company ownership, customer base issues, future franchise agreements
and federal and state issues regarding local control of cable franchises. Board
discussion ensued regarding these items. Mr. Clark agreed to forward a map
showing current coverage in the township and to respond to the Board’s
questions in writing before they make a decision to approve the new franchise
agreement.
Treasurer LeBlanc commented on the future new ownership of the cable franchise
by a company called Wave Broadband. Discussion ensued and it was agreed by the
Board that a review by the township auditors of the financial condition of the
company Wave Broadband was not warranted at this time.
Local Control Cable Resolution
Board discussion took place regarding the submitted resolution and it was
agreed that the resolution would be passed and forwarded to the MTA and state
officials as suggested by the MTA.
Williamstown Township Resolution # 50
Retaining Local Control of Cable Franchising
Resolution by Board Member Frans Wilbrink
WHEREAS, it is the mission of Williamstown Township, Ingham County, Michigan to
preserve and protect the rights of all its citizens;
WHEREAS, the existing federal and local cable franchising rules have resulted
in $100 billion investment in advanced telecommunications services nationwide
and formed the basis for a national policy of broadband (high-speed internet);
WHEREAS, Williamstown Township strongly supports the provisions contained
within the federal 1984 Cable Act including the anti-discrimination sections
that have ensured against a 19th century world of digital “haves and have-nots”
and ensured that Americans of all incomes, races and backgrounds can have equal
access to television and broadband service as the information and communication
that it provides becomes more essential in our daily lives;
WHEREAS, the current federal cable law has been effective in ensuring robust
build-out of broadband networks and in protecting against cherry-picking of
communities, and should be applied to both existing cable providers and new
entrants into the cable marketplace;
WHEREAS, some telecommunications companies that now seek to enter the cable
marketplace are attempting to gain a competitive advantage through federal and
state preemption of local authority and are seeking to undermine the anti-
discrimination and build-out requirements that have been a bipartisan
cornerstone of our telecommunications laws for decades;
WHEREAS, these telecommunications companies are attempting to label their
service as “video service” to bypass traditional cable laws and regulations,
and have encouraged the introduction of legislation in Congress and in various
states to attempt to circumvent federal and local regulations;
WHEREAS, in Michigan, legislation has been introduced in the House of
Representatives, HB 5895, and in the Senate, SB 1157, that would strip away
local cable franchising authority and hand control over to the State of
Michigan (secretary of state);
WHEREAS, Williamstown Township strongly supports competition for telephone,
broadband and video services, and recognizes that competition for such services
is growing rapidly and encourages that these new competitive services are
available to all its citizens;
WHEREAS, new entrants into the video marketplace face no unreasonable barriers
to entry as federal law expressly provides that cable franchises not be
exclusive and that local governments have franchised numerous second cable
providers throughout the country;
WHEREAS, excluding local elected officials from the franchise process as some
telecommunications carriers and HB 5895 and SB 1157 suggests would be harmful
to the citizens of Williamstown Township who use local franchise rules to
ensure that cable services are provided to everyone, that service territory
appropriately covers key areas for economic development and public safety and
other community needs are met;
WHEREAS, HB 5895 and SB 1157 does not permit a build-out requirement which will
allow companies entering the cable market to cherry-pick high-value residents
only, leaving low-value residents without service;
WHEREAS, Williamstown Township agrees that government policies should not
determine winners and losers in the marketplace and thus the rules governing
local franchises, including rules regarding build-out of networks, should apply
to all cable providers equally;
WHEREAS, HB 5895 and SB 1157 would drastically limit or abolish the important
role of local government franchising and weaken the non-discrimination
provisions of the 1984 Cable Act that protects the interests of all citizens
and promotes competition.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED that Williamstown Township, Ingham County,
Michigan, strongly urges the Michigan Legislature to reject legislative
proposals such as HB 5895 and SB 1157 that abolish the role of local government
franchising and the ability of local governments to protect all citizens, that
do not allow for build-out requirements, and that ensure that non-
discrimination provisions of the 1984 Cable Act are met and promote competition
for all its citizens;
BE IT RESOLVED, Williamstown Township, Ingham County, Michigan supports
legislation which promotes competition in broadband and cable services for
everyone, recognizes and preserves local community needs, preserves local
control over franchising, prohibits redlining and other discriminatory
practices, and ensures that any new entrants into the cable market abide by the
same standards that current cable, broadband or multichannel video providers
live by.
Seconded by Board Member Cindy Davis.
Carried by the following vote.
 
Wilbrink LeBlanc Wright Martin Davis
Yes      Yes     Yes    Yes    Yes
 
At this time the Site Plan/Special Use Permit item, delayed earlier on the
agenda was brought to the table.
1475 Epley Road Site Plan/SUP
Planning Commission Chairman Bob Hayes explained the approval given by the
Planning Commission for this Site Plan and Special Use Permit for a grass
landing strip on property at the named address. Supervisor Martin explained
that the strip would be for personal, not public, use and would be subject to
township ordinance control.
Motion by Wright to approve the Site Plan as submitted for a private landing
strip at 1475 Epley Road.
Seconded by LeBlanc.
Carried unanimously.
 
Motion by Wright to approve the Special Use Permit as submitted for a private
landing strip at 1475 Epley Road.
Seconded by LeBlanc.
Carried unanimously.
 
FOIA Request
Clerk Davis explained the confidential packet received by the Board containing
statements from the now-closed AG Edwards account. She explained that this
information was not available at the time of previous FOIA requests, but she
has since acquired missing documents and has assembled a complete file
regarding this account including opening account information, agent of record
change form, quarterly statements, closing documents and a letter from past
Treasurer Fink. She stated that in lieu of bad publicity and comments regarding
the issue, she would like the Board to issue a public statement saying that the
complete file is now available. LeBlanc stated that the packet is the most
complete information he has ever seen regarding this account, and lauded the
efforts of Clerk Davis.
Motion by Wilbrink to consider the submitted packet the final and complete
information , as we know it to be as of today’s date, regarding the AG Edwards
account, and to make it available to the public through a Freedom of
Information Act request.
Seconded by LeBlanc.
Carried unanimously.
 
Motion by Davis to draft a statement saying that the issue has been researched
and that a final and complete packet of information is available and publish
said statement on the township website.
Seconded by Wright.
 
Wilbrink LeBlanc Wright Martin Davis
No       Yes     Yes    Yes    Yes
 
FOIA Policy
Clerk Davis explained the inordinate number of FOIA requests received by the
Township and solicited comment from the Board regarding possible ways to reduce
the number of requests. Discussion ensued with public comment. It was agreed
that the Clerk’s Office would track FOIA’s for a 1-3 month period and return
the issue to the Board.
Constable Agreement
Clerk Davis explained the confidential packet received by the Board containing
information regarding Constable timesheets, signed agreement by the Constable,
fees and related items. Discussion ensued, with Trustee Wilbrink agreeing to
meet with Constable Dahlstrom to arrive at an acceptable solution and bring a
proposal to the Board for consideration.
NEW BUSINESS
McKenna Contract
Motion by Wright to approve the update to the Planning Services contract with
McKenna Associates as submitted.
Seconded by Wilbrink.
Carried unanimously.
 
Joint Meeting with City of Williamston
Discussion ensued regarding the scheduling of this annual meeting and it was
agreed to offer the dates of May 17th and 18th for consideration by the City of
Williamston.
Ingham County Sheriffs Office
Supervisor Martin stated that the township had not yet received the second part
of this communication, so the matter should be tabled to a future date.
COMPLAINTS
1054 Sherwood.
This problem has already been resolved.
Unsigned Letters
In lieu of the recent receipt of two complaint communications, Supervisor
Martin reiterated that unsigned letters would receive no response and there was
Board consensus agreeing with this policy.
REPORTS
NIESA
Trustee Wilbrink reported on NIESA issues.
Parks
Trustee Wilbrink reported on Park issues, with Howard Dahlstrom adding that the
Williamston Rotary Club had revised the purpose of their $3000.00 donation, so
that it could be used for the well.
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
Treasurer LeBlanc reported on an issue that involved the township’s application
for a NPDES permit in 2003. Former Treasurer Nancy Fink had submitted the
application in March 2003, but in March 2006 the Michigan Department of
Environmental Quality (MDEQ) sent the township a letter stating that the
application was incomplete, could not be approved, and that the township owed
them considerable additional material and two annual reports. LeBlanc said he
has spoken to a number of other township officials who are responsible for
NPDES and they have all recommended getting help either from a consulting firm
or by joining the Greater Lansing Regional Committee on Phase II Nonpoint
Source Pollution Prevention. LeBlanc suggested that the board hear
presentations from Brian Slater, an engineer who is handling NPDES for Woodhull
Township, a neighboring township; and from Erin Campbell, Coordinator for the
Greater Lansing Regional Committee. Supervisor Martin said she believed former
Treasurer Fink had worked with a consultant in preparing the original NPDES
filing and that that person should be contacted. Treasurer LeBlanc said that
Fink had indicated to him, while he was serving as her deputy, that she was not
working with a consultant but that he would search the files to see if there
was any record of a consultant and get back to the board. He will also bring a
proposal to the board on how best to resolve the NPDES compliance issue.
Supervisor Martin presented several informational items including: a checklist
for personal security from Central Security Alarm System, as well as an
announcement/application regarding an opening on the board of the Capital Area
District Library, MTA regional meeting and the Wheatfield Township Library
Authority vote was scheduled for April 11, 2006.
Discussion ensued regarding footnote c from the Treasurer’s Report, with
Treasurer LeBlanc explaining which of our deposits are protected by Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) insurance. Our Vanguard money market
account gives a high level of liquidity, but it is not covered by FDIC
insurance. LeBlanc believes that the Chase/Bank One sweep account now provides
all the liquidity we need, and it would be appropriate to close the Vanguard
account, put that money into three jumbo CD’s in local banks, and put the
amount remaining into the Chase/Bank One account. A jumbo CD is for $
100,000.00, the maximum amount covered in one bank in one account by the FDIC.
Because of this limit, we need a new bank for each new jumbo CD. Because of our
current deposits, it will be necessary to consider some additional banks as
approved depositories in order to completely liquidate the Vanguard account.
Motion by LeBlanc to liquidate the Vanguard account upon an approved depository
decision being made, and to deposit the funds into three jumbo certificates of
deposit and any remaining balance to be deposited in Bank One.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
 
Discussion ensued regarding footnote d with Clerk Davis questioning Treasurer
LeBlanc’s reference to QuickBooks. Treasurer LeBlanc stated that his note is
reconciling bank statements with checks and deposit slips, but not the general
ledger. Discussion continued regarding bank reconciliations, bank recordkeeping
procedures, the SWEEP account and auditor comments.
Treasurer Report
Treasurer LeBlanc elaborated on his submitted report including: settlement with
the County Treasurer for the 2005 tax year, budget line items for computer
consultant work, incomplete figures for the Profit –Loss statement, budget
versus actual, because of QuickBooks problems and honored the memory of the
late George Durak.
Clerk Report
Clerk Davis elaborated on her submitted report including information regarding
FOIA requests, a Williamston Chamber of Commerce river clean up scheduled for
May 20, 2006, attendance at workshops for Parliamentary Procedure, cemetery
issues and School Elections and highlights of a review of the townships bonding
and workman’s compensation insurance.
Supervisor Report
Supervisor Martin elaborated on her submitted report including a report on the
Board of review, seminar attendance for Planning, wells, and homeland security,
attendance at a County Sheriff sponsored damage assessment drill and
information regarding wireless broadband.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 11:07 p.m.
·   Conrad Taschner: Regarding unpaid cemetery plots and collection thereof. It
was agreed that this should be an item for the next Board meeting.
·   Katie Lo: Regarding salary issues for the Constable.
 
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 11:15 p.m.
Supervisor Martin reviewed the meeting and ordered an adjournment at 11:17pm.
 
____________________________
Cindy Davis
Township Clerk
April 18, 2006
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 5:30 pm at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the agenda.
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer LeBlanc, Trustee Wright,
Supervisor Martin and Clerk Davis
Absent: none
PUBLIC COMMENT
None.
PENSION PLAN PRESENTATION
Clerk Davis introduced Amber Howes of Burnham & Flowers who explained her
review of the township’s 457 and 218 plans and stated that her company, as
administrator of the plans, would ensure full compliance as the Board chooses a
new 401A investment option and adopts the MTA 457 documents. Discussion ensued
with information regarding various options and plans and information regarding
the Social Security aspects involved.
Motion by Supervisor Martin to authorize Burnham & Flowers to submit a revised,
complete proposal by May 4, 2006, for consideration at the May 9, 2006 meeting,
and that a representative from Burnham & Flowers be in attendance at that
meeting.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
RED CEDAR RECREATION ASSOCIATION PRESENTATION
Association co-director, Susan Needler of the Association explained the
purposes, and programs offered by the organization. She further explained the
parameters to play, costs involved and the aspects of participation in various
sports. Supervisor Martin spoke of her support for RCRA and clarified the
lawful expenditure requirements the Township must follow. Expenditures must be
authorized by statute such as senior programs through Act 39 of 1976. Act 179
of 1976 allows a public body to enter into a contract with a non-profit
corporation to provide youth services. Discussion ensued and Trustee Wilbrink
agreed to submit suggestions from the Parks committee and Clerk Davis will work
with RCRA to draft an agreement to be submitted to the Board at a later date.
Supervisor Martin adjourned the meeting at 7:10pm.
 
__________________
Cindy Davis
Township Clerk
 
May 9, 2006
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 PM at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the agenda.
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer LeBlanc, Trustee Wright,
Supervisor Martin and Clerk Davis
Absent: none
CONSENT AGENDA
·   Minutes of 4/11/06 and 4/48/06 Meetings
·   Treasurer Report
   Treasurer LeBlanc commented on auto pay issues and interest computations.
Discussion ensued and it was agreed to remove the Treasurers report from the
Consent Agenda for discussion later in the meeting.
·   Building Inspector Report
   No Comment
·   Accounts Payable
   Discussion ensued regarding the listing of a purchased mailbox. Treasurer
LeBlanc asked whether this purchase needed Board approval because it was over
$200.00. Supervisor Martin explained that it was needed and that the
Treasurer’s purchase of a drop box would be viewed the same way. Wilbrink
questioned the cemetery expense of lunch for the Cemetery Board and employees
at the Brookshire Golf Club. Discussion ensued and it was agreed to remove this
expense from the payment listing pending further review. Clerk Davis reported
that the Board would be approving checks 15163 through 15239 from the General
Fund for a total of $24,887.88 and checks 5259 through 5273 from the Cemetery
Fund (minus the removed payment) for a total of $3,108.03.
Motion by Davis to approve and pass the consent agenda with the noted changes.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS
·   Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:15 p.m.
·   Katie Lo: Regarding federal and state payroll tax payments.
·   Susan Stuwe: Regarding past minutes and censuring of two Board members.
·   Roger Philip: Submitted a written communication regarding A.G. Edwards
·   Al LeBlanc: Submitted a written communication regarding internal control
issues.
·   Susan Stuwe: Regarding a refund of charges for a recent FOIA request.
·   Conrad Taschner: Regarding the Cemetery Board lunch questioned earlier
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:31 p.m.
PLANNING COMMISSION
Planning Chairperson Bob Hayes commented on recent commission business as
outlined in the submitted minutes. He said that the Commission is recommending
approval of the site plan for the co-location placement of a wireless
communication array on an existing cellular tower located at 162 E. Grand
River, as requested by Michiana Metronet, Inc.
Motion by LeBlanc to approve the site plan for the co-location placement of a
wireless communication array on an existing cellular tower located at 162 E.
Grand River, as requested by Michiana Metronet, Inc.
Seconded by Wilbrink.
Carried unanimously.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Pension Plan
Lynn Bright of Burnham & Flowers was in attendance to elaborate on the proposed
new administration and changes to the current plan. Supervisor Martin
summarized the changes and discussion ensued regarding the variables involved
in the 457 and 401a plans.
Motion by LeBlanc to authorize Burnham & Flowers to set up new 457 and 401a
retirement/savings plans for the Township and administer same.
Seconded by Davis.
Carried unanimously.
FOIA Statement
Board discussion took place regarding the submitted statement regarding the AG
Edwards account. In lieu of public comments by Mr. Philip who said there are
more documents to be included in the final packet, Clerk Davis extended an
invitation to Mr. Philip to meet and discuss the issue, but he declined. Clerk
Davis further stated that she would attempt to set up a meeting with Mr. Philip
or secure documents he stated he has from the account, and return to the Board
with further information. Clerk Davis also commented on the FOIA log submitted
to the Board.
Constable Agreement
Wilbrink submitted a complaint form and was asked to return to the Board with a
Constable Agreement as was previously requested.
NEW BUSINESS
Gaming License/Williamston Theatre
Emily Sutton-Smith from the Williamston Theater was in attendance to explain
her request for a Texas Hold Em poker night fundraiser for the theater to be
held on May 12, 2006. While her business is in Williamston, the fundraiser
would be held inside Township limits, thus her request to the Board.
RESOLUTION #52
At a regular meeting of the Williamstown Township Board, called to order by
Supervisor Mickey Martin on May 9, 2006 at 7:00 pm the following resolution was
offered:
Moved by Trustee Wright that the request from the Williamston Theatre of
Williamston, Michigan, County of Ingham, asking that they be recognized as a
nonprofit organization operating in the community for the purpose of obtaining
a charitable gaming license be considered for approval.
Supported by Treasurer LeBlanc.
Carried by the following vote:
 
Wilbrink LeBlanc Wright Martin Davis
Yes      Yes     Yes    Yes    Yes
 
Sheriff’s Letter/Request for Support
Discussion ensued regarding the communication requesting funding for the Tri-
County Metro Narcotics Squad. Supervisor Martin will call and ask that a
representative give a presentation at a future Board meeting.
2006 Road Improvements
Supervisor Martin explained the Ingham County Road Commission’s two-year plan
for Barry Rd., including the process and time frame involved. Discussion
ensued, including comment from Barry Rd. residents.
Motion by Wright to approve the two year road plan for Barry Rd. as submitted
by the Ingham County Road Commission with pricing to be sustained for the time
period as quoted.
Seconded by LeBlanc.
Carried unanimously
Discussion ensued regarding a received invoice and letter scheduling road line
painting and the shared cost for the Township. Supervisor Martin agreed to ask
the Road Commission for a copy of the painting contract, before the Board
approves payment.
CADL Report
Jane Smith from the Capital Area District Library and Linda Tibadeau from the
Williamston Library were in attendance to present their annual report.. Ms.
Smith elaborated on the programs offered by the library and answered questions
from the Board regarding their services.
REPORTS
Treasurer Report
LeBlanc elaborated on his submitted report. Discussion ensued regarding the
figures submitted on this report, with Supervisor Martin stating that they were
incorrect and the report could not be approved. Supervisor Martin further
stated that she would review the report, as well as past reports and submit
comments to the Board. Treasurer LeBlanc commented on the process used to
assemble his monthly report and an explanation of the NPDES Report and back
dues owed to that organization. Discussion ensued regarding CD’s and interest
rates yielded leading to the following motion:
Motion by Wilbrink to authorize the transfer of $ 100,000.00 out of the Chase/
Bank One General Fund account to buy a jumbo certificate of deposit in an
approved depository if the new CD offers meaningfully better interest than what
we get in the Chase sweep account.
Seconded by LeBlanc
Carried unanimously.
 
Further discussion ensued regarding the need for a drop box on the inside wall
of the reception area for payments leading to the following motion:
Motion by LeBlanc to authorize the purchase of a new drop box to be installed
inside the township hall near the inside of the front door, with funds to be
taken from Capital Outlay.
Seconded by Wilbrink.
Carried unanimously.
 
The Treasurer further commented on the receipting of all monies received, no
matter how small and staff meetings with three Board members present that could
be violating the Open Meetings Act.
Clerk Report
Davis elaborated on her submitted report.
·   May 2, 2006 School Election.
·   New ballot containers.
·   Attendance at a Williamston Historical presentation.
·   Attendance at an MTA legislative conference.
·   NIESA Millage presentation by Paula Curtis.
·   Knox Boxes outside businesses to enable quick entry by fire fighters.
Supervisor Report
Supervisor Martin elaborated on her submitted report.
·   MTA Weekend Training Session
·   Cable Commission agreements and their impacts on Township service and
revenue.
·   Proper posting of Election Commission meeting notices.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 9:55 p.m.
·   Susan Stuwe: Regarding purchasing policies.
·   Darryl Brown: Regarding purchasing policies.
·   Bob Hayes: Regarding administrator duties and the Boards job of making
policy.
·   John Kennedy: Regarding duties of administrators and employee supervision.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 10:03 p.m.
Supervisor Martin stated that Building Official, Walt Aven, would be retiring
in September. Walt, in attendance at the meeting, conveyed the satisfaction he
has enjoyed in his position since 1989, and stated that the current
administrators of the Township are great to work with.
Supervisor Martin reviewed the meeting and ordered an adjournment at 10:07 pm.
 
__________________
Cindy Davis
Township Clerk
May 16, 2006
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 5:30 pm at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the agenda.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Trustee Wright, Supervisor Martin and Clerk Davis
Absent: Treasurer LeBlanc.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 5:31 p.m.
∙   Ruth Templeton: Regarding Planning Commission reports and the Master Plan.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 5:32 p.m.
POLICY DISCUSSION
Trustee Wilbrink commented on his submitted communication regarding the
enactment of a policy that would require every board, commission and committee
to submit minutes of every meeting held. Advantages and disadvantages being
discussed, as well as a possible request to the various entities for minutes
together with a trial time period. Discussion ensued and trustee Wilbrink will
draft a letter and return to the Board with that submission.
Trustee Wilbrink commented on his submitted communication regarding the
approval of all expenditure over $200.00. Discussion ensued with Trustee
Wright, Supervisor Martin and Clerk Davis agreeing that there was no need for
approval because the departmental budget was approved at the budget hearing. If
there was no line item for a particular department for an expenditure such as
capital outlay, or if the department had exceeded its allotment of funds, then,
and only then, should the Board approve the expenditure. Trustee Wright stated
that there was no need to revisit something that was passed previously by the
Board.
Discussion ensued regarding budget reports, budget appropriations and other
financial matters. After a lengthy discussion, Supervisor Martin asked the
Board to let the Treasurer and Clerk continue to work on these items and wait
for future progress reports.
Supervisor Martin commented on the Internal Controls sheet she had submitted,
asking that Board members look it over and see where they might find situations
that need improvement. Clerk Davis said that the checklist was a great tool and
encouraged its use.
Supervisor Martin adjourned the meeting at 7:00pm.
 
__________________
Cindy Davis
Township Clerk
May 19, 2006
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 11:00 pm on Friday, May 19, 2006
at the Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston,
Michigan. Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the
agenda.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Trustee Wright, Treasurer LeBlanc, Supervisor Martin
and Clerk Davis.
Absent: none
CLOSED SESSION
Attorney Vince Spagnoulo explained that he was accompanied by Legal Associate,
Whitney Ezis, from the firm. There would be no additional charge to the
township for this attendance.
Motion by Davis to approve attendance at the closed session for Legal
Associate, Whitney Ezis and Recording Secretary Robert Cwiertniewicz.
Seconded by Wright.
Roll call vote:
 
Wilbrink LeBlanc Wright Martin Davis
Yes      Yes     Yes    Yes    Yes
 
Motion by Martin to adjourn to closed session for two specific reasons:
1.   To consult with legal counsel regarding trial or settlement strategy in
connection with the specific pending litigation of Mossholder v Williamstown
Township, Ingham County Circuit Court No. 06-254-CH
2.   To consider the written legal opinion of legal counsel regarding MCL
125.286 (1) – the new conditional rezoning statute.
Seconded by Wright.
Roll call vote:
 
Wilbrink LeBlanc Wright Martin Davis
Yes      Yes     Yes    Yes    Yes
 
The Board adjourned to closed session at 11:10a.m.
Motion by Wright to reconvene in open session at 12:55 p.m.
Seconded by Davis.
Carried Unanimously.
 
Motion by Davis to authorize Attorney Spagnuolo to forward a finalized response
to the consent judgment negotiation based on discussions held during closed
session.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried Unanimously.
 
Motion by Wright to authorize a special Board meeting on July 12, 2006 at 1:00
p.m. for the purposes of discussing the new “conditional rezoning” law with
Attorney Spagnuolo and a representative of McKenna Associates to be present.
Seconded by Wilbrink.
Carried Unanimously.
 
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 1:02 p.m.
Supervisor Martin ended for public comment at 1:02 p.m.
Supervisor Martin ordered the meeting adjourned at 1:02 p.m.
 
__________________
Cindy Davis
Township Clerk
 
June 6, 2006
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 PM at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the agenda.
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer LeBlanc, Supervisor Martin and Clerk Davis
Absent: Trustee Wright
Supervisor Martin stated that Trustee Wright informed her that he would be
late.
CONSENT AGENDA
·   Minutes of 5/9/06, 5/16/06 and 5/19/06 Meetings
Treasurer LeBlanc asked that on pg.2 of the 5/9/06 meeting minutes, regarding
his public comment, that “financial issues” be changed to “internal controls”.
There was Board concurrence with the change.
·   Treasurer Report
There was Board concurrence, due to its late submission, to remove the
Treasurer’s Report from the consent agenda for discussion at next month’s
meeting.
·   Building Inspector Report
No Comment
·   Accounts Payable
Clerk Davis reported that the Board would be approving checks 15241 through
15299 from the General Fund for a total of $137,014.08 and checks 5274 through
5294 from the Cemetery Fund for a total of $3,925.62.
Motion by Davis to approve and pass the consent agenda with the noted changes.
Seconded by Martin.
Carried unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:09 p.m.
∙   Jeff Abood: Candidate for State Representative.
∙   Conrad Taschner: Regarding the Cemetery Open House and after hours work of
officials
∙   Tony Benevides: Candidate for Ingham County Commissioner.
∙   Susan Stuwe: Regarding FOIA charges, Environmental Comm. & expenditures.
∙   Mike Thomas: Regarding: wireless cable Internet and Library fundraisers.
∙   Roger Philips: Regarding his written submission about the AG Edwards
account.
∙   Billie O’Berry: Candidate for Judge in November.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:29 p.m.
PLANNING COMMISSION
Planning Chairperson Bob Hayes commented on recent commission business as
outlined in the submitted minutes.
Tri-County Resolution
Discussion ensued regarding the Tri-County Regional Planning Growth Issues and
adoption of the “Regional Growth: Choices for Our Future” policy, including a
request by Trustee Wilbrink to table the resolution.
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP
RESOLUTION # 52
Resolution by Supervisor Martin.
A RESOLUTION ENDORSING AND SUPPORTING THE TRI-COUNTY REGIONAL PLANNING
COMMISSION’S REGIONAL GROWTH CHOICES FOR FUTURE PROJECT, REGIONAL LAND USE
VISION POLICY MAP, THEMES AND PRINCIPLES.
   WHEREAS, on December 28, 1973, the Tri-County Regional Planning Commission
was designated by the Governor of Michigan as the Metropolitan Planning
Organization for the Lansing Urbanized Area; and
   WHEREAS, the Tri-County Regional Planning Commission conducted analysis of
current regional trends in land use, growth, development, environmental
impacts, the efficiency and effectiveness of the transportation system,
obtained substantial public input and gave careful consideration to alternative
regional land use patterns; and
   WHEREAS, the Regional 2030 Transportation Plan adopted by Tri-County
Regional Planning Commission on October 26, 2005 re-endorses results from the
Regional Growth: Choices for Our Future project’s “Wise Growth” alternative as
directed by the Tri-County Regional Planning Commission on March 27, 2002,
confirmed by the Regional Growth Steering Committee on April 5, 2002 and as
adopted by the Tri-County Regional Planning Commission on March 26, 2003 in the
Regional 2025 Transportation Plan; and
   WHEREAS, the adopted Regional 2030 Transportation Plan is based on regional
socioeconomic forecasts approved by the Tri-County Regional Planning Commission
in December, 2001 with consideration being given to long term reallocation of
these forecasts to be more consistent with the adopted “Wise Growth” land use
alternative from the Regional Growth: Choices for Our Future project; and
   WHEREAS, the Tri-County Regional Planning Commission recognized regional
development, land use and implementing the adopted “Wise Growth” scenario is
the region’s highest priority issue in order to reduce congestion, maintain and
improve air quality, protect environmentally sensitive or agricultural lands,
continue to maintain and expand the regional economy, improve global
competitiveness, sustain quality of life of the region’s residents and is part
of their fiduciary responsibility to taxpayers in order to protect public
health, safety and welfare of the region’s residents; and
   WHEREAS, the Tri-County Regional Planning Commission has adopted policies to
evaluate all proposed future expenditures of federal funds and to establish
project priorities for use of federal funds based on the adopted alternative
for land use as shown on the “Wise Growth” policy map and which are consistent
with the adopted themes and principles as shown in the Regional Growth: Choices
for Our Future Summary Report for the Lansing Metropolitan Region dated
September, 2005 and on it’s accompanying Poster Plan as transmitted on January
20, 2006; and
   WHEREAS, the Williamstown Township Board is the duly constituted local
governmental policy making body for Williamstown Township and desires to
endorse and support the Regional Growth: Choices for Our Future themes,
principles and policy map which constitute the agreed on regional land use
vision in order to guide future regional growth and development; and
   WHEREAS, the Regional Growth project’s themes, principles and policy map are
intended to provide a compatible generalized regional framework to guide local
government land use plans and other decisions in order to preserve and protect
the public health, safety and welfare of the region’s residents consistent with
the Williamstown Township Board’s fiduciary responsibility to our citizens; and
   NOW, THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED that the Williamstown Township Board does
endorse and support the Regional Growth: Choices for Our Future themes,
principles and policy map as depicted in “A Summary Report for the Lansing
Metropolitan Area” and on its accompanying Poster Plan are necessary to protect
public health, safety and welfare and are consistent with our fiduciary
responsibility to the taxpayers of Williamstown Township.
   BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that the Williamstown Township Board does hereby
endorse and support said themes, principles and policy map as policies for
Williamstown Township.
   BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that it is the policy of Williamstown Township that
these endorsed and supported themes, principles and policy map be referred to
staff and/or the Planning Commission for use in considering consistency of
future development, development decisions and other actions in local decision
making.
   BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that it shall be the policy of Williamstown Township
to support and actively work with other local governments, agencies and the
Tri-County Regional Planning Commission to fully participate in considering
implementation of the Regional Growth: Choices for Our Future action plan and
in hosting related training and other activities as may be appropriate to fully
integrate our policies endorsing and supporting the regional land use vision
into the fabric of regional life.
   BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that the Clerk is authorized to sign this resolution
and that it be transmitted to the Tri-County Regional Planning Commission,
adjacent governmental jurisdictions and other local, state and federal agencies
and representatives as appropriate.
Seconded by Clerk Davis.
Carried by the following vote.
   YES:       Supervisor Martin, Clerk Davis, Treasurer LeBlanc
    NO:       Trustee Wilbrink
    ABSENT:    Trustee Wright
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Lt. Gill – Tri-County Metro Narcotics Squad
Lt. Gill of the Ingham County Sheriffs Office spoke to the Board regarding the
Squad and explained his request for funding from all included cities and
townships, in an effort to maintain current personnel levels. Discussion ensued
and it was decided that any donation would entail a budget amendment to be
considered at a future meeting.
Trustee Wright entered the meeting at 8:00 p.m.
Motion by Martin to table the issue until the next Board meeting, to review the
issue further and discuss any budget amendment that would be necessary.
Seconded by Wilbrink.
Carried unanimously.
Constable Agreement
Board discussion took place regarding Constable’s powers, duties, hours and
responsibilities. It was agreed that Board members would provide written
comment to Trustee Wilbrink by June 9, 2006 for further discussion at the next
Board meeting.
Pension Plan
Discussion ensued regarding who would be eligible for the plan, and whether to
include an option for all employee participation. It was decided to revisit the
issue with next years’ budget before allowing participation by anyone other
than elected officials.
Motion by Wilbrink to enroll all elected officials in the 401A plan as
submitted by Burham & Flowers, with a contribution by the township of 7.65%,
the current Social Security percentile, and limit that contribution to a figure
no greater than the Social Security percentile and the employee match must be
7.65%.
Seconded by Davis.
Carried unanimously.
FOIA Statement
Board discussion took place regarding the statement finalizing the AG Edwards
account. Citing the considerable effort involved in this entire FOIA project,
it was decided, after much discussion, that Trustees Wilbrink and Wright would
handle further inquiries into this issue.
NPDES Proposal
After much discussion about rejoining Greater Lansing Regional Committee at a
total cost of $13,638.00, it was decided that Treasurer LeBlanc would contact,
the township’s wetlands consultant Wetland Coastal Resources and Kurt Guter,
for their opinion on how to proceed with this issue.
Internal Controls
Supervisor Martin commented on the Internal Controls survey results, saying
that it was evident there were improvements that needed to be made. Clerk Davis
commented on her work with the Treasurer about a change in duties and financial
reporting issues. Treasurer LeBlanc said that he was preparing a report based
on information from the Treasurer’s Institute and he would like to complete and
submit that report before considering the hiring of an outside consultant to
develop financial procedures for the township, as outlined in a submitted
proposal by R.L. Baldermann Consulting. Clerk Davis said that engaging the
services of the consultant now, would free up the time that the Clerk and
Treasurer would need to spend on these issues, and would present a concise set
of procedures that would be custom made for the township. Trustee Wright agreed
that we need the policy development by the consultant. It was decided to give
the Clerk and Treasurer time to gather information before the first August
meeting to possibly save money on the cost of the consultant.
Discussion ensued regarding Resolution #53 regarding the receipting of cash,
submitted by Treasurer LeBlanc, leading to the following action.
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP RESOLUTION #53
RESOLUTION ON RECEIPTING OF CASH OR CHECK PAYMENTS
Resolution by Treasurer LeBlanc.
   WHEREAS, the Board of Williamstown Township, Ingham County, in exercising
its fiduciary responsibilities desires to safeguard the funds of the township.
   THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED, That except for property tax payments, all
payments made in person to this township and accepted by an elected official or
member of the township staff, regardless of the amount of payment, will be
recorded in writing on a sequentially numbered triplicate receipt imprinted
with the name of the township. The original of this receipt will be offered to
the customer, the first copy will be kept with the payment, and the second copy
will be kept in the receipt book, which will be retained as a financial record
of the township. Taxpayers who pay property tax by U. S. Mail or by leaving
payment in the appropriate township drop box will receive an official property
tax receipt by mail. Taxpayers who pay property tax in the township office will
receive an official property tax receipt if a member of the Treasury department
is present to process the payment at the time it is made. If no member of the
Treasury department is present to process the payment, and if requested, the
taxpayer will be given a triplicate receipt by township staff, who must verify
the amount of payment actually received.  
Seconded by Clerk Davis.
Carried by the following vote:
 
Wilbrink LeBlanc Wright Martin Davis
Yes      Yes     Yes    Yes    Yes
 
Moved by Lablanc to authorize the purchase of a mail drop box # 2255 in
(aluminum or brass or ivory or green or bronze) finish ($ 100.00) with custom
engraving PROPERTY TAX ONLY – NO CASH ($ 20.00) together with locking
receptacle # 2256 in the same finish ($ 125.00) from Salsbury Industries. The
cost of buying and installing this through-the-wall mail drop assembly will be
charged to Account 101-294-980, Township Office, Capital Outlay, which has been
funded at $ 18,000.00 for the present fiscal year. The purpose of this mail
drop will be to receive property tax payments at times when the township office
is closed. Furthermore, installation costs of no more than $200.00 are also
authorized.
Seconded by Wilbrink.
Carried unanimously.
Moved by LaBlanc to authorize the purchase of a secure locking cash drawer with
insert from Office Max at a cost of no more than $ 160.00 and that the cost of
this purchase be charged to account 101-294-980 Township Office, Capital
Outlay.
Seconded by Wilbrink.
Carried unanimously.
Payment to Brookshire
Discussion ensued regarding this outstanding invoice.
Moved by Davis to authorize the payment of $67.11, from cemetery funds, to
Brookshire Inn & Country Club.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
NEW BUSINESS
Road Abandonment Petition – Hillcrest Road
Moved by Martin to inform the Ingham County Road Commission, per their request
for the township’s position, that the Township is not opposed to the
abandonment of the right of way known as Hillcrest Road in Williamstown
Township.
Seconded by LeBlanc.
Carried unanimously.
Past Treasurer’s Reports
This item was postponed for a future meeting.
COMPLAINTS
559 E. Sherwood Road
Constable Dahlstrom explained that he met with the owner to discuss the
situation regarding the renting of a remodeled unit at this address. Discussion
ensued regarding the zoning and rental issues with this location. It was
decided that a letter would be composed by the Supervisor and delivered by the
Constable, in an effort to clarify and resolve this issue.
Constable Dahlstrom also reported on a drain problem he investigated, stating
that the issue was not a township problem.
REPORTS
Treasurer Report
LeBlanc elaborated on his submitted report.
Clerk Report
Davis elaborated on her submitted report.
Supervisor Report
Supervisor Martin elaborated on her submitted report.
NIESA Report
Trustee Wilbrink informed the Board that EMS Director Jamie Johnson resigned
from his position on June 1, 2006.
Supervisor Martin stated that the DTE Tax Tribunal stipulation would be
forwarded to legal counsel for review.
Supervisor Martin stated that the first Board meeting of August was
inadvertently scheduled for the same day as the Primary election.
Moved by Martin to schedule the first Board meeting of August, 2006 for August
1, 2006.
Seconded by LeBlanc.
Carried unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 10:35 p.m.
∙   Ruth Templeton: Regarding auditor and financial issues.
∙   Susan Stuwe: Regarding pension benefits.
∙   Darryl Brown: Regarding the internal controls discussion.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 10:44 p.m.
upervisor Martin ordered an adjournment at 10:45 pm.
 
__________________
Cindy Davis
Township Clerk
June 20, 2006
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 5:30 pm at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the agenda.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer LeBlanc Trustee Wright and Supervisor
Martin.
Absent: Clerk Davis.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 5:31 p.m.
∙   Constable Dahlstrom: Regarding Constable duties and pay; discussion ensued
and it was agreed that the Constable as well as Trustee Wilbrink and Supervisor
Martin would meet to discuss details of the Constable Agreement.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 5:35 p.m.
BUILDING INSPECTOR POSITION
With the impending retirement of Walt Aven, discussion ensued regarding hiring
a replacement. Variables including salary and advertising of the opening were
discussed. It was agreed to place an ad in the Enterprise and to further
research salary issues for the July meeting.
MILLENIUM CONTRACT
Discussion ensued and it was agreed that legal Counsel would do a final review
of the contract before the Board takes any action.
PARK SPECIAL USES & PERMITS
Discussion ensued and it was agreed that it was not yet time to set use fees
and allow uses by groups and organizations. Facility improvements and parking
considerations need to be addressed. The Red Cedar Recreation Association
agreement regarding reciprocity of services for use of the fields needs to
reviewed. There will be no action taken regarding this issue at this time.
MEETING REVIEW
∙   Rates and salaries from other townships regarding the Building Inspector
position would be researched; an employment ad would be placed in the
Enterprise.
∙   Legal Counsel would do a final review of the Millennium contract.
∙   Park special uses and permits would not be addressed at this time; RCRA
agreement would be revisited; DNR would be contacted regarding signage issues;
a Parks Commission member would be asked to attend the next American Legion
meeting to hear possible park plans by the organization
Supervisor Martin adjourned the meeting at 6:55 pm.
__________________
Cindy Davis
Township Clerk
July 11, 2006
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 PM at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the agenda.
Motion by Davis to add discussion of the Mr. Baldermann contract, as an outside
financial consultant regarding financial procedures, to the agenda.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer LeBlanc, Trustee Wright,
Supervisor Martin and Clerk Davis
Absent: None.
CONSENT AGENDA
·   Minutes of 6/6/06 and 6/20/06 Meetings
·   Treasurer Report
Treasurer LeBlanc explained the reasons for the report being submitted late and
Supervisor Martin stated that it was not possible to discuss something the
Board was just handed.
Motion by Martin to remove the Treasurers Report from the consent agenda.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
·   Building Inspector Report
·   Accounts Payable
Clerk Davis reported that the Board would be approving checks 15300 through
15388 from the General Fund for a total of $47,504.89 and checks 5295 through
5320 from the Cemetery Fund for a total of $5,463.22.
Motion by Wright to approve and pass the consent agenda as amended.
Seconded by Davis.
Carried unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:09 p.m.
·   John Currie: Candidate for 69 th District legislator
·   Susan Stuwe: Regarding a previous FOIA request.
·   Pamela Kingsbury: Regarding a complaint about 5336 N. Meridian Road.
·   John Kennedy: Regarding the scheduled closed session.
·   Al LeBlanc: Regarding the Townships Profit & Loss statement.
·   Roger Philip: Regarding the June 6, 2006 minutes.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:25 p.m.
PLANNING COMMISSION
Planning Chairperson Bob Hayes commented on recent commission business as
outlined in the submitted minutes.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Tri-County Metro Request
Discussion ensued regarding the request to assist in the funding for the Tri-
County Metro Narcotics Squad.
Motion by Wilbrink to not offer funding assistance at this time and to include
this request in budget discussions for the 2007-08 budget.
Seconded by LeBlanc.
YES:    Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer LeBlanc, Trustee Wright Supervisor Martin.
NO:    Clerk Davis,   
Motion carried.
 
Constable Agreement
Discussion ensued regarding the agreement, procedures and form to be used.
Constable Dahlstrom read form a prepared statement saying that on the advice of
his attorney he would not be in favor of any changes to the Constable Agreement
at this time.
Motion by Wilbrink to reassess the Constable Agreement after the November, 2006
election and to return to the agreement and procedures that were in place in
September 2002.
Seconded by Davis.
YES:    Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer LeBlanc, Clerk Davis.
NO:    Trustee Wright, Supervisor Martin   
Motion carried.
 
Building Inspector Opening
Discussion ensued regarding compensation for the position, debating a
“percentage” pay, “per inspection” pay and “flat rate” pay.
Motion by Wright to set the Building Inspector salary at 60% of fees, $65.00
for meeting attendance plus supplies and education.
Seconded by Wilbrink.
Carried unanimously.
Motion by Martin to set a deadline for applicants of July 18, 2006 and to have
a committee of the Supervisor, Clerk and current Building Inspector make a
recommendation to the Board at the meeting of August 1, 2006.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
 
Millennium, Transfer to Wave Broadband
Discussion ensued regarding the transfer per the FTC 394 protocol.
Motion by Martin to agree to the transfer of the cable franchise from
Millennium to Wave Broadband pending receipt of legal fees incurred by the
township from Millennium.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously
 
Baldermann Contract
Motion by Davis to hire Richard Baldermann, CPA to create a financial
procedures package for the township with fees for said work not to exceed
$2400.00, and that all township officials and employees will implement and
abide by all components of said package.
Seconded by Wright.
Discussion ensued.
YES:    Wright, Martin, Davis.
NO:    Wilbrink, LeBlanc.   
Motion carried.
 
NEW BUSINESS
PA116 resolution – Small Estate
Motion by Trustee Wilbrink to approve removal of the home, buildings and 3.37
acres, described in the Certified Boundary Survey by Kebs, Inc-Job # 79119.BND,
from the PA 116 agreement with the State of Michigan, as requested by the Small
Estate.
Seconded by Supervisor Martin.
Carried unanimously.
 
Tri-County Road Study Resolution
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP
RESOLUTION # 54
A RESOLUTION ENDORSING AND SUPPORTING
A LOCAL ROAD ASSET MANAGEMENT PILOT PROJECT
FOR PORTIONS OF INGHAM COUNTY.
Resolution by Supervisor Martin.
   WHEREAS, in 2002, the Michigan Legislature adopted Act 499, which amended
Section 9(a) of Public Act 51 (MCL 247.659a) to replace the requirement for
periodic needs studies by an on-going asset management process; and
   WHEREAS, the 2002 amendments to Section 9(a) of Public Act 51 also
established a clear need for the development of asset management programs for
local roads, as evidenced in the legislation creating the Transportation Asset
Management Council:
“In order to provide a coordinated, unified effort by the various roadway
agencies within the state, the transportation asset management council is
hereby created within the State Transportation Commission and is charged with
advising the commission on a statewide asset management strategy and the
processes and necessary tools needed to implement such a strategy beginning
with the federal-aid eligible highway system, and once completed, continuing on
with the county road and municipal systems, in a cost-effective manner;” and
   WHEREAS, a strong incentive towards the development of asset management
programs for local roads is further provided in Subsection 6 of Section 13 of
Public Act 51 (MCL 247.663), which indicates that:
“A city or village shall not transfer more than 25% of its annual major street
funding for the local street system unless it has adopted and is following an
asset management process for its major and local street systems;” and
   WHEREAS, Act 499 further requires regional transportation and Metropolitan
Planning Organizations to provide qualified technical assistance to the Asset
Management Council in fulfilling their responsibilities; and
   WHEREAS, on December 28, 1973, the Tri-County Regional Planning Commission
was designated by the Governor of Michigan as the Metropolitan Planning
Organization for the Lansing Urbanized Area; and
   WHEREAS, the Tri-County Regional Planning Commission has been working with
local governments and the Michigan Department of Transportation to collect
asset management data for all federal aid eligible routes in Clinton, Eaton and
Ingham County; and
   WHEREAS, the Tri-County Regional Planning Commission, working with the
Michigan State University Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering and
local governments in Ingham County, has developed an application to conduct a
pilot program of data collection for all local roads in Meridian, Williamstown,
Wheatfield and Leroy townships, the City of Williamston, Village of Webberville
and the Ingham County Road Commission (hereinafter referred to as the study
area) to be funded by the state Asset Management Council; and
   WHEREAS, having a comprehensive inventory of asset management data will
assist the Township of Williamstown in making informed decisions about managing
our transportation assets, and
   NOW THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED, that the Township of Williamstown does hereby
endorse and support the application for local road pilot funds being submitted
by the Tri-County Regional Planning Commission to the Asset Management Council.
   BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, that the Township of Williamstown does hereby direct
our staff to cooperate and participate in data collection and related support
activities for said pilot project if it is funded by the Asset Management
Council.
   BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, that it is the intent of the Township of
Williamstown to receive such data and technical assistance made available
through this pilot project to assess conditions on our local street system and
to apply this information to decide strategies for managing our assets
consistent with the requirements of Act 499.
   BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, that Township Clerk Cindy Davis is hereby authorized
to sign this resolution and transmit it to the Tri-County Regional Planning
Commission, the Asset Management Council and the other governments and agencies
in the study area as an indication that the Township of Williamstown supports
and endorses this proposed pilot asset management project for our local street
system.
Seconded by Trustee Wright.
Carried by the following vote.
YES: Supervisor Martin, Clerk Davis, Treasurer LeBlanc, Trustee Wright and
Trustee Wilbrink.
NO: None.
 
Approved Depositories Resolution
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP
RESOLUTION # 55
Resolution by Treasurer LeBlanc.
   WHEREAS, the Board of Williamstown Township, Ingham County, in exercising
its fiduciary responsibilities desires to safeguard the funds of the township
that may be invested from time to time, and
   WHEREAS, public Act 77 of 1989 (MCL 41.77) requires that the township board
designate the banks or depositories for the money belonging to the township,
including the time for which the deposits shall be made and all details for
carrying into effect the authority given in this act, and
   WHEREAS, Public Act 196 of 1997 (MCL 129.91, et seq) requires township
boards, in consultation with the township treasurer, to adopt an investment
policy, now
   THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED, That this policy is applicable to all public funds
belonging to Williamstown Township and in the custody of the township
treasurer.
   BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, That the Williamstown Township treasurer is
authorized to manage funds belonging to the township, including depositing
funds in township board approved financial institutions and administration of
investments in conformance with MCL 41.77 and policies set forth in this
resolution.
   BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, That the board approves the following institutions
as depositories of township funds: Bank One/Chase, Republic Bank, Independent
Bank, Vanguard Securities, Fifth/Third Bank, Capitol National Bank, Flagstar
Bank, Mason State Bank, Dart Bank, National City Bank; Charter One Bank,
National Association; Citizens Bank, and LaSalle Bank Midwest National
Association.
   BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, That the treasurer shall recommend financial
institutions for approval for the safekeeping of township funds based on an
evaluation of the performance and solvency of the institution, as well as past
performance in exercising due care and prudence in managing the custody of
township funds held in trust, if applicable. The treasurer shall periodically
evaluate approved and potential financial depositories and shall make
recommendations as to appropriate changes in approved depositories when
warranted.
   In determining safekeeping and custody qualifications, financial
institutions should be able, upon request, to document a minimum capital
requirement of at least $10,000,000 and at least five years of operation. All
financial institutions and brokers/dealers shall be pre-qualified by supplying
the following:
·   Audited financial statements,
·   Proof of NASD certification or FDIC insurance,
·   Proof of state registration, and
·   Certification of having read, understood and agreement to comply with the
Williamstown Township investment policy.
   The treasurer shall periodically examine the financial condition and
registrations of qualified financial institutions and brokers/dealers by
obtaining annual updates of the information listed above.
   BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, That when the treasurer’s analysis of the township’s
cash flow requirements reveal that surplus funds will not be required to meet
current expenditures for a specific length of time, the treasurer is authorized
to make prudent investments for a length of time that will provide a reasonable
return on investment yet ensure that such funds will be available when needed
and will not be exposed to undue risk. The treasurer is authorized to invest
township funds in the following instruments:
a.   Bonds, securities, and other obligations of the United States or an agency
or instrumentality of the United States.
b.   Certificates of Deposit, savings accounts, deposit accounts, or depository
receipts of a financial institution, but only if the financial institution is
eligible to be a depository of funds belonging to the state under a law or rule
of this state or the United States.
c.   Commercial paper rated at the time of purchase within the 2 highest
classifications established by not less than 2 standard rating services and
that matures not more than 270 days after the date of purchase.
d.   Repurchase agreements consisting of instruments listed in subdivision (a).
e.   Bankers’ acceptances if United States banks.
f.   Obligations of this state or any of its political subdivisions that at the
time of purchase are rated as investment grade by not less than one standard
rating service.
g.   Mutual funds registered under the Investment Company Act of 1940, as
amended, Title 1 of Chapter 686, 54 Stat. 789, 15 U.S.C. 80 a-1 to 80 a-3 and
80 a-4 to 80 a-64, with authority to purchase only investment vehicles that are
legal for direct investment by a public corporation. However, a mutual fund is
not disqualified as a permissible investment solely by reason of either of the
following:
i)   The purchase of securities on a when-issued or delayed delivery basis
ii)   The ability to lend portfolio securities as long as the mutual fund
receives collateral at all times equal to at least 100% of the value of the
securities loaned.
iii)   The limited ability to borrow and pledge a like portion of the
portfolio’s assets for temporary or emergency purposes.
Investments in mutual funds shall be limited to securities whose intention is
to maintain a net asset value of $ 1.00 per share. 
h.   Obligations described in subdivision (a) through (g) if purchased through
an interlocal agreement under the Urban Cooperation Act of 1967, PA 7 of 1967,
Ex.Sess., (MCLs 124.501 to 124.512).
i.   Investment pools organized under the Surplus Funds Investment Pool Act, PA
367 of 1982 (MCLs 129.111 to 129.118).
j.   The investment pools organized under the Local Government Investment Pool
Act, PA 121 of 1985 (MCLs 129.141 to 129.150).
   BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, That the objectives of this policy are:
·   Foremost, maintain safety of principal of township funds;
·   Secondarily, maintain a diversified investment portfolio;
·   Maintain adequate liquidity;
·   Achieve a market rate of return on relatively safe investment instruments.
To accomplish these objectives, decisions and actions involving the township’s
investment portfolio shall meet the following criteria:
Safety: Safety of principal is the foremost objective of Williamstown
Township’s investment practices. Investments shall be undertaken in a manner
that seeks to ensure the preservation of capital in the overall investment
portfolio.
Diversifications: The investments shall be diversified by security type, when
practical, and institution, in order that potential losses on individual
securities do not exceed the income generated from the remainder of the
portfolio.
Liquidity: The investment portfolio shall remain sufficiently liquid to meet
all operating requirements that may be reasonably anticipated.
Return on Investment: The investment portfolio shall be designed to attain a
market average rate of return during budgetary and economic cycles while taking
into account investment risk constraints and liquidity needs. Return on
investment is of secondary importance compared to safety and liquidity
objectives. The core of investments is limited to relatively low risk
securities, and a fair rate of return relative to risk is assumed.
   BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, That the treasurer shall make such investments and
only such investments as a prudent person would make in dealing with the
property of another, having in view the preservation of the principal and the
amount and regularity of the income to be derived.
   BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, That the treasurer shall refrain from personal
business activity that could conflict with the proper execution and management
of township investments, or that could impair the treasurer’s ability to make
impartial investment decisions.
   BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, That the treasurer shall annually provide a written
report to the township board concerning the investment of township funds.
   BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, That Township Resolution Number 40 is hereby
replaced.
Seconded by Clerk Davis.
Carried by the following vote.
YES: Supervisor Martin, Clerk Davis, Treasurer LeBlanc, Trustee Wright and
Trustee Wilbrink.
NO: None.
COMPLAINTS
559 E. Sherwood Road
Constable Dahlstrom explained that certified mail had been sent to the owner
regarding this problem. The Constable was instructed to take pictures of the
situation and furnish a report.
820 Gulick Road
Constable Dahlstrom explained that this location was under investigation by the
Ingham County Sheriffs department and further comment would not be prudent at
this time. The Constable will meet with the Supervisor and complete a report.
Constable Dahlstrom also reported on a sign problem in the township and he was
asked to furnish a written report regarding the situation.
Motion by Wright to enter into closed session to discuss the pending litigation
known as Mossholder v Township, Ingham County case # 06254.
Seconded by Wilbrink.
YES:    Wilbrink, Wright, Martin, Davis.
NO: LeBlanc.   
Motion carried.
The regular meeting reconvened at 9:50pm.
Motion by Davis to instruct the township attorney to prepare a settlement
pertaining to the discussions of the closed session. The consent judgment,
agreed to by both parties, will be filed with the court and Register of Deeds.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried Unanimously.
REPORTS
Clerk Report
Davis elaborated on her submitted report.
Treasurer Report
LeBlanc elaborated on his submitted report.
Supervisor Report
Supervisor Martin elaborated on her submitted report.
Supervisor Martin announced that the Graham Memorial dedication would be held
on August 7, 2006 at 7:00pm at the Township Park.
Supervisor Martin asked if any further information was attained regarding the
videotaping of the meetings, and Treasurer LeBlanc said there was no new
information.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 10:04 p.m.
·   Susan Stuwe: Regarding the Baldermann contract and various reports.
·   Ruth Templeton: Regarding the Sexton pay and pension plans for the township
officials.
·   Conrad Taschner: Regarding the exemplary work of the Sexton, Mark Tabor.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 10:10 p.m.
Supervisor Martin reviewed the meeting.
·   Clerk Davis, Supervisor Martin and Walt Aven would meet regarding the
Building Official applicants.
·   Clerk Davis would process the paperwork for the transfer of the cable
franchise and seek legal fees incurred.
·   Clerk Davis would execute the Baldermann contract on behalf of the
Township.
·   Supervisor Martin would process the PA116 Small estate paperwork.
·   Clerk Davis would process the Road Study and Bank Depository Resolutions.
·   The Constable would acquire pictures and furnish reports as directed and
would issue a letter regarding the 820 Gulick situation and furnish a copy to
the Board.
·   Issues discussed at the closed session would proceed under the direction of
the Township Attorney.
Supervisor Martin ordered an adjournment at 10:15 pm.
__________________
Cindy Davis
Township Clerk
July 12, 2006
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 1:00 pm at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the agenda.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer LeBlanc, Trustee Wright and Supervisor
Martin.
Absent: Clerk Davis.
Clerk Davis joined the meeting at 1:10 pm.
Supervisor Martin explained that the purpose of the meeting was to discuss the
township’s Zoning Odinance as a result of the Conditional Rezoning factor.
Discussion ensued with Attorney Spagnuolo and Planning Consultant Chris Doozan
explaining the differences between conditional zoning and conventional zoning.
Discussion ensued.
Motion by Martin to move forward with amending the township zoning ordinance to
accommodate conditional rezoning laws, and to authorize Attorney Spagnuolo and
Planning Consultant Chris Doozan to facilitate said changes and needed
documents.
Seconded by Davis.
Carried unanimously.
Supervisor Martin adjourned the meeting at 2:00 pm.
__________________
Cindy Davis
Township Clerk
July 18, 2006
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 5:30 pm at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the agenda.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer LeBlanc, Trustee Wright
   Clerk Davis and Supervisor Martin.
Absent: None
Motion by Martin to add discussion of the sign ordinance to the agenda.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT
None
REIMBURSEMENT – MILEAGE CLARIFICATION
Discussion ensued and it was agreed to follow state and federal guidelines
regarding reimbursement for mileage based on line item amounts in departmental
budgets. Supervisor Martin will check into the cost factor of rental vehicles
compared to paying mileage.
MILLENIUM CONTRACT
Discussion ensued. Supervisor Martin will schedule a meeting with Rick Clark of
Millennium to discuss the following changes: 26 customers per mile & access
footage 300 feet to 23 customers per mile & access footage 250 feet; change 90
day termination clause to 45 days.
RECORDING DEVICES - OFFICE
Supervisor Martin said that employees have expressed concern regarding the
appropriateness and legality of using recording devices in the township hall.
Discussion ensued.
SIGN ORDINANCE
Supervisor Martin read the provisions in the ordinance regarding political
signs. She said there have been a number of calls regarding this issue and she
wanted to clarify what was expressed in the ordinance.
Supervisor Martin adjourned the meeting at 6:35 pm.
__________________
Cindy Davis
Township Clerk
August 1, 2006
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 PM at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the agenda.
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer LeBlanc, Trustee Wright,
Supervisor Martin and Clerk Davis
Absent: None.
CONSENT AGENDA
§   Minutes of 7/11/06, 7/12/06 and 7/18/06 Meetings
§   Treasurer Report
Motion by Martin to remove the Treasurers Report from the consent agenda.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
§   Building Inspector Report
§   Accounts Payable
Clerk Davis reported that the Board would be approving checks 15389 through
15430 from the General Fund for a total of $27,421.41 and checks 5321 through
5333 from the Cemetery Fund for a total of $4,612.00.
Motion by Davis to approve and pass the consent agenda as amended.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:06 p.m.
·   Wendell Proudfoot: Regarding his opinion of the group Williamston Watch.
·   Gary Gillespie: Regarding the 2005 Clerk appointment.
·   Susan Stuwe: Regarding the posting of the July 12, 2006 meeting.
·   Nancy Williams: Regarding her opinion of Treasurer LeBlanc’s conduct.
·   Bob Lombardini: Regarding his opinion of Treasurer LeBlanc’s conduct and
the work of Supervisor Martin and Clerk Davis.
·   Al LeBlanc: Regarding a scheduled meeting with consultant Baldermann.
·   John Kennedy: Regarding documents submitted by consultant Baldermann.
·   Deanne Smith: Regarding officials coming together as a community.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:34 p.m.
AUDIT REPORT
Aaron Stevens of Abraham & Gaffney reviewed the 2005-06 Audit submitted to the
Township. Discussion ensued.
PLANNING COMMISSION
Planning Commissioner Michael Fielak commented on recent commission business as
outlined in the submitted minutes.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Building Inspector Position
Supervisor Martin explained the selection process that took place and said the
committee is recommending Mark Miller for the position.
Motion by Davis to approve the employment of Mark Miller for the position of
Building Inspector for Williamstown Township. Wages will be set at 60% of the
building permit fee, $65.00 for township board, zoning board of appeals and
planning commission meeting attendance, payment for classes pertaining to
employment and supplies. Inspector will provide his own vehicle and fuel.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
Cable Franchise Agreement
Discussion ensued with Supervisor Martin highlighting changes agreed to by
Millennium.
Motion by Wilbrink to enter into the Cable Franchise Agreement with Millennium
Cable with terms to be adopted as presented in “packet #2”.
Seconded by Davis.
Carried by the following vote:
 
Wilbrink LeBlanc Wright Martin Davis
Yes      Yes     Yes    Yes    Yes
Motion carried.
NEW BUSINESS
FOIA Request - Stuwe
Discussion ensued. No action taken.
Branch School
Discussion ensued regarding the tear off of the current bathroom and restoring
the school with periodic bathrooms. Trustee Wilbrink was asked to attain more
definite plans from the Historical Committee regarding the future uses of the
school.
Resolution # 56 – Fixed Asset Capitalization Policy
Discussion ensued, resulting in the following resolution being offered.
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP
RESOLUTION # 56
FIXED ASSET CAPITALIZATION POLICY
Resolution by Trustee Wright.
WHEREAS, the Board of Williamstown Township, Ingham County, in exercising its
fiduciary responsibilities desires to establish a fix asset capitalization
policy;
NOW THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED that the policy contained herein shall be
considered an official policy of Williamstown Township, Michigan.
FIXED ASSET CAPITALIZATION POLICY
The Township of Williamstown will regard fixed assets as capitalized when all
of the following criteria are met:
   (1)   Assets purchased, built or leased have useful lives of one year or
more.
   (2)   The cost of the asset (including installation) is $5,000 or more.
Multiple assets whose cost is less than $5,000 but the aggregate requestor
total is $5,000 or more are capitalized.
   (3)   The cost of repairing or renovating the asset is $5,000 or more and
prolongs the life of the asset.
The township will regard the purchased software programs as fixed assets
subject to the above capitalization policy, and will amortize over an estimated
useful life of 3 years. Costs associated with software maintenance and customer
support are considered expenditures and will not be capitalized.
Other Considerations:
   (1)   REPAIR is an expenditure that keeps the property in ordinary efficient
operating condition. The cost of the repair does not add to the value or
prolong the life of the asset. All repair expenditures are charged to the
appropriate department and fund.
   (2)   IMPROVEMENTS are expenditures for additions, alterations and
renovations that appreciably prolong the life of the asset, materially increase
its value or adapt it to a different use. Improvements of this nature are
capitalized.
Examples of Repairs vs. Improvements
Repairs = Expenditures            Improvements = Capitalized Assets
All items-life less than one year         Life of more than one year
All items under $5,000            All items $5,000 or more
Property maintenance, wall repair         Property rebuilding
Replacement of machine parts to keep      Replacement of motor and parts that
Machine in normal operating condition      prolong the useful life
Property restoration (rebuilding)
normal operations            Property restoration for something different or
better
Existing building repairs            Building regulation conformity
Replacement of small sections of wiring,      Major replacement of wiring,
lighting,
Pipes or light fixtures            pipes or sewer
Patching walls, minor repair         Installation of floor, wall, roof, wall
floors, etc
painting, etc               wall covering, etc
Patching driveways            New driveway or major repair
Cleaning drapery, carpet, furniture         New drapery, carpets, furniture
 
Depreciation Method – Straight Line over the following useful lives:
Buildings                  40-60 years
Building Improvement            15-30 years
Infrastructure               See State Recommendations attached
Vehicles                  3-5 years
Office Equipment               3-5 years
Computer Equipment            3-5 years
Seconded by Trustee Wilbrink
Carried by the following vote.
YES: Wilbrink, LeBlanc, Wright, Martin, Davis.
NO: None.
COMPLAINTS
Meridian Road
Discussion ensued with Supervisor Martin to obtain the current status from the
Department of Environmental Quality and a copy of the permit from the Drain
Commissioner.
559 E. Sherwood Road
Constable Dahlstrom explained that he was not taking the pictures of the site
as requested by the Board without a letter from the Township Attorney or the
Board. Supervisor Martin asked for a formal report and pictures from the
Constable for the August 15, 2006 meeting.
820 Gulick Road
Discussion ensued. Constable Dahlstrom was instructed to keep on top of this
problem since, as it turns out, even though the Constable inferred last meeting
that there was an ongoing county investigation, there was no investigation by
the County Sheriff. The Constable would also investigate the dragline placed in
the wetlands to determine if it is a violation.
REPORTS
Treasurer Report
LeBlanc elaborated on his submitted report.
Clerk Report
Davis elaborated on her submitted report.
Trustee Wilbrink explained the NIESA ballot proposal for August 8, 2006.
Supervisor Report
Supervisor Martin elaborated on her submitted report and said that the Township
would be receiving a 2.4% increase in revenue sharing from the State of
Michigan.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 9:35 p.m.
·   Katie Lo: Regarding Broadband, pollwatchers and public ads in the
newspaper.
·   Gary Gillespie: Regarding communications with the State Election Bureau.
·   Darrell Brown: Regarding recordkeeping and FOIA overtime.
·   Nancy Ording: Regarding public waiting areas during closed sessions.
·   Ed Noonan: Regarding the status of the Library Fundraising Committee.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 9:53 p.m.
Supervisor Martin reviewed the meeting.
·   Walt Aven would work an interim period with the new Building Inspector.
·   Clerk Davis would process the paperwork for the cable franchise agreement.
·   Trustee Wilbrink would procure more definite plans from the Historical
Commission regarding Branch School.
·   Clerk Davis would process Resolution #56 passed at the meeting.
·   Supervisor Martin would check with DEQ regarding the Meridian Road
complaint.
·   The Constable would acquire pictures and furnish a written report for the
August 15, 2006 meeting as directed regarding the 559 E. Sherwood complaint.
·   The Constable would continue investigation of the 820 Gulick Road complaint
and blight and wetland issues.
Supervisor Martin ordered an adjournment at 9:55 pm.
__________________
Cindy Davis
Township Clerk
August 15, 2006
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 5:30 pm at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the agenda.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer LeBlanc, Trustee Wright
    Clerk Davis and Supervisor Martin.
Absent: None
Motion by Wilbrink to add discussion of the use of the Township Park by the
High School Cross Country team to the agenda.
Seconded by LeBlanc.
Carried unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 5:31 p.m.
∙   Gary Gillespie: Regarding the Township Hall closing early on August 9, 2006
∙   Ruth Templeton: Regarding election results and Township Hall closing early.
∙   Susan Stuwe: Regarding a previous FOIA for credit card statements.
∙   Ed Noonan: Regarding Library Foundation fundraising efforts.
∙   Helen LeBlanc: Regarding electric usage by those videotaping Board
meetings.
∙   Wendell Proudfoot: Regarding his nonuse of electricity when videotaping
Board meetings.
∙   Conrad Taschner: Regarding those who make public comment at the meetings.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 5:42 p.m.
559 Sherwood Road
Discussion ensued and Trustee Wilbrink produced a report from the Constable,
stating that the Constable had a court hearing in Grand Rapids and would not be
at the meeting. Supervisor Martin said that the documents were the same as
previously submitted by the Constable. Trustee Wilbrink stated that it is his
opinion that these were new photos.
850 Gulick Road
Discussion ensued and Trustee Wilbrink said the cars were removed and produced
a report from the Constable, stating that the Constable had a court hearing in
Grand Rapids and would not be at the meeting. Supervisor Martin said that the
documents were the same as previously submitted by the Constable.
Supervisor Martin renewed the request from the meeting of August 1, 2006 for an
updated written report from the Constable, regarding both complaints, for the
September 5, 2006 meeting.
Building Inspection Software
Discussion ensued.
Motion by Wright to authorize the purchase of Equalizer Building Inspection
Software from BS&A Software at a cost of $2,995.00 with funds to be taken from
the Building Inspection budget and a laptop computer at a cost of $1,900.00
with funds to be taken from Township Capital Outlays.
Seconded by Wilbrink.
Carried unanimously.
Aerial Views – County
Supervisor Martin explained that the County now has aerial view photo files for
townships and they can be loaded onto our computers and be used for a variety
of situations. They would be especially useful for the Planning Commission.
Discussion ensued.
Motion by Davis to authorize the purchase of aerial photo files from the county
at a cost of $958.00 with funds to be taken from the Planning Commission
budget.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously
Millennium Transfer
Supervisor Martin explained that the township has been informed that the
transfer from Millennium to Wave Broadband has been cancelled.
Red Cedar Recreation Association Agreement
Discussion ensued with Susan Needler of the Association present. The township
would like three clauses added to the agreement. (1) RCRA will provide an
annual schedule of events to the township. (2) RCRA will clean up area after
each game. (3) RCRA would provide a current certificate of liability insurance
to the township. It was agreed that a revised version of the draft agreement
would be submitted for action at the September 5, 2006 meeting.
Cross Country team’s Use of Township Park
Discussion ensued regarding the use of the Township park/trails for a cross-
country meet on October 4, 2006. Issues of parking and attendance were
discussed and it was agreed to allow the meet to take place subject to the
Board receiving proper documentation from the school system and a current
certificate of liability insurance. Formal action would be slated for the
September 5, 2006 Board meeting, with the documentation to be submitted by
August 30, 2006.
Supervisor Martin adjourned the meeting at 6:50 pm.
__________________
Cindy Davis
Township Clerk
September 5, 2006
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 PM at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the agenda.
 Motion by Davis to add discussion of the Red Cedar Recreation Association
agreement to the agenda after departmental reports.
Seconded by Wilbrink.
Carried unanimously.
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer LeBlanc, Trustee Wright, Supervisor Martin
and Clerk Davis
Absent: None.
CONSENT AGENDA
   Minutes of 8/1/06 and 8/15/06 Meetings
   Treasurer Report  
   Building Inspector Report
   Accounts Payable  
Clerk Davis reported that the Board would be approving checks 15431 through
15524 from the General Fund for a total of $85,134.84 and checks 5334 through
5352 from the Cemetery Fund for a total of $4,124.02.
    Revenue /Expenditure Report  
 Motion by Wright to approve the consent agenda with cited corrections and the
exclusion of the Treasurers Report.
Seconded by Davis.
Carried unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:14 p.m.
    • Ed Noonan: Regarding Library Foundation fundraising information.
   • Rick Williams: Regarding Constable Dahlstrom.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:22 p.m.
Richard Baldermann – Internal Controls Policy Mr. Baldermann was not in
attendance at this time and the Board moved this item to later in the agenda.
PLANNING COMMISSION
Planning Commissioner Michael Fielak commented on recent commission business as
outlined in the submitted minutes and the recommendations from the Commission
to the Board.
Motion by Wright that the site plan for Carol Bergman at 102 Turner Road be
approved as submitted subject to the following conditions:
   • Addition of a note to the plans indicating that no more than 30 animals
may be kept on the site.
   • Soundproofing of the indoor kennel area and the addition of a note to the
plans indicating such.
   • Addition of a note to the plans indicating that dog waste will be picked 4
times daily.
   • Addition of a note to the site plan indicating that the kennel is for
private use only and will not be used for a commercial use.
Seconded by Wilbrink.
Carried unanimously.
Motion by Wright that the special use permit for a non-commercial dog kennel
for Carol Bergman at 102 Turner Road be approved.
Seconded by Wilbrink.
Carried unanimously.
 Motion by Wright that the tentative preliminary plat for Hideaway Woods
Estates-3828 Vanneter Road be approved subject to items 1-5 recommended by
Mckenna Associates in their letter dated July 12, 2006.  
Seconded by Davis.
Carried unanimously.
Motion by LeBlanc that the special land use for Hideaway Woods Estates-3828
Vanneter Road be approved for the proposed Average Lot Size Development.
Seconded by Wilbrink.
Carried unanimously.
Motion by LeBlanc that a canine training facility use be permitted as a special
land use in the AG-SF district, subject to dimensional requirements of section
8.02 CC (1), and the event regulations 8.02.cc (3) (G).
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
It was recommended by the Board that the Planning Commission immediately review
sections 8.02 CC (1) and 8.02.cc (3) (G) of the Zoning Ordinance to determine
whether changes need to be made.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
 Branch School
Clay Braden and Steve Eyke explained various aspects and costs involved with
the roof and window replacements and the reconstruction of the bell tower.
Discussion ensued with the Board stating that the project costs for the roof
were approved in the budget and that the committee should move forward with the
refurbishments.
Hide-a-way Woods Estates
Supervisor Martin explained that the Drain Commission is working on the
reported stoppage in the Hideaway Woods area, and that it may be due to the
slope. It is possible that the Building Inspector could measure the slope.
Building Inspector Miller will contact the Drain Commissioner and further
investigate the problem.
Park Well
Discussion ensued with Jerry Fulcher and Scott Nemeth from the Parks Committee
explaining the revised plan and costs for the well as submitted at tonight’s
meeting.
Motion by Wright to authorize the Park Committee to move forward with the
proposed well project, dated September 5, 2006, at the Township Park, using
funds allocated for such purpose in the township budget.  
Seconded by LeBlanc.
Carried unanimously.
Bentley Road – Repair Estimate
Supervisor Martin, citing the project estimate from the Road Commission,
explained the need for the repairs.
Motion by Wright to authorize the reconstruction of Bentley Road from Barry
Road to the top of the hill north of Barry Road (approximately 600 feet) per
project plans submitted by the Ingham County Road Commission.
Seconded by Davis.
Carried unanimously.
Cable Commission Appointment
Motion by Wright to appoint Marvin W. Thomson, of 1480 Epley Road, to the Cable
Commission.
Seconded by LeBlanc.
Carried unanimously.
Tri-County Regional Planning Commission Request
Discussion ensued regarding this request for matching funds for a grant
proposal that would help cities keep and attract industry.
Motion by Wright to authorize an allocation of $500.00 to the Tri-County
Regional Planning Commission to be used as matching grant money in their
efforts to obtain a Capacity Building Grant from the Federal Economic
Development Administration for the Mid-Michigan region, including Eaton,
Clinton and Ingham counties. Funds for this purpose are to be taken from the
Planning Commission budget.
Seconded by Davis.
Carried unanimously.
COMPLAINTS
820 Gulick Road
Discussion ensued. Constable Dahlstrom explained his work regarding this
complaint. Discussion continued, including comments from neighbor Mike Newman,
who gave his chronological report of events at the named property. Mr. Newman
stated that Constable Dahlstrom had not contacted him and he felt that more
needed to be done to correct the problems at the location. Constable Dahlstrom
would return to the property to check on abandoned cars reported to still be on
the property and Supervisor Martin would contact the Department of
Environmental Quality to see if they would investigate claims of dumping oil
and other petroleum products at the site.
Meridian Road
Supervisor Martin stated that the township has been asked by the DEQ to allow
the agencies’ investigation process continue.
559 E. Sherwood Road
Constable Dahlstrom explained his work regarding this complaint dealing with an
unlawful occupancy of an accessory structure. It was determined that the
property owner and resident of the main house would be notified by certified
mail and that the resident of the accessory structure would receive a hand-
delivered notice from Constable Dahlstrom, which would be ready for delivery on
September 8, 2006.
Richard Baldermann – Internal Controls Policy
In the absence of Mr. Baldermann, discussion ensued regarding the draft
received regarding Internal Controls Policy. Comments from a member of the
public, as well as questions and comments from the Board would be forwarded to
Mr. Baldermann for his review.
 Red Cedar Recreation Association Agreement
Discussion ensued leading to the following motions.
 Motion by Wilbrink to authorize the township to enter into an agreement with
the Red Cedar Recreation Association for use of park facilities and grounds,
subject to conditions as outlined in the contract. The township shall subsidize
township participants in the Association’s sports activities at the rate of
$10.00 per participant.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
Motion by Davis to authorize payment in the amount of $3,010 to the Red Cedar
Recreation Association for subsidization of township participants in the
Association’s Fall 2005 and Winter 2006 sports activities. 
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
REPORTS
Treasurer Report
Treasurer LeBlanc elaborated on his submitted report.
Clerk Report
Clerk Davis elaborated on her submitted report.
 Supervisor Report
Supervisor Martin elaborated on her submitted report.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 10:40 p.m., and there was none.
Supervisor Martin reviewed the meeting.
    • Clerk Davis would speak with Mr. Baldermann regarding issues discussed
tonight.
   • Motions passed regarding Planning Commission issues would be processed.
   • Work at Branch School would move forward.
   • Supervisor Martin would contact the ICRC regarding the Bentley Road
repairs.
   • Clerk Davis would process the Tri-County Regional Planning Commission
request.
   • Supervisor Martin would contact DEQ regarding 820 Gulick Road.
   • The Constable would check and/or ticket abandoned vehicles at 820 Gulick
Road. 
   • Supervisor Martin would send certified mail regarding 559 E. Sherwood.
   • On Friday, September 8, 2006, the Constable would deliver notice to the
tenant of the accessory structure at 559 E. Sherwood.
Supervisor Martin ordered an adjournment at 10:44 pm.
__________________
Cindy Davis
Township Clerk
September 19, 2006
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 5:30 pm at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the agenda.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer LeBlanc, Trustee Wright
Clerk Davis and Supervisor Martin.
Absent: None
Motion by Martin to add discussion of the use of the Township Hall for a
benefit and the Bentley Road Project to the agenda and to move the NPDES item
to immediately following public comment.
Seconded by LeBlanc.
Carried unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 5:32 p.m.
    • Ruth Templeton: Regarding Planning Commission agendas.
   • Susan Stuwe: Regarding Planning Commission appointments
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 5:34 p.m.
NPDES update
Stephanie Barney, Environmental Quality Analyst from the Michigan Department of
Environmental Quality explained that the township is currently not in
compliance regarding Phase II of the storm water permit. Ms. Barney explained
the necessary measures and documents needed to become compliant and said that a
schedule/timeframe should be in place moving the township into the compliant
status. Discussion ensued.
Motion by LeBlanc that Al LeBlanc, Storm Water Manager for Williamstown
Township, draft a Request for Proposals for those wishing to provide assistance
with the completion of this township’s Phase 2 National Pollution Discharge
Elimination System storm water permit and all associated paper work required by
the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality. This Request for Proposals is
to be drafted and ready for the township Board’s review by the October 3, 2006
meeting of the Board.
Seconded by Wilbrink.
Carried unanimously.
 Internal Controls
Richard Baldermann explained the financial policy packet he has prepared for
the Township. Lengthy discussion ensued regarding various aspects of the policy
and it was suggested that any changes would need to be a result of discussions
by those involved in the financial duties of the township. It was also
suggested that the accounting software used by the township was inadequate, and
Supervisor Martin said she would like to discuss that item at next month’
 Treasurer Reports
Supervisor Martin expressed concern regarding no approvals of Treasurer Reports
for the fiscal year. Treasurer LeBlanc said that the work on the reports
continues, and that he would discuss increasing hours and availability with the
Deputy Treasurer to enable a more timely compilation of the reports.
Broadband Internet
Supervisor Martin said that in the interest of time this item would be
discussed next month.
Cemetery Storage Bins
Motion by Wright to authorize payment in the amount of $6215.00 to Jarred
Construction for construction of cemetery storage bins.
Seconded by LeBlanc.
Carried unanimously.
Hall Rental for Benefit
Motion by Davis to waive the township hall rental fee for a benefit for Gail
Taylor of Rowley Road, which will raise funds for his fight against cancer.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
Bentley Road Project
Motion by Wilbrink to approve the contract with the Ingham County Road
Commission in the amount of $34,176.50 for the repairs to Bentley Road.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
Supervisor Martin adjourned the meeting at 7:15 pm.
__________________
Cindy Davis
Township Clerk
October 3, 2006
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 PM at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order.
Supervisor Martin presented retired Building Official Walt Aven with a
Certificate of Appreciation for his many years of service to the Township.
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer LeBlanc, Trustee Wright, Supervisor Martin
and Clerk Davis
Absent: None.
CONSENT AGENDA
·   Minutes of 9/5/06 and 9/19/06 Meetings
·   Treasurer Report-Treasurer Leblanc stated that this month’s report was
correct as a result of other research done on treasury records due to a FOIA
request, and should be accepted.  
Motion by Leblanc to include approval of the Treasurer’s report in the consent
agenda.
Seconded by Wilbrink.
Yes: LeBlanc, Wilbrink.
No: Wright, Martin, Davis.
Motion fails.
·   Building Inspector Report
·   Accounts Payable
Clerk Davis reported that the Board would be approving checks 15525 through
15595 (excluding part of check# 15580 from the General Fund for a total of
$58,641.62 and checks 5353 through 5369 from the Cemetery Fund for a total of
$4,336.67.
·   Revenue /Expenditure Report
Motion by Wright to approve the consent agenda with cited corrections and the
exclusion of the Treasurers Report.
Seconded by Davis.
Carried unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:20 p.m.
·   Wendell Proudfoot: Regarding the political climate in the Township.
·   Katie Lo: Regarding leadership of officials.
·   Susan Stuwe: Regarding gasoline usage.
·   Conrad Taschner: Regarding gasoline usage.
·   Bob Hayes: Township officials working together.
·   Ruth Templeton: Regarding Township finances.
·   Al LeBlanc: Regarding FOIA issues and policies.
·   Rick Williams: Regarding Planning Commission appointments.
·   Darryl Brown: Regarding the lack of teamwork among officials.
·   Wendell Proudfoot: FOIA policies.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:42 p.m.
PLANNING COMMISSION
Planning Commission Chairman Bob Hayes commented on recent commission business
as outlined in the submitted minutes and the recommendations from the
Commission to the Board.
Motion by Wright that the site plan for the collocation of a wireless antenna
for FiberTower Wireless at 162 E. Grand River be approved as recommended.
Seconded by Wilbrink.
Carried unanimously.
Motion by Wright to approve the text amendments to the zoning ordinance as
provided by McKenna Associates, which enables compliance with the Michigan
Zoning Enabling Act.
Seconded by Davis.
Motion by Wilbrink to table this item until the meeting of October 17, 2006.
Seconded by LeBlanc.
Yes: Wilbrink, LeBlanc, Martin, Davis.
No: Wright
Motion carries.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Broadband
Supervisor Martin explained the latest issues regarding Broadband for the
Township residents, and Dave Schaberg was on hand to explain how his company
could implement this project. Discussion ensued.
Motion by Wilbrink to proceed with drafting a contract for Broadband Internet
for township residents knowing that the Township will need to make a financial
commitment to the project.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
Financial Policy Adoption
Discussion ensued with Treasurer Leblanc submitting amendments to the policy.
Motion by Davis to adopt the Financial Administration Policy with inclusion of
the changes discussed at tonight’s meeting.
Seconded by Wright.
Motion by Wilbrink to take up further discussion of this item.
Seconded by LeBlanc.
Carried unanimously.
Discussion took place, including additional revisions of certain sections of
the policy.
Motion by Wilbrink to table the original motion.
Seconded by LeBlanc.
Yes: Wilbrink, LeBlanc.
No: Wright, Martin, Davis.
Motion fails.
Yes: LeBlanc, Wright, Martin, Davis.
No: Wilbrink
Motion carries.
Accounting Software
Motion by Davis to purchase Fund Accounting software from BS&A Software. 
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
NPDES Proposal
Treasurer LeBlanc explained the draft of the Request for proposal for NPDES
compliance. Discussion ensued.
Motion by Wright to authorize Treasurer Leblanc to publish a synopsis of the
NPDES RFP.
Seconded by Wilbrink.
Yes: Wilbrink, LeBlanc, Wright, Davis.
No: Martin
Motion carries.
Treasurer Reports
Discussion ensued regarding timely Treasurer Reports.
NEW BUSINESS
Planning Commission Appointments
Motion by Davis to re-appoint current Commissioners Hayes, Cook and Hoag to a
new three-year appointment on the Planning Commission.
Seconded by Wright.
Yes: LeBlanc, Wright, Martin, Davis.
No: Wilbrink
Motion carries.
COMPLAINTS
It was the consensus of the Board to not enact rules, regulations or
stipulations regarding the mowing of lawns.
Constable Dahlstrom explained his resolutions of the complaints at 559 E.
Sherwood Road and 820 Gulick Road.
Motion by Martin to authorize Steven Eyke to install the through the wall drop
slot and lock box for property tax payments, with said installation costs not
to exceed $375.00.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
REPORTS
Treasurer Report
Treasurer LeBlanc elaborated on his submitted report.
Clerk Report
Clerk Davis elaborated on her submitted report.
Supervisor Report
Supervisor Martin elaborated on her submitted report.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 10:34 p.m.
∙   Darryl Brown: Regarding officials working together.
∙   Roger Phillip: Regarding a past packet of financial information.
∙   Howard Dahlstrom: Regarding a Rotary presentation of funds for the well
house.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 10:36 p.m.
Supervisor Martin reviewed the meeting and ordered an adjournment at 10:37 pm.
__________________
Cindy Davis
Township Clerk
October 17, 2006
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 5:30 pm at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the agenda.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer LeBlanc, Trustee Wright
    Clerk Davis and Supervisor Martin.
Absent: None
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 5:31 p.m.
   None.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 5:31 p.m.
Budget 2006-2007
Supervisor Martin explained the variables involved in composing the budget and
asked that departments begin looking at next year’s needs, revenues and
expenditures to plan for the new budget.
Compensation Commission
Supervisor Martin explained the duties and responsibilities of the proposed
commission. Wilbrink stated that since there was no Annual Meeting the electors
are not able to have input regarding this issue. Davis stated that the
commission is needed to have a fair evaluation of salaries. LeBlanc stated that
the commission was not needed and that the Board should retain this
responsibility.
Motion by Wilbrink to continue to let the Board set salaries.
Seconded by Leblanc.
Yes: Wilbrink, LeBlanc
No: Wright, Martin, Davis.
Motion fails.
Motion by Wright to enact the ordinance, as presented, establishing a Local
Officials Compensation Commission.
Seconded by Davis.
Yes: Wright, Martin, Davis
No: Wilbrink, LeBlanc
Motion passes.
Supervisor Martin asked that each Board Member submit one or two names of
individuals who have not served on a township committee or commission or who
were not employees of the township, for possible appointment to the commission.
Treasurer Reports
Treasurer LeBlanc explained that he would have a report covering the period of
April 2005-March 2006 for the next Board meeting.
Broadband Internet
Supervisor Martin explained that a decision needs to be made whether to use a
flagpole or monopole to affix needed equipment. Discussion ensued and it was
the consensus of the Board to use a monopole. The proposed contractor can help
with the location and placement of the monopole for maximum capability.
NPDES Kalamazoo
LeBlanc commented on the lawsuit filed by Kalamazoo regarding alleged over-
regulation by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, and said that
if the lawsuit was successful, it would save the township and government
entities across the state a large amount of money.
Motion by Wright to donate $2,000.00 to the legal fund that has undertaken this
lawsuit.
Seconded by Wilbrink.
Carried Unanimously.
Supervisor Martin adjourned the meeting at 7:06 pm.
__________________
Cindy Davis
Township Clerk
November 14, 2006
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 PM at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order.
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer LeBlanc, Trustee Wright,
Supervisor Martin and Clerk Davis
Absent: None.
CONSENT AGENDA
·   Minutes of 10/3/06 and 10/17/06 Meetings
·   Building Inspector Report
·   Accounts Payable
·   Revenue /Expenditure Report
Motion by Wright to approve the consent agenda, with corrections to the
minutes, and without the township’s accounts payable listing.
Seconded by Wilbrink.
Carried unanimously.
John Midgely, Ingham County Road Commission Director
Mr. Midgely explained the County’s budget problems and said the 2007 funding
for the local road matching program would be eliminated. He urged the Board to
contact their legislators in Lansing and urge them to consider an increase in
the user fees on gasoline and diesel taxes.
Michelle Reardon, MSU Extension Land Policy Educator
Ms. Reardon explained the Health Impact Assessment tool developed by MSU
Extension, which is a geographic information based project that evaluates
variables of the site plan process. The tool has been designed to accommodate
the needs of planning commissions especially in rural communities, and
Williamstown Township has been invited to participate in the field test.
Discussion ensued and it was agreed that Ms. Reardon would give a presentation
to the Planning Commission at their next meeting.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:42 p.m.
·   Brian Slater: Regarding the NPDES assistance project.
·   Laura Swartz: Regarding discussions with, and service from, the Treasurer.
·   Nancy Williams: Regarding her recent FOIA request.
·   Katie Lo: Regarding the November 7th election.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:56 p.m.
PLANNING COMMISSION
Planning Commission Chairman Bob Hayes commented on recent commission business
as outlined in the submitted minutes and the recommendations from the
Commission to the Board, including the approval of the revised Master Plan.
Motion by Wright to adopt the revised Master Plan as submitted by the Planning
Commission.
Seconded by Davis.
Motion by Wilbrink to table this item until December.
Seconded by LeBlanc.
   Yes: Wilbrink, LaBlanc.
   No: Wright, Martin, Davis.
   Motion fails.
Yes: Wilbrink, LeBlanc, Wright, Martin, Davis.
No: none
Motion carries.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Text Amendment Approval - Michigan Zoning Enabling Act.
Motion by Wilbrink to approve the text amendments to the zoning ordinance in
compliance with the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, as submitted by the Planning
Commission.
Seconded by LeBlanc.
Carried unanimously.
Broadband - Contract
Supervisor Martin explained the latest issues regarding Broadband for the
Township residents, and Dave Schaberg was on hand to explain how his company
could implement this project. Discussion ensued including comments regarding
the placement of the monopole and soil boring tests for same.
Motion by Wilbrink to approve soil borings for the proposed wireless internet
monopole location, and to forward revisions to proposed wireless internet
contract to the township’s attorney for review.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
NPDES Proposal
Treasurer LeBlanc explained that the bids were received and reviewed.
Discussion ensued.
Motion by LeBlanc to table the discussion of the requests for proposal
submissions soliciting assistance with the National Pollution Discharge
Elimination System until the first meeting of December.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
Treasurer Reports
Discussion ensued regarding the submitted reports, with Clerk Davis stating
that she would like to approve the reports without the footnotes.
Motion by Wilbrink to accept the revised Treasurer’s Report, covering the
period April 2005 through September 2006, as submitted.
Seconded by LeBlanc.
Yes: Wilbrink, LeBlanc, Wright,
No: Martin, Davis.
Motion carries
NEW BUSINESS
Budget Amendments - Roads
Motion by Martin to amend the budget by moving $31,000.00 from the General Fund
to line item 441-814.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
Library Resolution of Support
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP RESOLUTION # 57
RESOLUTION OF SUPPORT - LIBRARY FOUNDATION
Resolution by LeBlanc.
WHEREAS, the Township Board of Williamstown Township, County of Ingham, State
of Michigan (the “Township”), deems it advisable and necessary to provide for
the acquisition and construction of a library building and the necessary site
therefore for the combined use of the Township, the City of Williamston and the
Township of Wheatfield; and
  WHEREAS, the Williamston Community Library Foundation (the Foundation)
established November 20, 2000, is coordinating fundraising efforts to construct
a new library; and
  WHEREAS, the purpose of the Foundation shall be to serve the informational
needs of the people of the City of Williamston, Williamstown Township,
Wheatfield Township, and such other geographic areas as from time to time may
be added; to promote the library system in the geographic area, its facilities
and service; to fund capital and special projects in furtherance thereof; to
take and hold by devise, gift, purchase or lease, either absolutely or in
trust, objects of historical or natural interest to be preserved; to receive
and administer funds and function as and exercise all the powers of a Michigan
non-profit corporation known as a foundation, exclusively, however for
charitable and educational purposes as such purposes are set forth in Section
501 ( c) (3) of the Internal Revenue Code; and, to carry out such purposes, to
take and hold by bequest, devise, gift, purchase, or lease, absolutely or in
trust, any property permitted by law, whether real, personal or mixed, to
convey such property and to invest and reinvest the principal thereof in
accordance with law and to deal with and expend the principal or income
thereof, or both, and to hold and administer all such property and
accumulations thereof all to effectuate and carry out said charitable purposes;
and
  WHEREAS, the Foundation intends to build a new public Library for the
Williamston Community; and
  WHEREAS, such a project will provide the community with an improved and much
needed new library building and services; and
  WHEREAS, the Foundation has conducted fundraising efforts already to
establish a building fund for a new library; and
  WHEREAS, the Foundation intends to build the new Library entirely with
private funds and grants, hoping to avoid any taxation;
 NOW THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED that the Township supports the Foundation’s
efforts to construct a new Library in Williamston.
  BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that the Township is not committing public funds to
the Foundation and,
 BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that the Township encourages all persons to assist the
Foundation in its fundraising efforts;
Resolution supported by Wilbrink.
AYES: Wilbrink, LeBlanc, Wright, Martin, Davis
NAYS: None
RESOLUTION DECLARED ADOPTED.
COMPLAINTS
Constable Dahlstrom explained his resolution of the complaint at 820 Gulick
Road, stating that the partial vehicle had no VIN number and could not be
removed.
REPORTS
Treasurer Report
Treasurer LeBlanc elaborated on his submitted report.
Supervisor Report
Supervisor Martin elaborated on her submitted report.
Motion by Martin to amend the township hall office hours for the day before
Thanksgiving to 10:00am to 2:00pm.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
Clerk Report
Clerk Davis thanked the township and its residents for the great experience
during her tenure as Township Clerk. She presented a report detailing the
current status of outstanding issues in the Clerks Office for the Board and the
new Clerk to address. She has taken a position with the Michigan Township
Association and wished the township and its officials the best of luck in the
future.
Clerk Davis presented corrected amounts for the accounts payable listing,
leading to the following motion.
Motion by Wilbrink to approve payment of township checks 15696 through 15714 in
the total amount of $311,935.33, as submitted by Clerk Davis.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
The board expressed thanks and gratitude to Clerk Davis on her great work
during her time with the township.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 10:20 p.m.
·   Helen LeBlanc: Regarding the Treasurer’s Report and FOIA issues.
·   Bob Hayes: Thanked Clerk Davis for her outstanding service to the township.
·   Mark Miller: Thanked Clerk Davis for her assistance and work as Clerk.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 10:26 p.m.
Supervisor Martin reviewed the meeting and ordered an adjournment at 10:27 pm.
__________________
Cindy Davis
Township Clerk
November 21, 2006
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 5:30 pm at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin welcomed the new elected officials, Clerk Howard Dahlstrom and
Trustees Bob Hayes and Rick Williams, called the meeting to order and reviewed
the agenda.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer LeBlanc, Trustee Wright, Trustee Hayes,
Trustee Williams
    Clerk Dahlstrom and Supervisor Martin.
Absent: None
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 5:32 p.m.
∙   Katie Lo: Regarding the end of derisiveness during public comment.
∙   Nancy Williams: Regarding the Treasurers Report and her FOIA request.
∙   Ruth Templeton: Regarding previous Clerk reports.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 5:40 p.m.
Budget 2006-2007
Supervisor Martin explained the variables involved in composing the budget and
asked that departments assigned to various components of the budget begin
looking at next year’s needs, revenues and expenditures to plan for the new
budget. Submissions from departments should be submitted to her by December 5,
2006, so discussions can take place at the December 19, 2006 meeting and the
second meeting of January. A public hearing could be scheduled for the February
meeting.
Committee Assignments
Supervisor Martin explained the various committee assignments made to Board
members and discussion ensued with Board member committee assignments revised
as follows.
Committee            Board Member     Committee               Board Member
Cable Commission/    Williams         Looking Glass Watershed Williams/ Hayes
Broadband
Capital City Rifle   Wilbrink         Red Cedar Watershed     Williams/ Hayes
Club
Cemetery             Martin/Wright    Red Cedar Recreation    Hayes
Health Impact        Wright           Transportation          Martin/Wright
Assessment Project
Historical Committee Wilbrink/LeBlanc TriCounty Regional      Martin
                                      Planning
Ingham Co. Assessors Martin           Williamston             Dahlstrom
Assn.                                 Beautification
Ingham Co.           As needed        Williamston School      Hayes
Commissioners                         Board
Ingham Co. Drain     LeBlanc          Williamston Chamber of  Williams/Martin
Commission                            Comm.
Ingham Co. Road      Hayes/Wright     City of Williamston     Martin/Dahlstrom
Commission
Library Foundation   As needed        Zoning Board of Appeals Martin
NIESA                Wilbrink
Parks                Dahlstrom/Wright
Meeting Structure
Supervisor Martin explained that in an effort to have more productive meetings,
she will have a draft agenda for the next scheduled meeting available at each
session. Members will be allowed ample time for research and questions
regarding agenda items.
Supervisor Martin distributed additional information regarding wireless
internet and information regarding credit card use for tax payments.
Supervisor Martin adjourned the meeting at 7:10 pm.
__________________
Howard Dahlstrom
Township Clerk
December 5, 2006
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 PM at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order.
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer LeBlanc, Trustee Wright, Trustee Hayes,
Trustee Williams
    Clerk Dahlstrom and Supervisor Martin.
Motion by LeBlanc to add a discussion of FOIA labor charges to the agenda under
new business.
Seconded by Wilbrink.
Yes: LeBlanc, Wilbrink, Wright, Hayes, Williams, Dahlstrom.
No: Martin
Motion carries.
CONSENT AGENDA
∙   Minutes of 10/3/06 and 10/17/06 Meetings
∙   Treasurer Report
∙   Building Inspector Report
∙   Accounts Payable
∙   Revenue /Expenditure Report
Motion by LeBlanc to approve the consent agenda with corrections to the
minutes.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:19 p.m.
∙   State Representative Mark Meadows: Introduction.
∙   Cindy Davis: Regarding Payroll liability payments.
∙   Nancy Williams: Regarding responsibilities of the Clerk & Treasurer.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:24 p.m.
PLANNING COMMISSION
Planning Commission Chairman Michael Fielek commented on recent commission
business as outlined in the submitted minutes and the recommendations from the
Commission to the Board, including the approval of the revisions to the zoning
ordinance regarding conditional zoning.
Motion by Wright to approve the amendments to the zoning ordinance, as
recommended by the Planning Commission, to accommodate conditional zoning.
Seconded by Hayes.
Yes: LeBlanc, Wright, Martin, Hayes, Williams.
No: Wilbrink, Dahlstrom.
Motion carries.
Motion carries.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Broadband - Contract
Supervisor Martin explained the latest issues regarding Broadband for the
Township residents. Discussion ensued including comments regarding the
placement of the monopole and soil boring tests for same. Comments also
included the possibility of using a tower located at the high school.
Supervisor Martin will check into the high school tower possibility and speak
with the township attorneys regarding the contract issue.
NPDES Proposal
Treasurer LeBlanc explained that the lawsuit filed by Kalamazoo County was
successful, but the feeling is that the MDEQ will appeal. Discussion ensued
regarding the proposals for assistance that had been received.
Motion by LeBlanc to accept the proposal from Wade-Trim, as submitted,
regarding assistance with the NPDES compliance project.
Seconded by Wilbrink.
Yes: LeBlanc, Wilbrink, Dahlstrom..
No: Wright, Martin, Hayes, Williams.
Motion FAILS.
Compensation Commission
Motion by Martin to appoint the following to the Local Officials Compensation
Commission.
§   Ethel Anderson, 1818 Harvey Drive
§   Wilbur McNich, 1260 Epley Rd.
§   Dave Robinson, 3910 N. Williamston Rd.
§   Andy Sheets, 294 Germany Rd.
§   Sally Martin Stewart, 5950 Zimmer Rd.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
NEW BUSINESS
Board of Review Appointments
Motion by Martin to re-appoint Gerald Eidt (Chairman) and Robert Tetzlaff and
to appoint Ed Timm to the Township Board of Review for two-year terms.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
Planning Commission Appointments
Motion by Wilbrink to appoint Rod Imhoff to the Township Planning Commission to
fill the balance of the term vacated by Maurice Veenstra.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.   
Motion by Hayes to appoint Gerardus Schultink to the Township Planning
Commission to fill the balance of the term vacated by Bob Hayes.
Seconded by Williams.
Yes: LeBlanc, Wright, Martin, Hayes, Williams, Dahlstrom.
No: Wilbrink,
Motion carries
Cemetery Data
Motion by Wilbrink to request a two-page electronic version sample of cemetery
data from Mr. Wayne Fate to forward to our current cemetery software company to
determine if it can be imported to the current software. If it is compatible,
the complete electronic version of the cemetery data will be purchased from Mr.
Fate at a cost of $2000.00.
Seconded by Hayes.
Carried unanimously.
Constable
Discussion ensued regarding the position of Constable, which is now vacant.
Clerk Dahlstrom will talk with the County Sheriff to see if there is a
possibility of using their services.
Signature Resolution
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP RESOLUTION #58
BANK SIGNATORIES
Resolution by Treasurer LeBlanc.
Be it resolved that all bank account and money market account signature cards
will be submitted with four authorized signers. These signers will be the
current Clerk and Deputy Clerk, and the current Treasurer and Deputy Treasurer.
It will be the policy of this township that any check or withdrawal order will
require two signatures: one from the Clerk department and one from the Treasury
department, and one of these two signatures must be that of the Clerk or the
Treasurer. Because her term of office has ended, Cindy Davis’s name will be
removed from the signature cards. Whenever possible, investment accounts such
as bank certificates of deposit will be set up as book entry instruments in the
name of Williamstown Township and without signature cards. New signature cards
will be submitted with the following authorized signers:
Clerk: Howard M. Dahlstrom Deputy Clerk: Robert J. Cwiertniewicz
Treasurer: Albert LeBlanc Deputy Treasurer: Harold P. Husse
Supported by: Trustee Martin Wright
Roll call vote:
 
Supervisor Mickey Martin: yes Trustee Martin Wright: yes
Clerk Howard Dahlstrom: yes   Trustee Bob Hayes: yes
Treasurer Albert LeBlanc: yes Trustee Rick Williams: yes
Trustee Frans Wilbrink: yes
 
Resolution Adopted.
Depository Resolution
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP RESOLUTION #59
DEPOSITORY DESIGNATION RESOLUTION
Resolution by Treasurer LeBlanc.
WHEREAS, the Board of Williamstown Township, Ingham County, in exercising its
fiduciary responsibilities desires to safeguard the funds of the township that
may be invested from time to time, and
WHEREAS, public Act 77 of 1989 (MCL 41.77) requires that the township board
designate the banks or depositories for the money belonging to the township,
including the time for which the deposits shall be made and all details for
carrying into effect the authority given in this act, and
THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED, That the board approves the following institutions or
their successor institutions through merger and/or acquisition as depositories
of township funds: Chase Bank, Republic Bank, Independent Bank, Fifth/Third
Bank, Capitol National Bank, Flagstar Bank, Mason State Bank, Dart Bank,
National City Bank; Charter One Bank, National Association; Citizens Bank, and
LaSalle Bank Midwest National Association.
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, That the treasurer shall recommend financial
institutions for approval for the safekeeping of township funds based on an
evaluation of the performance and solvency of the institution, as well as past
performance in exercising due care and prudence in managing the custody of
township funds held in trust, if applicable. The treasurer shall periodically
evaluate approved and potential financial depositories and shall make
recommendations as to appropriate changes in approved depositories when
warranted.
Supported by: Trustee Martin Wright
Roll call vote:
 
Supervisor Mickey Martin: yes Trustee Martin Wright: yes
Clerk Howard Dahlstrom: yes   Trustee Bob Hayes: yes
Treasurer Albert LeBlanc: yes Trustee Rick Williams: yes
Trustee Frans Wilbrink: yes
 
Resolution Adopted.
Bar Code Scanner
Motion by LeBlanc to approve the purchase of an ImageTeam 3800 bar code
scanner, from BS&A Software to assist in the processing of tax payments, at a
cost of $250.00.
Seconded by Hayes.
Carried unanimously.
FOIA Policy Charges
Treasurer LeBlanc explained the need for implementation of the current FOIA
policy in the area of labor charges. A considerable amount of time was spent
preparing for a FOIA request to view documents from the Treasurer’s Office, and
the Clerk did not allow labor charges to be assessed. Discussion ensued and it
was stated that anyone who wanted changes to a township policy should submit a
revised policy to the Board.
REPORTS
Clerk Report
Clerk Dahlstrom commented on QuickBook software updates.
Treasurer Report
Treasurer LeBlanc elaborated on his submitted report.
Supervisor Report
Supervisor Martin elaborated on her submitted report, and said that work will
begin on the 2007-08 township and cemetery budgets at the December 19, 2006
meeting.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 9:34 p.m.
∙   Darryl Brown: Regarding zoning and planning consultants.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 9:36 p.m.
Supervisor Martin reviewed the meeting:
§   Clerk Dahlstrom would publish the notice of the zoning amendment adoption.
§   Clerk Dahlstrom would talk with the Sheriff regarding Constable issues.
and ordered an adjournment at 9:37 pm.
         
Howard M. Dahlstrom
Township Clerk
December 19, 2006
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 5:30 pm at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer LeBlanc, Trustee Wright, Trustee Hayes,
Trustee Williams
    Clerk Dahlstrom and Supervisor Martin.
Absent: None
Motion by Martin to add discussion of the waiver of a cremains burial fee to
the agenda.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 5:32 p.m.
∙   Nancy Williams: Regarding the Treasurers work.
∙   Ruth Templeton: Regarding office hours of elected officials.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 5:35 p.m.
Budget 2007-2008
Discussion continued with a line-by-line analysis of the proposed budget. The
following are changes made by consensus to expenditure individual line items
during discussion.
 
Line item                        Proposed Revised to:
101-101-910-Insurance            6500.00  10600.00
101-171-703-Supervisor Assistant 10500.00 10000.00
101-215-703-Deputy Clerk         15600.00 10000.00
 
Motion by Dahlstrom to table further work on the budget to a special meeting to
be held on Thursday, December 28, 2006 at 5:30 p.m.
Seconded by Williams.
Carried unanimously.
Motion by Martin to waive the cremation fee for the late Cemetery Board
Chairman, Conrad Taschner.
Seconded by Dahlstrom.
Carried unanimously.
Motion by Martin to purchase a hard copy of all cemetery data compiled by Mr.
Wayne Fate at a cost of $2000.00.
Seconded by Dahlstrom.
Yes: Wright, Martin, Hayes, Williams, Dahlstrom.
No: LeBlanc, Wilbrink,
Motion carries
Supervisor Martin adjourned the meeting at 7:25 pm.
__________________
Howard M. Dahlstrom
Township Clerk
December 28, 2006
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 5:30 pm at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer LeBlanc, Trustee Wright, Trustee Hayes,
Trustee Williams
    Clerk Dahlstrom and Supervisor Martin.
Absent: None
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 5:32 p.m.
∙   Ruth Templeton: Regarding 457 plans for employees.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 5:34 p.m.
Motion by LeBlanc to call for a formal vote on changes made to the proposed
budget during discussions for clarification purposes.
Seconded by Wilbrink.
Yes: LeBlanc, Wilbrink, Dahlstrom.
No: Martin, Wright, Hayes, Williams.
Motion FAILS.
Supervisor Martin stated that she would ask for a majority consensus on any
change to the proposed numbers.
Budget 2007-2008
Discussion continued with a line-by-line analysis of the proposed budget. The
following are changes made by a majority consensus to individual expenditure
line items during discussion.
Line item                            Proposed Revised to:
101-101-910-Insurance                6500.00  10600.00 (12-19-06)
101-171-703-Supervisor Assistant     10500.00 10000.00 (12-19-06)
101-215-703-Deputy Clerk             15600.00 10000.00 (12-19-06)
101-253-705-Treasury Assistant       5000.00  1000.00 (12-19-06)
101-253-728-Treasurer Supplies       1895.00  1800.00 (12-19-06)
REVISIONS ENACTED AT 12-28-06 MEETING
101-253-980-Treasurer Capital Outlay 1050.00  500.00
101-253 –Posting data on Internet  3000.00  0
101-247-730 BOR Postage              39.00    50.00
101-371-702 Inspector Reimbursement  780.00   800.00
101-209-803-Outside Assessor         14000.00 13800.00
101-209-810-Twp reassessment         8000.00  7000.00
101-265-727-Cleaning Supplies        600.00   900.00
101-265-805-Custodian                8000.00  7500.00
101-265-910-Insurance                9500.00  10000.00
101-265-920-Utilities                15500.00 16000.00
101-294-702-Office Receptionist      18000.00 20000.00
101-294-920-Telephone                3600.00  3800.00
101-294-930-Repairs & Maintenance    8000.00  10000.00
101-294-705-Website                  6000.00  5000.00
101-301-703-Metro Narcotics Squad    500.00   1000.00
101-400-702-Planning Comm. Salaries  14040.00 10000.00
101-400-728-Planning Comm. Supplies  100.00   1000.00
101-441-816-Recycling                4200.00  8000.00
101-751-881-Park Lands               20616.00 21000.00
101-751-882-Historical Comm.         18300.00 19000.00
101-751-955-Recreation Miscellaneous 1800.00  2500.00
101-851-714 Health Insurance         6540.00  8000.00
 
It was suggested to add a line item for fuel under “Buildings & Grounds”.
Changes were also made to the proposed cemetery budget.
Line item                      Proposed Revised to:
209-000-604-Foundations (Rev.) 3000.00  3200.00
209-000-605-Opening & Closing  17250.00 13000.00 (incl 2000.00 for cremains)
(Rev.)
209-000-665-Interest (Rev.)    0        3500.00
209-276-703-Sexton (Exp.)      10000.00 18000.00
209-276-704-Temp help (Exp.)   5000.00  4000.00
209-276-711 Soc Sec. (Exp.)    1000.00  1500.00
209-276-714 Medicare (Exp.)    500.00   600.00
Supervisor Martin said that she would note all the changes to both budgets and
distribute a revised draft budget at the January 9, 2007 meeting.
Supervisor Martin adjourned the meeting at 9:30 pm.
____________________
Howard M. Dahlstrom
Township Clerk
2007 Meeting Minutes
January 9, 2007
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 PM at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order.
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer LeBlanc, Trustee Wright, Trustee Hayes,
Trustee Williams
    Clerk Dahlstrom and Supervisor Martin.
CONSENT AGENDA
·   Minutes of 12/5/06, 12/19/06 and 12/28/06 Meetings
·   Treasurer Report
·   Building Inspector Report
·   Accounts Payable
·   Revenue /Expenditure Report
Motion by Hayes to approve the consent agenda, with corrections, and without
the township’s revenue-expenditure listing (profit-loss report).
Seconded by Williams.
Carried unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:10 p.m.
·   Cindy Davis: regarding tax payments and an upcoming Planning Commission
public hearing for a special use permit.
·   Nancy Williams: regarding conflict of interest issues for some Board
members.
·   Helen LeBlanc: regarding conflict of interest issues for some Board
members.
·   Roger Philip: regarding comments about conflict of interest issues and the
submission of documents regarding the past AG Edwards account.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:20 p.m.
PLANNING COMMISSION
Planning Commission Chairman Michael Fielek commented on recent commission
business as outlined in the submitted minutes of the December 19, 2006 meeting.
He stated that he attended the Meridian Planning Commission meeting and the
conditional rezoning was approved for the Mayberry Homes site which borders the
township. Supervisor Martin stated that this might be a type of issue that a
joint (area-wide) planning commission, as is currently being explored, might
discuss to see the regional effects of a development a government entity might
be considering. Discussion ensued regarding the effect of a Board motion
against the rezoning, and Supervisor Martin stated that she would draft a
resolution for the next Board meeting.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Budget 2008-General Fund & Cemetery
Supervisor Martin explained the draft budgets compiled by the Board for the
township and cemetery.
Motion by Wright to set a public hearing for the 2008 township budget for
Tuesday, February 20, 2007 at 5:30 p.m.
Seconded by Williams.
Carried unanimously.
Motion by Wright to set a public hearing for the 2008 cemetery budget for
Tuesday, February 20, 2007 at 5:30 p.m.
Seconded by Williams.
Carried unanimously.
Constable
Clerk Dahlstrom said that he contacted the Ingham County Sherriff and they
would be able to assist with running plates on abandoned vehicles and tax
collection to varying degrees. Supervisor Martin stated that Building Inspector
Mark Miller is willing to work as the zoning enforcement officer, but a plan
for duties and compensation rates would have to be developed.
Motion by Hayes to authorize Supervisor Martin and Building Official Miller to
develop a plan for rates regarding enforcement officer duty.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
Drop Box
Treasurer LeBlanc explained his motion regarding the installation of the new
white drop box. Discussion ensued regarding the new drop slot near the front
entrance, and its handicap accessibility. Treasurer LeBlanc said that the slot
is at the same level as the front door handles.
Motion by LeBlanc that the white Salsbury Industries drop box be installed as
soon as possible on the white pedestal that has been prepared for it by the U.
S. Mail box in front of the township hall, and that the old black drop box by
the U. S. Mail box be removed.
Seconded by Wilbrink.
Carried unanimously.
Space Heater & Water Heaters
Treasurer LeBlanc explained his motion regarding the need for a space heater
for the conference room.
Motion by LeBlanc to authorize the purchase of a fast acting electric heater
for no more than $ 50.00 for use in the township’s small conference room. This
heater is to be paid for from account 101-294-980, Township Office, Capital
Outlay.
Seconded by Hayes.
Carried unanimously.
Discussion ensued regarding bids received for hot water heaters, and it was
decided that the issue should be re-priced to include the kitchen sink and the
two bathroom sinks.
NEW BUSINESS
Cable Commission Appointments
Motion by Martin to appoint Nancy Williams and Kurt Guter to the Cable
Commission.
Seconded by Hayes.
Roll Call Vote:
Yes: Wright, Martin, Hayes, Williams
No: LeBlanc, Wilbrink, Dahlstrom.
Motion carries.
Township Park Dog Play Area
Discussion ensued regarding the possibility of a fenced dog play area for the
park, with issues such as fence costs, donations and liability premiums being
considered. It was decided to send the issue back to the Parks Committee to see
if they have received any interest in the project before proceeding with
further discussion.
Building Permit Policy
Discussion ensued regarding the expiration policy for building permits.
Inspector Miller explained data he received from the State that allows for a
township policy to be developed.
Motion by Hayes to authorize Supervisor Martin and Building Official Miller
develop a resolution regarding building permit deadline policies.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
Meals on Wheels
Discussion ensued regarding a request for support from the Meals on Wheels
program.
Motion by Wilbrink to amend the 2007 budget by transferring $1500.00 from the
contingency fund to line item 101-751-955 (Recreation miscellaneous).
Seconded by Hayes.
Carried unanimously.
Motion by Wilbrink to donate $1500.00 from line item 101-751-955 (Recreation
miscellaneous) to the Meals on Wheels program.
Seconded by Hayes.
Carried unanimously
REPORTS
Treasurer Report
Treasurer LeBlanc elaborated on his submitted report.
Trustee Reports
Trustee Wright stated that he is compiling data regarding a revamped recycling
program.
Trustee Wilbrink commented on NIESA issues.
Trustee Williams commented on an upcoming Cable Commission meeting & stormwater
compliance issues.
Trustee Hayes commented on the possibility of revamping the public comment
portions of the meetings and asked Boardmembers to think about ways to
streamline the meeting, but still afford public comment.
Supervisor Report
Supervisor Martin elaborated on her submitted report and mentioned items for
the next agenda.
Trustee Hayes mentioned the items on the revenue/expenditure reports that were
over budget. Discussion ensued and it was agreed that Supervisor Martin and
Clerk Dahlstrom would discuss those items and prepare an explanation for the
next meeting.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 9:25 p.m.
·   Ruth Templeton: regarding Compensation Commission meeting dates and payroll
liability issues.
·   Cindy Davis: regarding an upcoming special use permit hearing and Clerk
training in the area of financial responsibilities.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 9:33 p.m.
Supervisor Martin reviewed the meeting and ordered an adjournment at 9:35 pm.
__________________
Howard M. Dahlstrom
Township Clerk
January 16, 2007
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 5:30 pm at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer LeBlanc, Trustee Wright, Trustee Hayes,
Trustee Williams
    Clerk Dahlstrom and Supervisor Martin.
Absent: None
Motion by Martin to add discussion of a resolution to oppose the rezoning of
part of Meridian Township for a Mayberry Homes project to the agenda.
Seconded by Wilbrink.
Carried unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 5:32 p.m.
·   Helen LeBlanc: regarding the senior citizens agreement and Williamston pool
donations.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 5:36 p.m.
Wireless Internet Contract
Discussion ensued regarding the wireless internet project with Supervisor
Martin stating that she would be meeting with T-Mobile to discuss the use of
the monopole they will be placing at the high school. Attorney Spagnuolo cited
his suggested changes to the contract and discussion ensued. Performance
bonding for the vendor was discussed and Attorney Spagnuolo said that he would
check to see if bonding is available for such businesses. Supervisor Martin
will report back to the Board regarding the meeting with T-Mobile and Attorney
Spagnuolo will incorporate the agreed upon changes into the contract and
forward the completed document to Supervisor Martin.
Discussion ensued regarding conflict of interest issues for elected officials.
Attorney Spagnuolo said that the general rule of thumb is that members should
recuse themselves even if there is an appearance of impropriety. It was the
consensuses of the body to have Attorney Spagnuolo investigate rules of
procedure for elected officials when there may be a conflict of interest.
Discussion ensued regarding opposition to the rezoning of part of Meridian
Township for a Mayberry Homes project, leading to the following resolution.
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP RESOLUTION #60
OPPOSING THE PROPOSED MAYBERRY HOMES REZONING
Resolution by Treasurer LeBlanc.
Whereas, the Planning Commission of Williamstown Township adopted a Master Plan
for Williamstown Township on October 17, 2006, and such plan was accepted by
the Williamstown Township Board of Trustees on November 14, 2006, and
Whereas, a stated goal of the Master Plan is to preserve “rural open space,
farmlands, and environmental quality” and, in order to meet its stated goals,
the Master Plan “concentrates the most intensive development along Grand River
Avenue” and “calls for agricultural uses and low-density residential
development in the northern two-thirds of the Township;” and
Whereas, the lands in Williamstown Township north of Haslett Road and adjacent
to Meridian Township are designated on the Future Land Use Map as Agricultural
Preserve, with a minimum lot size of 40 acres, and the current zoning
classification of these lands requires a minimum lot size of 40 acres, and
Whereas, a request for rezoning has been presented to Meridian Township by
Mayberry Homes to convert 141.36 acres on the north side of Haslett Road and
adjacent to Williamstown Township from RR, Rural Residential zoning to RA,
Single-Family Medium Density zoning, and
Whereas, the 2005 Charter Township of Meridian Master Plan designates the
rezoning site for Agricultural-Residential use, with recommended minimum lot
sizes of 2 acres, and
Whereas, the requested RA zoning district permits residential development at 3
½ units per acre, and
Whereas, the anticipated result of rezoning the Meridian Township lands as
requested would be to significantly increase development pressure on
agricultural lands in Williamstown Township by introducing a growth center in
the northerly part of the Township, and
Whereas, development consistent with that permitted under the requested zoning
classification could erode the basic concept of the Williamstown Township
Master Plan, and
Whereas, the Williamstown Township Planning Commission has reviewed the
proposal and has unanimously approved a motion to strongly recommend that the
Mayberry Homes site not be rezoned, in consideration of the potential negative
impacts the rezoning would have on quality of life and the adopted Master Plan
of Williamstown Township.
Now, Therefore, be it resolved that the Board of Trustees of Williamstown
Township, in consideration of the potential deleterious impacts the rezoning
would have, strenuously objects to the proposed Mayberry Homes rezoning
proposal.
Be it Further Resolved, that the Board of Trustees of Williamstown Township
strongly urges Meridian Township to adhere to the adopted Charter Township of
Meridian Master Plan and maintain the land use designated on the Meridian
Township Future Land Use Map.
Be it Further Resolved, that the Board of Trustees of Williamstown Township
recommends that Meridian Township deny the request for rezoning.
Seconded by: Trustee Bob Hayes
Roll call vote:
Supervisor Mickey Martin: yes Trustee Martin Wright:       yes
Clerk Howard Dahlstrom:    yes Trustee Bob Hayes:       yes
Treasurer Albert LeBlanc:    yes Trustee Rick Williams:       yes
Trustee Frans Wilbrink:    yes
Resolution Adopted.
Supervisor Martin called a recess at 6:35pm and reconvened at 6:37pm.
Supervisor Martin said that a meeting was held with Clerk Dahlstrom to assess
the questions from Trustee Hayes regarding the profit/loss statement from the
last Board meeting. An explanation for each item was given.
Motion by Martin to adjourn the meeting at 7:05 pm
Seconded by Hayes.
Carried unanimously.
__________________
Howard M. Dahlstrom
Township Clerk
February 6, 2007
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 PM at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order.
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer LeBlanc, Trustee Wright, Trustee Hayes,
Trustee Williams
    Clerk Dahlstrom and Supervisor Martin.
CONSENT AGENDA
§   Minutes of 1/9/07 and 1/16/07 Meetings
§   Treasurer Report
§   Building Inspector Report
§   Accounts Payable
§   Revenue /Expenditure Report
Motion by Williams to approve the consent agenda, with corrections, and removal
of the township’s revenue-expenditure report.
Seconded by Hayes.
Carried unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:22 p.m.
∙   Helen LeBlanc: regarding the audit of 2004 and possible retroactive changes
to same
∙   Nancy Williams: regarding Trustee Wilbrink.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:32 p.m.
PLANNING COMMISSION
Planning Commission Chairman Michael Fielek commented on recent commission
business as outlined in the submitted minutes of the January 16 & January 23,
2007 meetings. Discussion ensued regarding the recommended ordinance amendments
submitted to the Board.
Motion by Hayes to approve proposed text amendments to the zoning ordinance, as
submitted by McKenna Associates and upon recommendation by the Planning
Commission. The text amendments will add subsection LL to section 8.02
establishing regulations for wineries.
Seconded by Wright.
Yes: Wright, Martin, Hayes, Williams, LeBlanc, Dahlstrom.
No: Wilbrink.
Motion carries.
Motion by Hayes to approve proposed text amendments to the land division
ordinance, as submitted by McKenna Associates and upon recommendation by the
Planning Commission. The text amendments will re-write subsection 3 of section
6.01, which addresses “Division of land in a recorded plat”.
Seconded by Williams.
Carried unanimously.
Motion by Hayes to approve proposed text amendments to the zoning ordinance, as
submitted by McKenna Associates and upon recommendation by the Planning
Commission. The text amendments will add definitions to section 7.03 and amend
footnotes in section 7.05 establishing regulations for political signs.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
CCC Process
Supervisor Martin explained the process involved with the Planning Commission
public hearing regarding the Capital Area Canine Club site plan and special use
permit. Discussion ensued regarding provisions and procedures in the zoning
ordinance that allow for the application by, and subsequent public hearing for,
those who choose to use the process.
Recycling
Trustee Wright gave an informative explanation of various additional options
available for the township’s recycling program. He recommended expanding to
include #1 plastics, and possibly cardboard. Lengthy discussion ensued
resulting with the need for more information and possibly instituting various
changes in the spring.
Wetlands-Cemetery
Motion by Hayes to approve the contract with Wetland and Coastal Resources,
Inc., with an amount not to exceed $517.50, for wetland delineation and
associated work and reports at Summit Cemetery.
Seconded by Wilbrink.
Carried unanimously.
Soil Borings
Motion by Wright to approve the contract with Maynard Beery Soil Scientist for
soil testing of areas designated as possible pole locations, at an amount of
$925.00, unless a lower bid, using the same specifications and scope of work,
is received within two weeks of this meeting.
Seconded by Williams.
Carried unanimously.
NEW BUSINESS
Poverty Exemption Standards
Supervisor Martin explained the guidelines, which are based on those, set by
the federal government.
Motion by Wright to adopt the federal guidelines with an increase of 50% in all
sections as shown below, and to limit assets to one principle residence and one
licensed vehicle for each resident, with a maximum of two.
Size of family unit Poverty Guidelines
1                   $14,700.00
2                   $19,800.00
3                   $24,900.00
4                   $30,000.00
5                   $35,100.00
6                   $40,200.00
7                   $45,300.00
8                   $50,400.00
Each add. Person    $5,100.00
Seconded by Wilbrink.
Carried unanimously.
Constable – Code Enforcement
Supervisor Martin explained that she had discussed the area of code enforcement
with Building Official Mark Miller, and that they had reached an agreement
enabling Mr. Miller to take on code enforcement responsibilities. Stipulations
for the proposed agreement between the township and Mark Miller were submitted
to the Board.
Motion by Hayes to authorize Supervisor Martin to execute the agreement
presented between the township and Mark Miller for provision of code
enforcement services.
Seconded by Williams.
Carried unanimously.
Budget Amendment Proposal
Clerk Dahlstrom initiated discussion regarding the need for funds to be
transferred to the Deputy Clerk salary line item to enable the Deputy to
continue working to the end of the fiscal year. Discussion continued leading to
the following action.
Motion by Wilbrink to amend the budget by moving $800.00 from the Election
Expense Acct. (191.725) and $900.00 from Clerks Conference/Travel Acct.
(215.864) to the Deputy Clerk Salary Acct. (215.703).
Seconded by LeBlanc.
Yes: Wilbrink, LeBlanc, Dahlstrom.
No: Wright, Martin, Hayes, Williams.
Motion FAILS.
Motion by Dahlstrom to amend the budget by moving $1000.00 from Clerks
Conference/Travel Acct. (215.864) to the Deputy Clerk Salary Acct. (215.703).
Seconded by Wilbrink.
Carried unanimously.
REPORTS
Treasurer Report
Treasurer LeBlanc elaborated on his submitted report and welcomed Lori Hurst
who has taken the position of Deputy Treasurer.
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP RESOLUTION #61
BANK SIGNATORIES
Resolution by Treasurer LeBlanc.
Be it resolved that all bank account and money market account signature cards
will be submitted with four authorized signers. These signers will be the
current Clerk and Deputy Clerk, and the current Treasurer and Deputy Treasurer.
It will be the policy of this township that any check or withdrawal order will
require two signatures: one from the Clerk department and one from the Treasury
department, and one of these two signatures must be that of the Clerk or the
Treasurer. Because he prefers to serve as Treasury Assistant rather than Deputy
Treasurer, Harold P. Husse’s name will be removed from the signature cards.
Lori Hurst’s name will be added as Deputy Treasurer. Whenever possible,
investment accounts such as bank certificates of deposit will be set up as book
entry instruments in the name of Williamstown Township and without signature
cards. New signature cards will be submitted with the following authorized
signers:
Clerk: Howard M. Dahlstrom Deputy Clerk: Robert J. Cwiertniewicz
Treasurer: Albert LeBlanc Deputy Treasurer: Lori Hurst
Supported by: Clerk Howard M. Dahlstrom
Roll call vote:
 
Supervisor Mickey Martin: yes Trustee Martin Wright: yes
Clerk Howard Dahlstrom: yes   Trustee Bob Hayes: yes
Treasurer Albert LeBlanc: yes Trustee Rick Williams: yes
Trustee Frans Wilbrink: yes
Resolution passes.
Supervisor Report
Supervisor Martin elaborated on her submitted report which included information
regarding the MTA Conference, possible collocation of wireless internet
equipment on a future tower on Williamston school grounds, Road Commission
proposed fees for dead animal pickup, a CADL proposal for a district wide
building improvement plan and updates on the work of the Compensation Committee
and Cemetery Board.
Trustee Reports
Trustee Williams commented on the MTA Conference and gave an update on the DEQ
compliance issue.
Supervisor Martin stated that further discussion regarding the revenue-
expenditure report would be more productive after Clerk Dahlstrom was able to
ascertain the reasons for the discrepancies.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 9:48 p.m.
∙   Rod Imhoff: regarding whether a response was ever received from Meridian
Township regarding the townships’ opposition to the Mayberry Homes situation.
There has been no response.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 9:49 p.m.
Supervisor Martin reviewed the meeting and ordered an adjournment at 9:50 pm.
__________________
Howard M. Dahlstrom
Township Clerk
February 20, 2007
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 5:30 pm at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer LeBlanc, Trustee Wright, Trustee Hayes,
Trustee Williams
    Clerk Dahlstrom and Supervisor Martin.
Absent: None
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 5:31 p.m.
∙   Ruth Templeton: regarding cost effectiveness to constituents.
∙   Wendell Proudfoot: regarding videotaping and replay of Board meetings.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 5:33 p.m.
Public Hearing – Budgets 2008
Supervisor Martin explained the process of adopting a budget and noted the
various departments and items included in the proposed budgets for 2008.
Supervisor Martin opened the public hearing for the general fund budget and
called for public comment.
∙   Ruth Templeton: regarding expense increases from the 06-07-budget year.
∙   Wendell Proudfoot: regarding an expense line item for videotaping and
replay of Board meetings.
There was no further public comment.
Motion by Wright to close the public hearing for the 2008 general fund budget.
Seconded by Hayes.
Carried unanimously.
Supervisor Martin opened the public hearing for the cemetery fund budget and
called for public comment.
There was no public comment, but Supervisor Martin supplied a written comment
from Greg Lammers of the Cemetery Board, which stated that the Sexton’s salary
should be increased from $17,000.00 to $19,000.00.
Discussion ensued with Trustee Hayes saying that the “consultants” line item
may be to low, and he asked that the Cemetery Board get an estimate of costs
for their proposed projects for the year.
Motion by Hayes to close the public hearing for the 2008 cemetery fund budget.
Seconded by Williams.
Carried unanimously.
Supervisor Martin said that deliberations for the adoption of the budgets would
be placed on the March 20, 2007 Board agenda.
Revenue Expenditure Report
Discussion ensued regarding various components of the report including
erroneous figures as a result of previous journal entries and the chart of
accounts and line item names used in BS&A as opposed to QuickBooks. Clerk
Dahlstrom was asked to contact the Auditor and BS&A to find solutions to the
current problems.
Soil Borings
Supervisor Martin stated that the township would need to use the services of a
soil engineer to precisely determine the testing process for the possible
construction of a wireless internet pole. A proposal has been submitted by STS
Consultants and Kebs has stated that they will also submit a proposal. Marvin
Thomson has agreed to serve as project manager for this aspect of the proposed
wireless internet for the township. Supervisor Martin said that contact has
been made with the school system regarding possible collocation and there would
be more information provided at the next meeting.
Hall Rental – Safety Class
Supervisor Martin informed the Board that the township hall would be rented for
7 days in March to conduct an OSHA Safety Training workshop. No discounts were
requested and the township will collect $100.00 for each day.
Budget Amendments
Discussion ensued regarding the lack of funds remaining in the salary line
items of those who are paid monthly. This was apparently the result of
switching monthly payroll to the last business day of the month, per the
financial policy adopted this last fiscal year. The change took place in
October of 2006. Trustee Wilbrink contended that this would result in thirteen
paychecks for those involved. Further discussion resulted in the following
motion.
Motion by Hayes to transfer needed funds from the contingency line item to the
salary line items of those affected.
Seconded by Williams.
Yes: Wright, Martin, Hayes, Williams, LeBlanc, Dahlstrom.
No: Wilbrink.
Motion carries.
Building Permit Policy
Supervisor Martin explained the policy presented, stating that it was the
culmination of a cooperative effort with assistance from Building Official Mark
Miller. Further discussion explained variables involved in the policy including
time limits for the expiration of building permits.
Motion by Hayes to adopt the “Building Permits Action and Status Policy” as
submitted.
Seconded by Williams.
Carried unanimously.
Supervisor Martin adjourned the meeting at 6:50 p.m.
__________________
Howard M. Dahlstrom
Township Clerk
March 6, 2007
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 PM at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order.
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer LeBlanc, Trustee Hayes, Trustee Williams
    Clerk Dahlstrom and Supervisor Martin.
Absent: Trustee Wright
Motion by Williams to add a discussion of soil borings to the agenda under
“unfinished business”.
Seconded by Hayes.
Carried unanimously.
CONSENT AGENDA
§   Minutes of 1/9/07 and 1/16/07 Meetings
§   Treasurer Report
§   Building Inspector Report
§   Accounts Payable
§   Revenue /Expenditure Report
Motion by Hayes to remove the accounts payable reports, revenue-expenditure
report and minutes of the 2/6/07 and 2/20/07 meetings from the consent agenda.
Seconded by Williams.
Carried unanimously.
Motion by Williams to remove the treasurer’s report from the consent agenda.
Seconded by Hayes.
Yes: Martin, Hayes, Williams.
No: Wilbrink, LeBlanc, Dahlstrom.
Motion FAILS.
Motion by Wilbrink to approve the consent agenda as amended.
Seconded by LeBlanc.
Yes: Wilbrink, LeBlanc, Dahlstrom.
No: Martin, Hayes, Williams.
Motion FAILS.
Motion by Williams to approve the consent agenda, with corrections, and removal
of the township’s revenue-expenditure report.
Seconded by Hayes.
Carried unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:06 p.m.
∙   Jennifer Johnson: regarding canine club issue and process.
∙   Al Leblanc: regarding financial administration issues.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:10 p.m.
PLANNING COMMISSION
Planning Commission Chairman Michael Fielek commented on recent commission
business as outlined in the submitted minutes of the February 20, 2007 meeting.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Resolution – BS&A Tax Data on Internet
Treasurer Leblanc explained the proposal received from BS&A, including options
for user fee payment and township fee payment. He recommended that the township
use the option that has the users paying a convenience fee. Discussion ensued.
Motion by Wilbrink to table discussion of placing tax data on the internet to
the 1st meeting of April, 2007.
Seconded by Williams.
Carried unanimously.
401A Plan Options
Discussion ensued regarding information previously presented to the Board
regarding employee/employer contributions to this program.
Motion by Wilbrink to reduce the employee contribution to 6.2% and the employer
contribution to 6.2% for the 401A Nationwide program, administered through
Burnham & Flowers.
Seconded by Hayes.
Carried unanimously.
NEW BUSINESS
Soil Borings
Marvin Thomson commented on his review of the bids received and recommended the
firm of “Kebs, Inc.” for the project. Discussion ensued, with Trustee Wilbrink
stating that the township should wait to see exactly how and where the tower
would be located, and for information regarding other available options that
might be pursued that would not require the township to undertake the erection
of a tower.
Motion by Wilbrink to postpone contracting soil borings contract for proposed
wireless internet until more information is received from other carriers.
Seconded by Williams.
Yes: Wilbrink, LeBlanc, Dahlstrom, Hayes, Williams.
No: Martin.
Motion carries.
Extend – Preliminary Plat Springbrook Estates
Motion by Martin to approve a second 1-year extension of the preliminary plat
approval and a 1- year extension of the Zoning Board of Appeals approval for
the water and sewer lines crossing the Suttell Drain and the adjacent wetland
for the Springbrook Estates.
Seconded by Dahlstrom.
Carried unanimously.
Extend – Tentative Preliminary Plat – Brookstone
Motion by Hayes to approve a third and final, 1-year extension of the tentative
preliminary plat approval for Brookstone Development.
Seconded by Williams.
Carried unanimously.
14-Point Review
Supervisor Martin stated that she disseminated the information regarding this
process so the Board would understand the importance of the review.
Clean Water Action Committee
Discussion ensued regarding a request from this organization to canvass door-
to-door in the township to solicit for and explain their project to raise funds
and awareness regarding clean water.
Motion by Wilbrink Hayes (corrected with minutes approval on April 10, 2007) to
allow the CLEAN WATER ACTION organization to conduct a door-to-door canvass of
residential properties from: February 2007 through May 2007, between the hours
of 4:00pm and 9:00pm, Monday though Friday.
Seconded by Wilbrink.
Carried unanimously.
2007-08 Meeting Dates
Discussion ensued regarding needed changes on some dates and whether the second
meeting of the month is needed, or could possibly be scheduled as tentative.
Treasurer LeBlanc expressed disagreement with the change of the date for the
first meeting of April, stating that he used the schedule published in the
recent newsletter to make travel plans.
Motion by Hayes to adopt the schedule of Board meetings for 2007-08 with agreed
upon date changes for the first meetings of the month and all second meetings
to be tentative.
Seconded by Martin.
Yes: Martin, Hayes, Williams.
No: Wilbrink, LeBlanc, Dahlstrom.
Motion FAILS.
Motion by Martin to adopt the schedule of Board meetings for 2007-08 with
agreed upon date changes with no second meeting to be scheduled for June, July
or August 2007 and to revisit the concept of having a second meeting only when
necessary in September of 2007.
Seconded by Williams.
Yes: Martin, Hayes, Williams.
No: Wilbrink, LeBlanc, Dahlstrom.
Motion FAILS.
Motion by Wilbrink to adopt the schedule of Board meetings for 2007-08 with
agreed upon date changes and a stipulation that the second meetings of the
month will be listed as tentative.
Seconded by Martin.
Yes: Wilbrink, Martin, Hayes, Dahlstrom.
No: Williams, LeBlanc.
Motion carries.
Williamstown Township
Board Meeting Schedule
2007-2008
Unless otherwise posted, the first meetings are at 7:00pm and the second
meetings are tentative and will be held only if necessary, at 5:30pm at the
Williamstown Township Hall corner of Germany and Zimmer roads.
 
First Meeting       Second Meeting - Tentative
Tuesdays at 7:00 pm Tuesdays at 5:30 pm
April 10, 2007      April 17, 2007
May 1, 2007         May 15, 2007
June 5, 2007        June 19, 2007
July 10, 2007       July 17, 2007
August 7, 2007      August 21, 2007
September 11, 2007  September 18, 2007
October 2, 2007     October 16, 2007
November 13, 2007   November 20, 2007
December 4, 2007    December 18, 2007
January 8, 2008     January 15, 2008
February 5, 2008    February 19, 2008
March 4, 2008       March 18, 2008
Planning Commission Minutes on the Website
Discussion ensued regarding placing the Planning Commission minutes on the
township website.
Motion by Williams to solicit the cost of placing the Planning Commission
minutes on the website using the company currently engaged to place the Board
minutes online.
Seconded by Hayes.
Carried unanimously.
REPORTS
Treasurer Report
Treasurer LeBlanc elaborated on his submitted report.
Trustee Wilbrink reported on NIESA news and issues.
Discussion ensued regarding approval of the Accounts Payable Report. Changes
agreed upon included the deduction of sales tax on one invoice, the elimination
of a former employee from the AFLAC rolls, the elimination of voiding of two
(corrected with minutes approval on April 10, 2007) cable commission checks
issued and the elimination of a duplicate charge/check.
Motion by Hayes to approve the submitted accounts payable report, with agreed
upon changes.
Seconded by Wilbrink.
Carried unanimously.
Discussion ensued regarding approval of the Revenue/Expenditure Report. It was
agreed that BS&A would be contacted to clear up apparent discrepancies that
have occurred with the changeover from QuickBooks.
Discussion ensued regarding a budget amendment for the legal fee line item in
the current budget.
Motion by Hayes to amend the budget by moving $9000.00 from the contingency
line item to the legal fees line item.
Seconded by Williams.
Yes: Martin LeBlanc, Dahlstrom, Hayes, Williams.
No: Wilbrink
Motion carries.
Discussion ensued regarding approval of the Board minutes of February 20, 2007
and February 28, 2007.
Motion by Martin to amend the minutes of the February 6, 2007 by deleting the
line, The text amendments will add subsection LL to section 8.02 establishing
regulations for wineries; from the paragraph describing the text amendments to
the zoning ordinance regarding wineries.
Seconded by Dahlstrom.
Carried unanimously.
Motion by Martin to amend the minutes of the February 20, 2007 by changing the
amount of days from seven to fourteen, and the amount from $100.00 to $50.00 in
the section regarding Hall Rental-Safety Class.
Seconded by Williams.
Carried unanimously.
Motion by Dahlstrom to approve the minutes of February 6, 2007 and the minutes
of February 20, 2007 as corrected.
Seconded by Williams.
Carried unanimously.
Supervisor Report
Supervisor Martin elaborated on her submitted report.
Trustee Reports
Trustee Williams commented on the MTA Conference and gave an update on the DEQ
compliance issue.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 9:32 p.m.
∙   Cindy Davis: regarding the 14-point review and accounts payable processes.
∙   Helen Leblanc: regarding employees doing assessor work during office
manager hours.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 9:40 p.m.
upervisor Martin reviewed the meeting and stated that the township attorney
would be on hand at the March 20, 2007 meeting for a possible closed session
regarding the conflict of interest issue sent to him for review and
recommendation. Also on March 20, 2007 deliberations for the township and
cemetery budgets would take place. An earlier starting time for the meeting was
suggested.
Motion by Martin to set the starting time for the meeting of March 20, 2007 at
4:30 pm.
Seconded by Williams.
Carried unanimously.
Motion by Dahlstrom to adjourn at 9:45 pm.
Seconded by Hayes.
Carried unanimously.
__________________
Howard M. Dahlstrom
Township Clerk
March 20, 2007
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 5:30 pm at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer LeBlanc, Trustee Wright, Trustee Hayes,
Trustee Williams
    Clerk Dahlstrom and Supervisor Martin.
Absent: None
Supervisor Martin reviewed the agenda and stated that a closed session with the
township attorney was scheduled on the agenda.
Motion by Hayes to enter into closed session to discuss the written legal
opinion of the township attorney.
Seconded by Williams.
Roll Call Vote:
Yes: Martin, Wright, Hayes, Williams.
No: LeBlanc, Dahlstrom, Wilbrink.
Motion FAILS. (2/3 affirmative vote needed)
Attorney Spagnuolo explained the reason for the need for a closed session,
stating that this was a legitimate reason, under the law, for non-public
meeting. He further stated that if the Board wanted to meet regarding his issue
in a public session, he would need a motion that waives the attorney/client
privilege for the document he submitted.
Motion by Wilbrink to waive the attorney/client privilege for the document
submitted by the township attorney.
Seconded by Williams.
Roll Call Vote:
Yes: LeBlanc, Dahlstrom, Wilbrink.
No: Martin, Wright, Hayes, Williams.
Motion FAILS.
Motion by Wright to reconsider the first motion of the meeting - to enter into
closed session to discuss the written legal opinion of the township attorney.
Seconded by Williams.
Yes: Martin, Wright, Hayes, Williams, Dahlstrom.
No: LeBlanc, Wilbrink.
Motion passes.
The Board entered into closed session at 5:00 pm.
The Board reconvened in public session at 5:45 pm.
Motion by Wilbrink Martin (corrected with minutes approval on April 10, 2007)
to waive the attorney/client privilege for the document submitted by the
township attorney regarding his legal opinion regarding the topic “conflict of
interest”.
Seconded by Williams.
Carried unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 5:48 p.m.
   There was none.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 5:48 p.m.
COMPENSATION COMMISSION RECOMMENDATIONS
Supervisor Martin explained the duties and responsibilities of the commission
and the schedule of meetings they used in determining their recommendation.
Motion by Hayes to accept and approve the two-year salary recommendations of
the Local Compensation Commission as presented.
Position   Annual Salary Effective date For fiscal year
Supervisor $23, 425.00   April 1, 2007  2007-08
Supervisor $24, 130.00   April 1, 2008  2008-09
Treasurer  $23, 425.00   April 1, 2007  2007-08
Treasurer  $24, 130.00   April 1, 2008  2008-09
Clerk      $23, 425.00   April 1, 2007  2007-08
Clerk      $24, 130.00   April 1, 2008  2008-09
Trustee    $5,328.00*    April 1, 2007  2007-08 & 2008-09
* Trustees shall receive $65.00 for any third meeting held in a month, with
a maximum of twelve meetings.
 
Seconded by Williams.
Roll Call Vote:
Yes: LeBlanc, Dahlstrom, Martin, Wright, Hayes, Williams.
No: Wilbrink.
Motion passes.
Carried unanimously.  (corrected with minutes approval on April 10, 2007)
Deliberate –2008 General Fund Budget
Supervisor Martin explained the process and timeline the township used in
preparing the budget. Discussion ensued with the following comment synopsis.
∙   Public- Helen LeBlanc stating that the pool payments to Williamston should
be complete.
∙   Supervisor Martin-Documents have been located, which show calculations that
reveal one more year of payments are due.
∙   Trustee Hayes-In keeping with the equal salary recommendations for the
elected officials, the deputies should be paid identical amounts of $12,000.00,
with the Deputy Clerk position being allocated at $11,000.00 $10,000.00
(corrected with minutes approval on April 10, 2007) and the Election Clerk
position allocated at $1,000.00 $2,000.00 (corrected with minutes approval on
April 10, 2007). The Deputy Treasurer should be allocated at $12,000.00.
∙   Supervisor Martin-Videotaping of Board meetings should be allocated for in
the new budget, with a $5,000.00 appropriation listed under legislative
control.
∙   Clerk Dahlstrom-Outside Assessor salary should be set at $12,000.00 like
the deputy positions.
∙   Trustee Wilbrink-Legal fees are too high, and asked “what are the residents
getting for their money?”
∙   Supervisor Martin- the residents are receiving services like road repair
and the recycling program.
∙   Trustee Williams-Cable Commission conference and training should be
budgeted at $500.00. Trustee conference and training should be budgeted at
$2500.00. The supervisor assistant position should be allocated at $12,000.00,
as are the deputy positions.
∙   Treasurer LeBlanc-Deputy Clerk should receive $12,000.00 as Deputy Clerk
and original amount requested by the Clerk for Election Deputy.
Consensus Changes
∙   Increase Cable Commission conference and training to $500.00
∙   Increase Trustee conference and training to $500.00 $2,500.00 (corrected
with minutes approval on 4/10/07)
∙   Set Deputy Treasurer salary line item at $12,000.00 $11,000.00 & Treasury
Assistant at $1,000.00
∙   Set Supervisor Assistant salary line item at $12,000.00
∙   Set Deputy Clerk salary line item at $11,000.00
∙   Set Election Clerk salary line item at $1,000.00
∙   Set Outside Assessor line item at $12,000.00
∙   Reduce line item for NPDES to $500.00
Motion by Hayes to adopt the 2007-08 Township Budget as submitted, with the
consensus changes and recommendations of the Local Officials Compensation
Commission included.
Seconded by Williams.
Roll Call Vote:
Yes: LeBlanc, Martin, Wright, Hayes, Williams.
No: Dahlstrom, Wilbrink.
Motion passes.
Deliberate –2008 Cemetery Budget
Supervisor Martin explained the process and timeline the township used in
preparing the budget. Discussion ensued regarding raising the Sexton salary to
$19,000.00.
Consensus Changes
∙   Increase the Sexton salary to $19,000.00
Motion by Hayes to adopt the 2007-08 Cemetery Budget as submitted, with the
consensus changes included.
Seconded by Williams.
Roll Call Vote:
Yes: LeBlanc, Martin, Wright, Hayes, Williams.
No: Dahlstrom, Wilbrink.
Motion passes.
Clerk Reports from 2-6-07
Clerk Dahlstrom reported that he has been in contact with BSA and the auditors
regarding the discrepancies that have occurred with the changeover from
QuickBooks to BSA.
A special meeting to discuss these reports was called for March 27, 2006 at 5:
30pm.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 6:55 p.m.
∙   John Kennedy: regarding attorney/client privilege.
∙   Cindy Davis: regarding budget issues.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:00 p.m.
Supervisor Martin adjourned the meeting at 7:00 p.m.
__________________
Howard M. Dahlstrom
Township Clerk
March 27, 2007
SPECIAL BOARD OF TRUSTEES MEETING
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened in a Special Session to review
financial reports at 5:30 pm at the Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990
Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan.
ROLL CALL
Present:
Trustee Wilbrink, Trustee Wright, Trustee Hayes, Trustee Williams, Clerk
Dahlstrom and Supervisor Martin.
Absent:
Treasurer LeBlanc.
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 5:31 p.m.
   None
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 5:31p.m.
Supervisor Martin asked for the reason the back reconciliation report was
included and the Clerk Dahlstrom said that this explains a problem with four
checks that occurred when the change from Quickbooks to BSA took place.
Clerk Dahlstrom explained the Revenue/Expenditure report and that the over-
budget items were listed for review.
Motion by Wright to amend the budget placing $6,000.00 in the Planning
Commission (400) budget, $500.00 in the Cable Commission (425) budget and
$200.00 in the Public Works (441) budget to rectify those over-budget items.
Seconded by Dahlstrom.
Carried unanimously.
Supervisor Martin inquired about the status of liability payments and Clerk
Dahlstrom stated that all payments were up to date.
Discussion ensued regarding cemetery checks 5440-5449 in the amount of
$2,574.17 and township checks 15986-16066. Clerk Dahlstrom was asked to prepare
more definitive reports regarding payroll and accounts payable with check
numbers and amounts.
A special meeting to discuss these reports was called for Wednesday, March 28,
2006 at 5:30pm for the purpose of reviewing and approving these reports.
Supervisor Martin adjourned the meeting at 6:30 p.m.
__________________
Howard M. Dahlstrom
Township Clerk
March 28, 2007
SPECIAL BOARD OF TRUSTEES MEETING
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened in a Special Session to review
financial reports at 5:30 pm at the Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990
Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan.
ROLL CALL
Present:
Trustee Wilbrink, Trustee Wright, Trustee Hayes, Trustee Williams, Clerk
Dahlstrom and Supervisor Martin.
Absent:
Treasurer LeBlanc.
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 5:31 p.m.
   None
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 5:31p.m.
Clerk Dahlstrom explained the check detail report submitted. Discussion ensued
regarding check numbers and electronic payment inclusions in the report.
Motion by Wright to table all items to a special meeting to be held on
Thursday, March 29, 2007.
Seconded by Martin.
Carried unanimously.
It was agreed that reports should reflect check numbers 15985-16066, auto-pays
and all EFTPS payments.
Supervisor Martin adjourned the meeting at 6:20 p.m.
_________________
Howard M. Dahlstrom
Township
March 29, 2007
SPECIAL BOARD OF TRUSTEES MEETING
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened in a Special Session to review
financial reports at 5:30 pm at the Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990
Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan.
ROLL CALL
Present:
Trustee Wilbrink, Trustee Hayes, Trustee Williams, Clerk Dahlstrom and
Supervisor Martin.
Absent:
Treasurer LeBlanc, Trustee Wright.
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 5:31 p.m.
   None
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 5:31p.m.
Discussion ensued regarding a list of questions submitted by Trustee Williams.
Clerk Dahlstrom explained the township accounts payable listing submitted.
Discussion ensued and it was agreed to run a calculator tape to check all
amounts submitted in reports and present tape to the Board with the reports
(corrected with minutes approval on April 10, 2007).
Motion by Wilbrink to approve the township accounts payable listing as
submitted for checks 16001-16066 with a total amount of $23,085.87.
Seconded by Williams.
Carried unanimously.
Motion by Dahlstrom to approve the township payroll listing as submitted for
checks 15959-15965, 15982 and 16056-16061 with a total amount of $13,691.56.
Seconded by Hayes.
Carried unanimously.
Motion by Wilbrink to approve the cemetery accounts payable listing as
submitted for checks 5440-5449 with a total amount of $2,574.17.
Seconded by Hayes.
Carried unanimously.
Motion by Hayes to approve the cemetery payroll listing as submitted for check
5436 with a total amount of $24.01.
Seconded by Williams.
Carried unanimously.
It was agreed that future check reports should begin with check number 16067
for the township and check number 5450 for the cemetery.
Public Comment
-Ruth Templeton re: positive comments regarding the inclusion of voided check
numbers in the reports.
Supervisor Martin adjourned the meeting at 6:10 p.m.
__________________
Howard M. Dahlstrom
Township Clerk
April 10, 2007
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 PM at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order.
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer LeBlanc, Trustee Wright, Trustee Hayes,
Trustee Williams
    Clerk Dahlstrom and Supervisor Martin.
Absent: None.
CONSENT AGENDA
§   Minutes of 3/6/07, 3/20/07,3/27/07,3/28/07 and 3/29/07 Meetings
§   Treasurer Report
§   Building Inspector Report
§   Accounts Payable
§   Revenue /Expenditure Report
Motion by Wilbrink to remove the accounts payable reports, revenue-expenditure
report, additional submitted Treasurer Report comments and the minutes of March
6, 2007, March 20, 2007 and March 29, 2007 and approve the consent agenda as
edited.
Seconded by Hayes.
Carried unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:13 p.m.
∙   Darryl Brown: regarding financial administration issues.
∙   Ruth Templeton: regarding check register information.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:19 p.m.
PLANNING COMMISSION
Planning Commission Chairman Michael Fielek commented on recent commission
business as outlined in the submitted minutes of the March 20, 2007 meeting and
commented on the recommendation to adopt the text amendments to the Wetlands
Protection Ordinance.
Motion by Hayes to approve proposed text amendments to the Wetlands Protection
ordinance, as submitted by McKenna Associates and upon recommendation by the
Planning Commission. The text amendments address wetland buffer specifications,
procedures and restrictions.
Seconded by Wright.
Yes: Wright, Martin, Hayes, Williams, LeBlanc, Dahlstrom.
No: Wilbrink.
Motion carries.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Broadband Internet
Marv Thompson explained proposals received from Arialink and FreedomNet and
commented on the need to move forward with soil borings.
Motion by Wright to retain the services of Kebs, Inc. to perform soil testing
in an area on township property that may be considered for the erection of a
tower to enable wireless internet in the township, and to procure more
information from AriaLink and Freedom Net regarding their proposals for the
wireless internet project.
Seconded by Williams.
Carried unanimously.
401A Plan Options
Discussion ensued regarding the intent of an earlier motion regarding elected
officials wages that should be included in the calculations.
Motion by Hayes to clarify the intent of the township regarding contributions
to the 401a plan by stating that the entire paycheck of elected officials is to
be used for calculations to determine contributions.
Seconded by Williams.
Yes: Wright, Martin, Hayes, Williams.
No: Dahlstrom, LeBlanc, Wilbrink.
Motion carries.
Motion by Wright to authorize the township to seek bids for a full and complete
audit of all township and cemetery financial records.
Seconded by Hayes.
Carried unanimously.
NEW BUSINESS
Cable Franchise
Marvin Thomson commented on new federal laws dealing with franchise contracts.
While smaller cities and townships will probably be the last to be approached,
the township should be aware that there are new provisions under which the
providers may operate.
Financial Policy
Segments of the policy were discussed including: cash receipting, payroll
approval, the Treasurer receiving bank statements unopened, reimbursements
auto-pays and the ACH policy.
Park Damage
Recent damage to the park, which is now in the hands of law enforcement
officials, was discussed, as well as a need to secure the porta-john from being
tipped over. It was the consensus of the Board to have staff place four-by-four
posts around the porta-john to inhibit future incidents.
Late Fee Charge
Discussion ensued regarding communications received from Kevin Kuzera regarding
a refund of late fee charges.
Motion by Hayes to waive all late fees for the property tax payment of Kevin
Kuzera of 4440 Glencoe Drive, Williamston, Michigan, and to refund the amount
of $154.41 to this party.
Seconded by Williams.
Carried unanimously.
Changes and corrections to the minutes of March 6, 2007, March 20, 2007 and
March 28, 2007 were discussed.
Motion by Hayes to approve the minutes of March 6, 2007, March 20, 2007 and
March 29, 2007 with the following changes.
3/6
Motion by Wilbrink Hayes to allow the CLEAN WATER ACTION organization to
conduct a door-to-door canvass of residential properties from: February 2007
through May 2007, between the hours of 4:00pm and 9:00pm, Monday though Friday.
Seconded by Wilbrink.
Carried unanimously.
included the deduction of sales tax on one invoice, the elimination of a former
employee from the AFLAC rolls, the elimination of voiding of cable commission
checks issued and the elimination of a duplicate charge/check.
3/20
Motion by Wilbrink Martin to waive the attorney/client privilege for the
document submitted by the township attorney regarding his legal opinion
regarding the topic “conflict of interest”.
Seconded by Williams.
Carried unanimously.
(Accepting and approving recommendations from the LOCC)
Carried unanimously.
Trustee Hayes-In keeping with the equal salary recommendations for the elected
officials, the deputies should be paid identical amounts of $12,000.00, with
the Deputy Clerk position being allocated at $11,000.00 $10,000.00 and the
Election Clerk position allocated at $1,000.00 $2,000.00. The Deputy Treasurer
should be allocated at $12,000.00.
Increase Trustee conference and training to $500.00 $2,500.00
Set Deputy Treasurer salary line item at $12,000.00 $11,000.00 & Treasury
Assistant at $1,000.00
3/29
Clerk Dahlstrom explained the township accounts payable listing submitted.
Discussion ensued and it was agreed to run a calculator tape to check all
amounts submitted in reports and present tape to the Board with the reports.
Seconded by Williams.
Carried unanimously.
Discussion ensued regarding the township and cemetery accounts payable listing,
including questions regarding Trustee pay for additional meetings.
Motion by Wright to approve the expenditures referenced on township check
numbers 16067-16132 and one autopay for a total amount of $38,972.26 and the
expenditures referenced on cemetery check numbers 5450-5456 for a total amount
of $2,162.28.
Seconded by Williams.
Yes: Wright, Martin, Hayes, Williams, LeBlanc, Dahlstrom.
No: Wilbrink.
Motion carries.
Discussion ensued regarding the submitted reveneue-expenditure report.
Motion by Wilbrink to approve the revenue-expenditure report ending March 31,
2007 as submitted.
Seconded by Wright.
Yes: none.
No: Wright, Martin, Hayes, Williams, LeBlanc, Dahlstrom, Wilbrink.
Motion FAILS.
It was the consensus of the Board that the revenue-expenditure report would be
discussed at the April 17, 2007 meeting.
Reports
Discussion ensued regarding the hot water heater pumps for sinks in the
township hall, with Mark Tabor and Mark Miller explaining the bids received and
various aspects of the installations and specifications.
Motion by Wright to approve the bid from “Guthries” in the amount of $1,735.00
for the labor, parts and installation of a recirculating pump on the township
hot water heater, and approve the bid from “J & J” in the amount of $405.00 for
the labor, parts and installation of a kitchen vent in the hall kitchen.
Seconded by Hayes.
Carried unanimously.
Supervisor Martin reported on various items including: new acceptable
recyclable materials for the monthly recycling program, the nomination of the
township for a Tri-County Waste Reduction Award, and the annual joint meeting
with the City of Williamston.
Treasurer LeBlanc said that he would supply more information on the “online tax
information” at the May meeting.
Clerk Dahlstrom reported on scheduled election worker training and opinions
received from the auditor regarding tax deductions for paychecks of commission
members.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin called for public comment.
∙   Helen Leblanc: regarding the security of employee computer passwords.
∙   Cindy Davis: regarding the Clerk’s letter regarding the 401a issues.
∙   Ruth Templeton: regarding the 401 deductions and reports.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment.
Supervisor Martin reviewed the meeting. The next meeting would include the
revenue expenditure report. The approved text amendments to the wetlands
ordinance would be published. Marv Thompson and the Supervisor would meet
regarding the Broadband Internet issue. There is a need for more discussion and
research in the 401a issue. The Treasurer would ensure the refund of late fees
per tonight’s motion. The Clerk would look into bids for the audit and furnish
information regarding Trustee pay for additional meetings, as well as furnish a
copy of the motion regarding clarification of the 401a contributions to Burnham
& Flowers.
Motion by Hayes to adjourn at 10:15 pm.
Seconded by Dahlstrom.
Carried unanimously.
Howard M. Dahlstrom
Township Clerk
April 17, 2007
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 5:30 pm at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer LeBlanc, Trustee Wright, Trustee Hayes,
Trustee Williams
    Clerk Dahlstrom and Supervisor Martin.
Absent: None
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 5:31p.m.
   There was none.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 5:31p.m.
Revenue-Expenditure Reports
Clerk Dahlstrom presented the revenue-expenditure report for discussion and
approval. Discussion ensued including suggested changes from the Treasurer and
the need for a breakdown of the health insurance, unemployment and pension to
be input into the budget by department.
Motion by Williams to hold approval of the revenue-expenditure report till the
first meeting of May.
Seconded by Hayes.
Carried unanimously.
401a
Supervisor Martin initiated discussion regarding unresolved issues with the
plan and commented on Clerk Dahlstrom’s letter calling for an investigation of
the matter.
Motion by Martin to have the township attorney investigate and research the
unresolved issues and administration irregularities posed by the Clerk
regarding the 401A plan.
Seconded by Hayes.
Yes: Wright, Martin, Hayes.
No: Wilbrink, Williams, LeBlanc, Dahlstrom.
Motion FAILS.
Motion by Dahlstrom to retain the add [request information regarding] (changed
with minutes approval on 5-1-07) the services of an independent attorney, other
than Murphy-Spagnuolo, to investigate and research the unresolved issues and
administration irregularities posed by the Clerk regarding the 401A plan
Seconded by Wilbrink.
Yes: Wright, Wilbrink, Williams, LeBlanc, Dahlstrom, Hayes.
No: Martin.
Motion passes.
Audit Update
Supervisor Martin explained that she had received the bid from Abraham &
Gaffney, our regular auditor, on the day of this meeting. Clerk Dahlstrom said
that he had contacted two other firms, but has not yet received a bid from
them, and therefore declined to give their names. Treasurer LeBlanc will
contact the Maner, Costerisan & Ellis firm and other qualified firms using the
specs from the received bid to try and obtain additional bids.
1099/W-2 Employee Status Update
Clerk Dahlstrom reported that our auditing firm has said that commissioners
were employees and there is an option on whether to withhold payroll taxes and
issue a W-2 or to refrain from withholding taxes and issue a 1099 form at the
end of the year. Trustee Williams stated that he always received a 1099 at the
end of the year during his tenure on the Cable Commission.
Motion by Williams that effective January 1, 2007 the township will refrain
from tax deductions on the paychecks of Cable Commission members, issue a
refund to those commissioners who had tax deductions withheld since that date
and issue a 1099 for these members at the end of the calendar year.
Seconded by Wright.
Yes: Wright, Martin, Williams, Dahlstrom, Hayes.
No: Wilbrink, LeBlanc.
Motion passes.
Trustee Pay Update Committees and Reports (changed with minutes approval on 5-
1-07)
Discussion ensued regarding Trustee Pay for additional monthly meetings.
Motion by Williams to enable Trustees to be paid for more than one extra
meeting per month, with a maximum number of compensated meetings to be set at
twelve per year.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
Reports
Supervisor Martin reported on CADL millage info, a meeting with other local
Supervisors, the March Board of review, the hot water heater circulating pump,
the great job that was done by the staff on the township hall floors and new
recyclables now being accepted by the township.
Motion by Martin to require members of the Board & staff who need to be excused
during a meeting to ask for maximum of an eight-minute recess.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
Motion by Martin to require that all material for the Board meeting be included
with the packet, when distributed, and that items submitted the night of the
meeting shall not be discussed at the meeting.
Seconded by Williams.
Carried unanimously.
Supervisor Martin adjourned the meeting at 7:00 p.m.
__________________
Howard M. Dahlstrom
Township Clerk
May 1, 2007
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 PM at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order.
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer LeBlanc, Trustee Wright, Trustee Hayes,
Trustee Williams
    Clerk Dahlstrom and Supervisor Martin.
Absent: None.
CONSENT AGENDA
§   Minutes of 4/10/07 and 4/17/07 Meetings
§   Treasurer Report
§   Building Inspector Report
§   Accounts Payable
§   Revenue /Expenditure Report
Motion by Williams to remove all items from the consent agenda, enabling
discussion of same.
Seconded by Wilbrink.
Carried unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:13 p.m.
None.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:13 p.m.
Minutes of 4/10/07 and 4/17/07 Meetings
It was discussed that the minutes should include a more clear explanation of
public comments, motions even if they are not seconded and when the accounts
payable listings are included in the consent agenda, the motion approving the
consent agenda should include the check number range and total amounts.
Motion by Martin to approve the minutes of April 10, 2007 and April 17, 2007
with the following changes to the April 17th minutes:
Pg 1.
Motion by Dahlstrom to retain the add [request information regarding the]
services of an independent attorney, other than Murphy-Spagnuolo, to
investigate and research the unresolved issues and administration
irregularities posed by the Clerk regarding the 401A plan
Seconded by Wilbrink.
Yes: Wright, Wilbrink, Williams, LeBlanc, Dahlstrom, Hayes.
No: Martin.
Motion passes.
Pg 2. – Trustee Pay Update  replace with Committees & Reports
Seconded by Hayes.
Carried unanimously.
Treasurer Report
Supervisor Martin noted that the report was not reconciled against the general
ledger and that it should be tabled until that is done. Treasurer LeBlanc
pointed out that all bank statements are fully reconciled to all documented
checks and deposits and carry forward balances, and that the problem is in the
BSA software. It was determined that February and March are not reconciled to
the general ledger. Discussion ensued regarding a completion date for
reconciling the report against the general ledger and Treasurer LeBlanc said
that he will make a good faith attempt at completing it as soon as possible,
but could not commit to a date. Further discussion ensued regarding BSA
training, clearing previous year discrepancies and the number of modules in BSA
that make up the information needed for reconciliation. The Board requested
that the Treasurer enlist help through his training budget to reconcile the
accounts to the general ledger.
Building Inspector Report
Trustee Wilbrink questioned the building fee involved with the addition work
(corrected with minutes approval on 6-5-07) at the residence of Trustee
Williams. Trustee Williams replied that the reason the materials cost is so low
is because he already had much of the material needed on hand.
Motion by Hayes to accept the Building Inspectors report as submitted.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
Accounts Payable
Discussion ensued regarding cable commission withholding refunds, post-
conference charges that were paid upfront in previous years, DTE autopays and
quarterly payments to the IRS.
Motion by Wilbrink to approve the expenditures referenced on township check
numbers 16133-16214 for a total amount of $49,562.99 and the expenditures
referenced on cemetery check numbers 5457-5471 for a total amount of $3,033.90.
Seconded by Dahlstrom.
Carried unanimously.
PLANNING COMMISSION
Planning Commission Chairman Michael Fielek commented on recent commission
business as outlined in the submitted minutes of the April 17, 2007 meeting,
including preliminary discussions that took place regarding the Grand River
Design Overlay and commented on the recommendation to rescind the Development
Rights Ordinance. Supervisor Martin stated that it was nice to see many of the
Planning Commissioners in attendance at the City of Williamston’s recent event
regarding planning.
Motion by Wright to rescind the township Development Rights Ordinance.
Seconded by Hayes.
Roll Call Vote:
 
LeBlanc Hayes Martin Wilbrink Williams Wright Dahlstrom
Yes     Yes   Yes    Yes      Yes      Yes    Yes
 
Motion carries.  
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Broadband Internet
Supervisor Martin gave an update including information regarding soil boring
work, and the progress of the project. Information is still being gathered and
considered and there may be a meeting scheduled soon to present an update on
the status of Broadband Internet for the township.
401A Update
Supervisor Martin said that she had received two lawyer referrals from MTA
regarding assistance in this matter, and added that the MTA itself would not be
able to provide direct help. Discussion ensued regarding the letter received
from Burnham & Flower’s addressing the issue. Trustee Hayes stated that it
appears that the letter answers all the questions involved in the matter and
that after rectifying the reconciliation and other accounting problems it is
possible that the issue will be resolved. Trustee Wilbrink said that he would
volunteer to look into the accounting/funding of individual member accounts.
Trustee Williams and Supervisor Martin also offered their assistance.
Supervisor Martin asked Clerk Dahlstrom to procure more information regarding
the individual accounts.
NEW BUSINESS
Cemetery Committee Master Plan update/Columbarium
Cemetery Board Chairman, Greg Lammers, reported on the Master Plan for the
cemetery and gave an extensive report on the placement of a columbarium on the
cemetery grounds. Discussion ensued and it was agreed that the Cemetery Board
should proceed with gathering more information regarding the placement of a
columbarium in it’s Master Plan.
Parks Baseball Fields
Dan Demitroff, representing the Red Cedar Recreation Association, explained a
proposal to build two ball diamonds at the township park. He stated that this
was a necessity because of an increased need for game and practice fields. A
sketch of the proposed look was also included.
He also said that they would like to have a scoreboard at the township hall
ball diamond.
Motion by Martin to allow the Red Cedar Recreation Association to move forward
with their plans for baseball diamond work at the township park and scoreboard
work at the township hall park and to ask that the Parks Commission oversee
their progress.
Seconded by Hayes.
Carried unanimously.
Supervisor Martin stated that the security posts have been installed around the
porta-john at the township park and added that a warrant for the arrest for the
perpetrator accused of the vandalism at the park has been issued. She also
stated that posts needed to be placed around the parking areas to limit the
destruction of fields and grass.
Historical Committee
Trustee Wilbrink stated that he would soon submit a report regarding the
committee’s plans for the upcoming year. Supervisor Martin requested that all
plans for Branch School be submitted to the Board for approval. Discussion
ensued regarding the need for more volunteers to join the committee, and
Supervisor Martin stated that there would be articles on the website and in the
next edition of the township newsletter.
Audit Update
Treasurer LeBlanc submitted copies of a proposal from Carolan & McGarry that
had been received the day of this meeting. He further stated that this full
audit would be very expensive because of the matter of examining every
transaction. He said he had talked to our regular auditing firm of Abraham &
Gaffney and was told that what the township was requesting was “over the top”
and that it was not necessary to be that extensive.
Motion by LeBlanc that the Treasurer invite bids from local accounting firms to
audit both the General Fund and Cemetery Fund payroll and payroll liability
accounts for the 2006-07 fiscal year. This audit is to be supervised by the
Clerk, Treasurer, and Supervisor, the auditor will present a written report,
and the audit will consist of the following work:
   a.   For each payroll expenditure transaction recorded in the general ledger
      i.   Examine related supporting documentation (time sheet, Board meeting
minutes, etc.)
      ii.   Verify that amount of transaction in general ledger agrees with
supporting documentation (hours on time sheet by rate of pay for hourly
employees, appropriate rate of pay for salaried employees as documented in
Board minutes)
      iii.   Verify that expenditure was linked in general ledger with
appropriate fund, account, and period recorded
      iv.   Examine canceled check, which will be furnished by the township,
and compare with amount, date, and vendor in general ledger
      v.   Examine endorsements on cancelled check for appropriateness
   b.   For each payroll liability transaction recorded in the general ledger
      i.   Examine related supporting documentation (remittance advice, IRS
Forms 941, etc.)
      ii.   Verify that amount of transaction in general ledger agrees with
supporting documentation (payment amount in remittance agrees with general
ledger)
      iii.   Verify that the disbursement was correctly reflected in the
general ledger (appropriate fund, reduction of appropriate liability account,
correct period recorded)
      iv.   Recompute amounts withheld based upon original source documentation
(e. g. government withholding tables, pension plan withhold rates) and verify
that township withheld and remitted the correct amount.
Seconded by Hayes.
Roll Call Vote:
 
Hayes Williams Wright LeBlanc Wilbrink Dahlstrom Martin
Yes   Yes      Yes    Yes     Yes      Yes       Yes
 
Motion carries.
Reports
Clerk Dahlstrom commented on his submitted list of needed budget amendments. It
was suggested to wait until after the audit, recalculate and make the
amendments at that time, basing his calculations on the 2007-08 budget, not the
2006-07 budget.
Supervisor Martin reported on the groundbreaking for the new NIESA facility,
the local township chapter meeting and stated that the ICRC has reinstated
their matching road repair funds for all townships. She also urged everyone to
contact their state representatives and senators regarding the proposed threat
to eliminate township government as a cost saving measure.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 9:59 pm.
∙   Cindy Davis: regarding inquiring as to which firm Meridian Township uses
for their audit.
∙   John Kennedy: regarding a policy/procedure for soliciting bids for township
work.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 10:04 pm
Motion by Hayes to enter into closed session to discuss an open investigation
by the State Police regarding the 401a irregularities posed by the Clerk.
Seconded by Wright.
Roll Call Vote:
 
Martin Dahlstrom LeBlanc Wright Wilbrink Hayes Williams
Yes    No        No      Yes    No       Yes   Yes
 
Motion carries.
The Board entered into a closed session at 10:05 pm.
The Board reconvened the regular meeting at 10:15 pm.
Supervisor Martin announced that the annual joint meeting, this year hosted by
the City of Williamston at the Community Center, would be held at 7:00 pm on
Wednesday, May 23, 2007.
Supervisor Martin reviewed the meeting:
∙   Treasurer LeBlanc would work on the reconciliation report.
∙   Clerk Dahlstrom would work on the revenue/expenditure report.
∙   Clerk Dahlstrom would publish notice of the ordinance rescission.
∙   Trustee Wilbrink would bring forth a building plan from the Historical
Committee.
∙   At this time, there is no meeting scheduled for May 15, 2007.
Supervisor Martin adjourned the meeting at 10:20 pm.
Howard M. Dahlstrom
Township Clerk
May 22, 2007
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened in a special meeting at 5:30 pm at
the Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston,
Michigan.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer LeBlanc, Trustee Wright, Trustee Hayes,
Trustee Williams
    Clerk Dahlstrom and Supervisor Martin.
Absent: None
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 5:32 p.m.
·   Helen LeBlanc: regarding comments on a private internet blog regarding
information discussed by the Board after the last closed session.
·   Wendell Proudfoot: commented on the previously mentioned blog; also
commented on fees for copies of draft (inserted with minutes approval on 6-5-
07) minutes.
·   John Kennedy: regarding the timeframes for availability of minutes and
draft minutes.
Supervisor Martin said that draft minutes are to be available eight days after
the meeting and approved minutes are to be available five days after approval.
(inserted with minutes approval on 6-5-07)
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 5:36 p.m.
Broadband Internet
Supervisor Martin explained the current status of the project and said that
members of the committee would present their information and recommendations.
Marv Thompson explained the submitted compilation of responses from various
prospective providers of internet service. Services, rates, installation
timeframes and financing were discussed. It was the recommendation of the
committee that the township designate Freedom Net as the selected provider. A
letter of support was submitted by Bradley & Lou Sharo of Lounsbury Road in
support of the project.
Motion by Hayes to designate Freedom Net as the selected provider for broadband
internet services to the township of Williamstown and to authorize the
broadband internet committee to move forward with negotiations.
Seconded by Williams.
Carried unanimously.
Committee member Kurt Guter explained the variables involved with the tower,
including the building, maintenance and costs associated with the project. He
submitted a comparison sheet and reported information gathered through his
research. Financing and possible loans for the project would take more research
into how and if the township could be involved in this aspect.
Motion by Hayes to authorize the broadband internet committee to move forward
with negotiations with Freedom Net regarding building the tower needed for
broadband internet.
Seconded by LeBlanc.
Carried unanimously.
401a
Supervisor Martin initiated discussion regarding unresolved issues with the
plan and commented on Clerk Dahlstrom’s allegations. She said that she has
contacted Plunkett and Cooney regarding investigating the matter and issuing an
opinion. She said they would charge $175.00 per hour, and would try to keep the
total amount around $2,000.00. Discussion ensued regarding who would be the
contact person on behalf of the township. Trustee Wilbrink suggested that one
or more of the trustees contact the attorney (inserted with minutes approval on
6-5-07). Trustee Hayes stated that we should not even be in this situation
because the Clerk, in closed session, did not provide any information or
substantiation for any allegations. Treasurer LeBlanc stated that the entire
Board should receive the opinion rendered by the Attorney.
Motion by Williams to approve the hiring of Plunkett & Cooney, with the
attorney selecting a township contact person, to investigate the allegations
regarding the township 401a plan.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
Information
Treasurer LeBlanc will open sealed bids at 6:00 pm on May 23, 2007 for the
audit and will present information at the next meeting.
Supervisor Martin reminded the Board of the Joint Meeting with the City that
will take place at 7:00 pm on May 23, 2007.
Supervisor Martin adjourned the meeting at 6:55 p.m.
__________________
Howard M. Dahlstrom
Township Clerk
June 5, 2007
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 PM at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order.
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer LeBlanc, Trustee Wright, Trustee Hayes,
Trustee Williams
    Clerk Dahlstrom and Supervisor Martin.
Absent: None.
CONSENT AGENDA
§   Minutes of 5/1/07, 5/22/07 and 5/22/07 Closed Meeting.
§   Treasurer Report
§   Building Inspector Report
§   Accounts Payable
§   Revenue /Expenditure Report
During discussion it was the consensus to remove all items from the consent
agenda, with the exception of the Building Inspector Report, enabling
discussion of same.
Motion by Hayes to accept the Building Inspectors Report as submitted.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
Motion by Hayes to accept the minutes of May 1, 2007 and May 22, 2007 with the
following corrections.
May 1 Minutes – Pg.2
Building Inspector Report
Trustee Wilbrink questioned the building fee involved with the addition work
(REWORDED with minutes approval on 6-5-07) at the residence of Trustee
Williams. Trustee Williams replied that the reason the materials cost is so low
is because he already had much of the material needed on hand.
May 22 Minutes – Pg.1
∙   Wendell Proudfoot: commented on the previously mentioned blog; also
commented on fees for copies of draft (inserted with minutes approval on 6-5-
07) minutes.
Supervisor Martin said that draft minutes are to be available eight days after
the meeting and approved minutes are to be available five days after approval.
(sentence inserted with minutes approval on 6-5-07)
May 22 Minutes – Pg.2
401a
….Discussion ensued regarding who would be the contact person on behalf of the
township. Trustee Wilbrink suggested that one or more of the trustees contact
the attorney (inserted with minutes approval on 6-5-07).
Seconded by Dahlstrom.
Carried unanimously.
Discussion ensued regarding the Treasurer’s Report and it was the consensus to
withhold action on the report because it was not reconciled to the general
ledger.
Discussion ensued regarding the Accounts Payable and Payroll Report.
Motion by Wilbrink to approve the expenditures referenced on township check
numbers 16215-16331, removing number 16302, for a total amount of $54,287.14.
Subsequent payment is to be made to Assessment & Valuation Services.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
 
Motion by Wilbrink to approve the expenditures referenced on cemetery check
numbers 5472-5493 for a total amount of $4,576.09.
Seconded by LeBlanc.
Carried unanimously.
 
Motion by Martin to not approve the revenue/expenditure report until account
names, Treasurer temporary help line item and unemployment breakdowns are
corrected. The report should also reflect an end date of the last day of the
previous month.
Seconded by Williams.
Carried unanimously.
 
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:30 p.m.
Helen LeBlanc: regarding stipulations, requirements and reports of
organizations who receive township funds.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:33 p.m.
PLANNING COMMISSION
Planning Commission Chairman Michael Fielek commented on recent commission
business as outlined in the submitted minutes of the May 15, 2007 meeting, and
commented on a joint planning meeting to be held with the Meridian Township
Planning Commission.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Park Request
Supervisor Martin stated that the Parks Committee declined to allocate money
for the development of baseball fields at the township park. Discussion ensued.
Motion by Martin to approve an amount of $1,000.00 for reimbursement for
expenses incurred in the development of two new ball fields at the township
park.
Seconded by Hayes.
Motion passes.
A recess was called at 7:50 pm and the meeting reconvened at 7:55pm.
BS&A Treasury Internet Site
Treasurer LeBlanc explained the proposal to place tax information on the
internet.
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP RESOLUTION #62
INTERNET ACCESS TO TAX DATABASE
Resolution by Treasurer LeBlanc.
Be it resolved that as a service to township taxpayers and to businesses that
serve current and potential township taxpayers, the Treasurer is authorized to
arrange for making the township’s Equalizer Tax database available on the
Internet. This is to be done through an arrangement with BS&A Software, in
which the township will incur no expense and viewers will pay a fee of $ 2.00
per parcel for information viewed. Taxpayers may view information about their
own parcel free of charge.
Seconded by: Trustee Frans Wilbrink
Roll Call Vote:
 
Hayes Williams Wright LeBlanc Wilbrink Dahlstrom Martin
Yes   Yes      Yes    Yes     Yes      Yes       Yes
Resolution carries.
Payroll Audit Proposals 2006-07
Treasurer LeBlanc explained the proposals received and recommended Abraham &
Gaffney. Discussion ensued with some members stating they would like to wait
until after the research is completed regarding the alleged miscalculations
in investigation into (changed with minutes approval 7-10-07) the 401a issue.
Motion by LeBlanc to engage Abraham & Gaffney to conduct the proposed payroll
audit and that their work be supervised by the Supervisor, Treasurer and Clerk.
Seconded by Wilbrink.
Roll Call Vote:
 
Williams Wright Dahlstrom Hayes Martin LeBlanc Wilbrink
No       No     Yes       No    No     Yes     Yes
Motion fails.
Reconciliation of Township Funds
Treasurer LeBlanc explained the problems involved with reconciling accounts in
the BS&A software. Discussion ensued.
NEW BUSINESS
Hideaway Woods #5 Final Plat
Motion by Wilbrink to approve Hideaway Woods #5 Final Plat subject to the
condition that the utility easement with the City of Williamston shall be
submitted to the Township Board when recorded.
Seconded by LeBlanc.
Carried unanimously.
Road Improvements - 2007
Discussion ensued regarding the information received from the Transportation
Committee and the Ingham County Road Commission regarding the 2007 Road
Improvement Program.
Motion by Hayes to approve the 2007 road improvement recommendations of the
transportation committee as follows:
·   Finish reconstruction of Barry road from Lounsbury Rd to Williamston Road.
·   Oakleaf Hills Subdivision, Single Micro-surface
·   Ebright Road, Double Micro-Surface
·   Damon Rd, Single Micro-Surface
·   Crackfilling on Congdon, Oliver & Wilfors Dr plus Newman Rd East of
Meridian.
Seconded by Williams.
Carried unanimously
Rental Agreement
Supervisor martin explained the reason for the changes to the form, and felt
that the elimination of the liability insurance clause was justified.
Motion by Hayes to approve the revised hall rental form as typographically
corrected.
Seconded by Williams.
Carried unanimously.
Reports
Treasurer LeBlanc elaborated on his submitted report regarding payroll items
being included in the general ledger, mobile home hook-up fees and a CD
rollover. He then read from a prepared statement tendering his resignation from
the office of Treasurer, effective June 30, 2007 at 11:59 pm.
Motion by Hayes to accept the resignation of Treasurer Albert LeBlanc,
effective at 11:59 pm, June 30, 2007.
Seconded by Williams.
Motion carried.
 
Motion by Wilbrink to approve the placement of a notice in the Williamston
Enterprise and on the township website seeking candidates to fill the position
of Treasurer.
Seconded by Williams.
Carried unanimously.
 
Clerk Dahlstrom commented on his submitted motion to establish fees for voter
lists. Discussion ensued and it was the consensus that more research was needed
to see if the fees were in line with other communities.
Trustee Wilbrink commented on information regarding NIESA,, the Parks Committee
and the Cemetery Board.
Supervisor Martin reported on the efforts to acquire an updated copier, the
progress of the Broadband Internet project, hall rental procedures and thanked
the township employees for the great work they do at the township hall and with
the landscaping on the grounds. Appreciation was also extended to all the
volunteers who are helping with the township park well and baseball diamonds.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 9:12 pm.
·   Cindy Davis: regarding the resignation of the Treasurer and support of the
$1,000.00 reimbursement allocation for township park development expenses.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 9:15 pm
Supervisor Martin reviewed the meeting:
·   Approval of the closed session minutes is still pending.
·   Treasurer LeBlanc would work on the reconciliation report.
·   Clerk Dahlstrom would work on the revenue/expenditure report.
·   The payroll audit is on hold and the regular audit will begin in July
·   Supervisor Martin would contact the ICRC regarding the 2007 road
improvements.
·   Clerk Dahlstrom will place the Treasurer position notice in the paper.
·   The Board will meet on Tuesday, June 19, 2007 at 5:30 pm.
upervisor Martin adjourned the meeting at 9:20 pm.
            
Howard M. Dahlstrom
Township Clerk
June 19, 2007
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened in a meeting at 5:30 pm at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer LeBlanc, Trustee Wright, Trustee Hayes,
Trustee Williams
    Clerk Dahlstrom and Supervisor Martin.
Absent: None
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 5:31 p.m. There was none.
Auditors Report – Bill Tucker
Bill Tucker, of Abraham & Gaffney, stated that he had spent the day at the
township hall examining and correcting some accounting problems. He stated that
the Cemetery Fund reconciliations were complete through March 2007 and the
General Fund reconciliations were complete through February 2007. He added that
accounts were set up in the BS&A software for the tax bank accounts, and there
would be no further usage of Quickbooks for these accounts. He stated that
Quickbooks should now only be used for reference. He further stated that all
Certificates of Deposit balances were correct. Journal entries were still
needed for some previous 2006 checks and other items. Trustee Williams asked
about the advisability of outsourcing payroll and Mr. Tucker said that’s a
possibility because of a seemingly high rate of employee turnover, but that
when Treasurer LeBlanc talks to BS&A regarding the issues that were discussed
today, it would most probably rectify the payroll problems also. Mr. Tucker
concluded by saying that the audit should be on schedule to begin on July 23,
2007.
Treasurer Appointment
Supervisor Martin explained that there were two applicants, Gwen Chirico-
Brandon and Janet T. Eyster, for the position of Treasurer being vacated by
Treasurer LeBlanc as of June 30, 2007.
Supervisor Martin called for public comment regarding this issue. There was
none.
Supervisor Martin stated that the Board members had submitted questions for the
candidates and they had been compiled into one sheet and distributed to the
Board. The series of questions were asked first of Gwen Chirico-Brandon and
then Janet T. Eyster. Upon completion of the verbal response sessions, the
candidates voluntarily left the meeting to enable the Board to discuss the
responses. Discussion ensued with the consensus being that both candidates
exhibited great experience and qualifications for the position and that the
decision is very difficult.
Motion by Wright to appoint Janet T. Eyster to the position of Township
Treasurer, effective July 1, 2007, to fill the balance of the term that expires
on November 21, 2008.
Seconded by Hayes.
Carried unanimously. (Treasurer LeBlanc did not vote on this motion.)
Trustee Wright stated that he hoped Gwen Chirico-Brandon would continue her
current employment with the Township.
Clerk Dahlstrom commented on his submitted cost report regarding the well
project at the park.
Supervisor Martin explained that the township has had a copier at the township
hall for a trial period and it has performed up to expectations. It was her
recommendation that the copier be purchased. Discussion ensued regarding the
capabilities and need for this copier. Supervisor Martin stated that a
replacement copier was budgeted into the 2007-08 budget. Discussion of disposal
of the old copier took place, with Trustee Williams suggesting that the Chamber
of Commerce is in need of a copier.
Supervisor Martin gave a brief update on the Broadband project, stating that
preliminary customer signups and tower placement survey work were taking place.
It is possible that a site plan for the tower could go to the Planning
Commission in July.
Supervisor Martin adjourned the meting at 6:50pm.
__________________
Howard M. Dahlstrom
Township Clerk
July 3, 2007
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened in a meeting at 10:00 am at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan
for the purpose of enacting a bank signatory resolution.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Trustee Wright, Trustee Hayes, Trustee Williams
    Clerk Dahlstrom and Supervisor Martin.
Absent: None
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 10:03 a.m. There was none.
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP RESOLUTION #63
BANK SIGNATORIES
Resolution by Trustee Wright.
Be it resolved that all bank account and money market account signature cards
will be submitted with four authorized signers. These signers will be the
current Clerk and Deputy Clerk, and the current Treasurer and Deputy Treasurer.
It will be the policy of this township that any check or withdrawal order will
require two signatures: one from the Clerk department and one from the Treasury
department, and one of these two signatures must be that of the Clerk or the
Treasurer. Whenever possible, investment accounts such as bank certificates of
deposit will be set up as book entry instruments in the name of Williamstown
Township and without signature cards. New signature cards will be submitted
with the following authorized signers:
Clerk: Howard M. Dahlstrom Deputy Clerk: Robert J. Cwiertniewicz
Treasurer: Janet T. Eyster Deputy Treasurer: Lori Hurst
Seconded by Trustee Wilbrink
Roll call vote:
Supervisor Mickey Martin:   yes
Clerk Howard Dahlstrom:   yes
Trustee Frans Wilbrink:      yes       
Trustee Martin Wright:       yes       
Trustee Bob Hayes:       yes      
Trustee Rick Williams:      yes    
Supervisor Martin adjourned the meting at 10:09 a.m.
__________________
Howard M. Dahlstrom
Township Clerk
July 10, 2007
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 PM at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order and introduced Treasurer Janet T.
Eyster, in attendance for her first meeting since taking over the position.
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer Eyster, Trustee Wright, Trustee Hayes,
Trustee Williams
    Clerk Dahlstrom and Supervisor Martin.
Absent: None.
Also Present: Michael Fielek, Planning Commission Chair & Building Inspector,
Mark Miller.
CONSENT AGENDA
§   Minutes of 6/5/07, 6/19/07 and 7/3/07 Meetings.
§   Treasurer Report
§   Building Inspector Report
§   Accounts Payable
§   Revenue /Expenditure Report
During discussion it was the consensus to remove all items from the consent
agenda, with the exception of the Building Inspector Report and the minutes of
the July 3, 2007 meeting.
Motion by Hayes to accept the Building Inspectors Report and the minutes of the
July 3, 2007 Board meeting as submitted.
Seconded by Martin.
Carried unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:09 p.m.
Al LeBlanc: regarding the ease of transition with Treasurer Eyster taking over
the responsibilities of the office, and issues and work still outstanding.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:10 p.m.
PLANNING COMMISSION
Planning Commission Chairman Michael Fielek commented on recent commission
business as outlined in the submitted minutes of the June 19, 2007 meeting, and
explained the recommendations for approval of a site plan for 4922 N.
Williamston Road and the removal of an interpretation of a “like use” for
canine training facilities. He also reported on a successful joint meeting held
with the Meridian Township Planning Commission, and said that the feasibility
of a joint commission for border areas was encouraged by Supervisor Susan
McGillicuddy of Meridian Township, Supervisor Roni Christmas of Bath Township
and Supervisor Mickey Martin of Williamstown Township, and is being studied.
Mr. Fielek stated that the next meeting of the joint commissions, date yet to
be determined, would be held at Meridian Township.
Motion by Hayes to approve the site plan for Baird Arena & Riding Stables, 4922
N. Williamston Road, with the following two stipulations to be successfully
resolved:
∙   Provide additional required details of the proposed retaining pond.
∙   Provide the agreement of conditions and limitations on the use of a riding
arena in a format recordable by the Register of Deeds.
Seconded by Williams.
Carried unanimously.
 
Motion by Wilbrink to remove the interpretation that a canine training facility
use shall be considered a like use as 8.02 CC3.
Seconded by Hayes.
Carried Unanimously
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Internet Tower Update
Supervisor Martin explained the latest details regarding the wireless internet
project, including information that the contract with FreedomNet is in its
fourth draft and that the tower costs on the part of the township would only be
$60,000.00.
Eastside Development – MHSDA Senior Apartments
Ms. Cheryl McHallam, of McHallam Development, explained the proposal for the
project known as the Red Cedar Meadows Senior Apartments, a 30-unit building to
be located at 2365 E. Grand River. Project information was disseminated to the
Board including rental rates, amenities, square footage and developer
information. The developer was looking for a show of support from the Township
Board, pursuant to requirements for MHSDA funding.
Motion by Wright to endorse the concept of the project known as the Red Cedar
Meadows Senior Apartments, and to encourage all parties to move forward in its
development.
Seconded by Williams.
Carried Unanimously
Packets
Supervisor Martin explained that with the acquisition of the new copier, and in
consideration of time spent and paper used to assemble Board packets, that it
would be more cost efficient to develop a program to enable the email delivery
of Board packets. The copier has a scanner component that can convert any
document into an electronic format that can be easily dispatched through email.
Discussion ensued regarding the concept including the establishment of email
addresses, placing these full packets on the township website, and the use of
laptop computer by Board members at the meetings. Supervisor Martin said that
she would like to begin with the emailing of packets and then possibly extend
the project to posting packets on the website. It was the consensus of the
Board to move forward with the development of the project, and that Clerk
Dahlstrom would check into the establishment of email addresses and Supervisor
Martin would check with legal counsel regarding FOIA of personal emails.
HB 4780
Supervisor Martin elaborated on the impact of the possible passage of House
Bill 4780, which would reduce and/or eliminate the township’s responsibilities
in the areas of tax collection, assessing and elections. Supervisor Martin
advised the Board and the public to contact our legislators in Lansing to urge
them to defeat this bill. She said that she had recently talked to the Ingham
County Controller and he said that there would be great difficulty in assuming
these responsibilities. Cindy Davis, of the Michigan Townships Association, in
attendance at the meeting, said that the MTA is encouraging the defeat of this
bill and that it was the opinion of the Association that this was just the
first step down the road to the possibility of eliminating township government
in the State of Michigan.
Treasurer’s Report
The Treasurer’s report submitted by previous Treasurer Al LeBlanc was
addressed, with Supervisor Martin saying that the bank reconciliation have not
yet been reconciled to the general fund. Treasurer Eyster thanked the previous
Treasurer and the township hall staff and officials for their help during the
transition to her new position.
Accounts Payable Report
Questions regarding purposes of specific payments were asked and answered, with
Supervisor Martin adding that she would like to see the report include the
general ledger numbers from which funds are being taken for each payment.
Discussion ensued regarding check number 16380, payable to Nationwide, which
appeared to be a duplicate or incorrect payment. After review, it was
determined that check number 16380 was voided, and a subsequent check for the
correct amount was issued. This check amount would have to be subtracted from
the accounts payable total.
Motion by Wilbrink to approve the expenditures referenced on township check
numbers 16332-16461, excluding voided check number 16380, for a total
recalculated amount of $59.681.54.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
 
Motion by Wilbrink to approve the expenditures referenced on cemetery check
numbers 5494-5524 for a total amount of $9,564.73.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
Revenue-Expenditure Report
This report was not accepted as submitted and it was the consensus that the
Clerk, Treasurer and Supervisor would need to caucus and make the necessary
changes to general ledger numbers, names and possible amounts. It was also the
consensus that all revenue-expenditure reports, in relation to the date of the
Board meeting, should reflect activity as of the last day of the previous
month.
Clerk Dahlstrom reported on future election activity and dates.
Supervisor Martin elaborated on her submitted report and asked for a motion
regarding an appropriation of funds for sponsorship and attendance at the
August Williamston Chamber of Commerce Luncheon. The cost for the sponsorship
is $100.00 and attendance cost is $10.00 per person. Discussion ensued with
Trustee Wilbrink stating that this was not listed as an agenda item and because
it is an expenditure, it should have been listed. Supervisor Martin stated that
her report was a part of the agenda, and that the request was listed inside her
report. Supervisor Martin also commented on parks and road information.
Motion by Wright to allocate $100.00 from account # 294-955 for sponsorship of
Chamber luncheon authorized by MCL 41.110c and $10.00 for the cost of the
attendance for anyone from Historical Committee and Board.
Seconded by Williams.
Motion carried.
Trustee Wilbrink asked whether a person has been hired for the website duties,
and Supervisor Martin replied affirmatively. Discussion ensued regarding
appointments to commissions and boards. It was the opinion of Trustee Wilbrink
that the appointments should be made by the Board. Trustee Wright said that in
some cases a law would dictate if the Supervisor makes the appointment or if
the appointment is recommended by the Supervisor and approved by the Board. As
discussion ensued it was the consensus that there should be a policy
established for appointments to the Cemetery Board, and perhaps for all
committees. Trustee Wilbrink also stated that if an item or issue is not on the
agenda, it should be added at the beginning of the meeting, or not addressed at
all.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 8:55 pm.
∙   Al LeBlanc: confirming that Wendell Proudfoot is inquiring as to the
identity of (added with minutes approval-8-7-07) the new township Webmaster.
∙   Cindy Davis: regarding insurance payments listed for the meeting.
∙   Ruth Templeton: regarding computer passwords.
∙   Jennifer Johnson: regarding her appreciation for the canine use rescission.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 9:03 pm
Supervisor Martin reviewed the meeting:
∙   Wanda Bloomquist would handle the post approval work for the site plan.
∙   The Clerk would check into the email address issue.
∙   The Supervisor would contact FreedomNet regarding the email address issue.
∙   The Treasurer and Supervisor would work on an appointment policy for
commissions and committees.
Supervisor Martin adjourned the meeting at 9:05 pm.
                  
Howard M. Dahlstrom
Township Clerk
August 7, 2007
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 pm at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer Eyster, Trustee Wright, Trustee Hayes,
Trustee Williams
    Clerk Dahlstrom and Supervisor Martin.
Absent: None.
Also Present: Michael Fielek, Planning Commission Chair & Building Inspector,
Mark Miller.
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
CONSENT AGENDA
§   Minutes of 7/10/07 Meeting
§   Treasurer Report
§   Building Inspector Report
§   Accounts Payable
§   Revenue /Expenditure Report
During discussion it was the consensus to remove all items from the consent
agenda, with the exception of the Building Inspector Report.
Motion by Eyster to approve the Consent Agenda.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:06 p.m.
Jeff Bartrem: regarding Library fundraising efforts and CADL millages and
procedures.
Al LeBlanc: regarding his submitted communication regarding Medicare
withholding issues.
Helen LeBlanc: regarding her submitted communication regarding Medicare
withholding issues.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:19 p.m.
PLANNING COMMISSION
Planning Commission Chairman Michael Fielek commented on recent commission
business as outlined in the submitted minutes of the July 17, 2007 meeting, and
explained the recommendations for approval of a site plan and special land use
for the Internet Tower.
Motion by Hayes to approve the site plan and special land use for the proposed
wireless communications tower, subject to revising the site plan to provide a
vinyl-coated chain-link fence, providing landscaping to screen the ground
operations on the north and west, and obtaining all necessary permits from
outside agencies. A demolition bond for the tower will be secured if, and when,
the township no longer owns the tower.
Seconded by Williams.
Carried unanimously.
 
Chairman Fielek informed the Board regarding possible September meetings for
the overlay district issue and commented on the Commission’s approval,
following a public hearing, of text amendments for agricultural zoning.
Supervisor Martin explained that the text amendment recommendations have been
forwarded to the Township Attorney for his review.
The meeting recessed at 7:30 pm and reconvened at 7:35 pm.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Broadband Agreements
Supervisor Martin explained the latest details regarding the agreements and
asked for committee member Marv Thomson to explain each of the agreements. Mr.
Thomson handed out a summary sheet of both agreements highlighting the
important issues. Representatives of FreedomNet, in attendance, offered
clarifications and details in response to questions from the Board. Discussion
ensued and it was agreed to continue working on both agreements.
Motion by Williams to allow the committee, in conjunction with the Township
Attorney and representatives from FreedomNet, to move forward with fine-tuning
the Equipment Lease Agreement and the Tower Site Lease.
Seconded by Hayes.
Carried unanimously.
 
401a Investigation
Supervisor Martin explained that the report is not yet complete and that it
should be available for the September meeting.
 
Voter List Fees
Clerk Dahlstrom explained the research and recommendation that is being
presented. These fees will be for those who wish to buy voter information lists
from the township.
Motion by Eyster to immediately effect charges for voter lists as follows:
·   hard copy lists – 2 cents per name
·   electronic copy lists – 1 cent per name
·   daily AV list subscription - $5.00 per election
Each list shall contain the precinct, name, address and school system of the
voters and shall be issued in either hard copy or electronic document,
whichever is requested. All fees shall be non-refundable
Seconded by Wilbrink.
Carried unanimously.
 
Board Packets
Clerk Dahlstrom explained a proposed policy for Board packets, with timeframes
and deadlines, in order to increase efficiency in this area of the work in the
Clerk’s office. Discussion ensued, including the possibility of future packets
being delivered electronically through email, the Board submitting preferred
email addresses for packet distribution and posting of the packet on the
township website. It was agreed that the procedure and timeframes for Board
packets would continue to be developed.
 
Minutes of 7/10/07 Meeting
Motion by Williams to approve the minutes of July 10, 2007 with the following
changes to page 4
·   Al LeBlanc: confirming that Wendell Proudfoot is inquiring as to the
identity of the new township webmaster.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
 
Treasurer’s Report
Treasurer Eyster explained the submitted reports covering January, February,
March and April. She elaborated on the bank reconciliation procedure, deposits
in transit and listing interest payments received in the software. Discussion
ensued and Treasurer Eyster requested that the Board bring the reports
distributed tonight to the September Board meeting to reduce copying time.
 
Accounts Payable Report
Clerk Dahlstrom explained the reports submitted for the meeting, and stressed
that all reports were printed directly from the BS&A software.
Motion by Wright to approve, pending review by the Supervisor and Treasurer,
payments for accounts payable, as submitted by Clerk Dahlstrom, in the amount
of $29,895.47-Township and $393.51-Cemetery.
Seconded by Hayes.
Carried unanimously.
 
Supervisor Martin reported that she and Trustee Hayes would be attending an
upcoming MTA conference. She also reminded the Board of the upcoming
Williamston Area Chamber of Commerce Luncheon scheduled for Thursday, August
23, 2007.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 9:20 pm.
There was none.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 9:21 pm
Supervisor Martin adjourned the meeting at 9:22 pm.
            
Howard M. Dahlstrom
Township Clerk
August 24, 2007
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened in a meeting at 8:05 am at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan
for the purposes/issues of broadband internet contracts, report from treasurer,
credit cards and audit.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Trustee Wright, Trustee Hayes, Trustee Williams
    Clerk Dahlstrom, Treasurer Eyster and Supervisor Martin.
Absent: None
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 8:06 a.m. There was none.
BROADBAND INTERNET CONTRACTS
Supervisor Martin explained the work completed in this project and asked that
Broadband Committee member Marv Thomson explain the final drafts of the Tower
Site Lease, Equipment Lease and the Non-Exclusive Agreement for Broadband
Wireless Internet and VOIP Telephone Service. Discussion ensued.
Motion by Wright to approve the Tower Site Lease, Equipment Lease and the Non-
Exclusive Agreement for Broadband Wireless Internet and VOIP Telephone Service
with the following changes:
·   Non-Exclusive Agreement-Section 9 add clause that calls for FNS to provide
copies of all permits obtained.
·   Tower Site Lease-Part 2 (C)-add electrical to clause, in addition to
telephone cable
·   Equipment Lease-section 1- after “Within 20 days of receipt of the proof of
the customer installation”—add ” , including location, serial number and model
number of equipment”.
 
Seconded by Hayes.
Roll Call Vote:
 
Williams Wright Dahlstrom Hayes Martin Eyster Wilbrink
Yes      Yes    Yes       Yes   Yes    Yes    No
 
Motion carries.
 
Recess was ordered at 8:40am. The meeting reconvened at 8:45am.
REPORT FROM THE TREASURER
Treasurer Eyster commented on the 401a plan problems for 2006, and said that it
is possible that revised W-2 forms may be need to be computed and distributed
to elected officials. She said that she is still researching 2007, but it
appears there may be Medicare-match problems with the first three calendar
months. She said that there does not appear to be a problem with Social
Security withholding, but has concluded that the Medicare percentage being
withheld and forwarded may not be correct. Further work and verification needs
to be done.
CREDIT CARDS
Supervisor Martin said that there is a credit card bill through Bank of America
that has not been paid. It was explained that there are two separate Bank of
America credit cards, and the one that includes charges related to attendance
at a conference by the Supervisor was the one that had not been paid. Clerk
Dahlstrom said that he had not received a breakdown for the charges, enabling
him to charge the expenses to the proper account. Treasurer Eyster and
Supervisor Martin stated that receipts for all but one charge were in the file
Clerk Dahlstrom submitted. Supervisor Martin said that there should have been
more follow-up with the invoice so that the invoice could have been paid
without incurring late charges. Discussion ensued with the consensus being that
these bills should be paid within 60 days per the financial policy.
Motion by Wright to enable a review of all credit card bills and accounts by
the Treasurer and Board Trustee Wright enable proper accounting of same.
Seconded by Hayes.
Carried unanimously.
 
AUDIT
Clerk Dahlstrom explained the communication from Abraham & Gaffney who availed
their services for the purpose of review and reconciliation of the township’s
941 reports to the general ledger at an estimated time frame of eight hours and
an estimated cost of $800.00. Discussion ensued with Treasurer Eyster asking
that the company review the procedure and figures currently being used, and
determine if the township is following correct procedures and using correct
percentages. She said that perhaps there is not a problem that necessitates a
$100.00 per hour fee. It was the consensus that the Treasurer contact Abraham &
Gaffney to see what arrangements could be made for a meeting with her, the
Supervisor, the Clerk and the Deputy Clerk.
 
Supervisor Martin adjourned the meting at 9:25 a.m.
__________________
Howard M. Dahlstrom
Township Clerk
September 11, 2007
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 pm at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer Eyster, Trustee Wright, Trustee Hayes,
Trustee Williams
    Clerk Dahlstrom and Supervisor Martin.
Absent: None.
Also Present: Michael Fielek, Planning Commission Chair & Building Inspector,
Mark Miller.
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
CONSENT AGENDA
§   Minutes of 8/7/07 & 8/24/07 Meetings
§   Treasurer Report
§   Building Inspector Report
§   Accounts Payable
§   Revenue /Expenditure Report
 
During discussion it was the consensus to remove the minutes of 8/24.07 and the
revenue-expenditure report from the consent agenda.
Motion by Wilbrink to approve the Consent Agenda.
Seconded by Eyster.
Carried unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:10 p.m.
Darryl Brown: regarding the need for a traffic signal at Grand River & Zimmer.
County Commissioner Steve Dougan: regarding issues before the County
Commissioners; the opening of the new football stadium for Williamston High
school; rural patrols by the County.
 
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:16 p.m.
PLANNING COMMISSION
Planning Commission Chairman Michael Fielek commented on the action items
presented top the Board by the Planning Commission. He said that the reason for
the zoning ordinance amendments was to become compliant with the Right To Farm
Act.
Motion by Wright to approve zoning ordinance amendments to sections 1.03,
8.02,11.02,13.01,13.02,14.01,14.02,15.01,15.02 and 18.02, as submitted by
McKenna & Associates, enabling the township to be in compliance with the Right
To Farm Act.
Seconded by Hayes.
Carried unanimously.
 
Motion by Wright to approve an extension of a special land use &site plan for
parcel #33-03-03-34-101-003 with the extension to run from January 3, 2007 to
January 3, 2008.
Seconded by Hayes.
Carried unanimously.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Discussion regarding the 401a investigation was deferred to later in the
meeting.
NEW BUSINESS
Budget 2008-2009
Supervisor Martin encouraged department heads and Board Members to begin
planning for the 2008-09 budget, which will be taken up beginning in October.
She asked that line item work that would better define the budget and amounts
for departmental line items be researched.
 
January meeting date-request change
Discussione nsued regarding future Board meeting dates, leading to the
following motion.
Motion by Wright to approve the following changes to the Board Meeting
schedule. Cancel January 8, 2008 and meet January 16, 2008 at 700pm. Cancel
March 4, 2008 and meet March 5, 2008 at 7:00pm.
Seconded by Hayes.
Carried unanimously.
 
Minutes of 8.24.07
Discussion ensued leading to the following motion.
Motion by Hayes to approve the minutes of August 24, 2007 with the following
change. On pg.1, in the first motion, in the Equipment Lease section-add “and
serial” after model and before number.
Seconded by Wilbrink.
Carried unanimously.
 
Reports
Treasurer Eyster commented on her submitted report and said that the future
bank reconciliations will be on file with the Clerk, per the financial policy.
Clerk Dahlstrom commented on the progress of issuing Board E-Packets.
Supervisor Martin stated that the Cemetery Board would like to present a report
on the proposed columbarium and cemetery plans, and that a Board meeting would
be scheduled for September 18, 2007 at 5:30pm to discuss this matter as well as
parks issues and other matters of import. Supervisor Martin also announced a
Michigan Township Association meeting to be held on September 20, 2007.
 
401a Investigation
Motion by Hayes to convene a closed session to review the report and attorney
opinion regarding the 401a investigation.
Seconded by Wright.
Roll Call Vote:
 
Eyster Hayes Martin Wilbrink Williams Wright Dahlstrom
Yes    Yes   Yes    No       Yes      Yes    No
Motion carries.
 
The Board entered a closed session at 7:50pm.
Motion by Wright to reconvene in open session ay 8:35pm.
Seconded by Hayes
Carried unanimously.
 
Motion by Hayes to make public the documentation presented by attorney Otis
regarding the 401a investigation.
Seconded by Williams.
Carried unanimously.
 
Attorney David Otis explained the document presented stating that the scope of
the work by his firm was twofold.
First, to establish if there was an ongoing investigation by the Michigan State
Police regarding irregularities in the 401a Plan. To this issue he stated that
in communication with the State Police, that he was told there was not an
investigation started at any point regarding the allegations stated by Clerk
Dahlstrom. Further, that it was the recommendation of the State Police, top
Clerk Dahlstrom, to request an audit of the fund to determine if there were any
irregularities.
Second, to determine if there was embezzlement of insurance fraud with regard
to the administration of the 401a Plan. To this issue, the final conclusion was
that there was no basis found for the allegations and no evidence to support
the allegations.
Trustee Williams stated that he was unable to trust Clerk Dahlstrom in the
position of Clerk and demanded that (corrected with minutes approval on 10/2/
07) asked for the Clerk to resign. Trustee Hayes also stated that he would have
a hard time trusting the work of the Clerk, and that there while there may have
been mistakes made, there was no fraud and the allegations were inappropriate.
In response to audience comment, Supervisor Martin stated that this situation
was not an error by the Clerk; he made serious allegations of fraud. Clerk
Dahlstrom thanked everyone for their comments.
 
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 9:08 pm.
There was none.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 9:08 pm.
Supervisor Martin reviewed the meeting and called for an adjournment at 9:10
pm.
____________________________
Howard M. Dahlstrom
Township Clerk
September 18, 2007
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened in a meeting at 5:30 pm at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Trustee Wright, Trustee Hayes, Trustee Williams
    Clerk Dahlstrom, Treasurer Eyster and Supervisor Martin.
Absent: None
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 5:31 p.m.
Darrell Brown: regarding procedural questions about closed sessions and the
audit.
Bob Lombardini: commending the Board for their action regarding the 401a
allegations by Clerk Dahlstrom.
John Kennedy: regarding personal attacks made during public comment by audience
members.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 5:40 p.m.
CEMETERY DEVELOPMENT PLANS
Supervisor Martin asked Cemetery Board Chair, Greg Lammers to elaborate on the
submitted plans. Mr. Lammers explained the various components of the plan
resulting in the following motion.
Motion by Hayes to approve the following items for Summit Cemetery:
∙    Removal of old storage building and return to grade.
∙    Drilling of a new water well
∙    Definition of current property that is suitable for internments.
And to approve the concept of the construction of columbarium.
Seconded by Hayes (corrected with minutes approval on 10/2/07) Williams.
Carried unanimously.
PARK - PAVILLION
Jerry Fulcher explained the details and variables involved in the proposed
pavilion for the township park and commented on bids received. Discussion
ensued regarding possible partnerships to aid in the cost of the pavilion,
possible design changes to the proposed project and design considerations for
future improvements such as electricity. Discussions continued regarding a
possible re-design of the project to reduce the cost. It was the consensus that
further research would need to be done to encompass possible design changes and
the incorporation of a water well and electricity.
Dan Demitroff explained the improvements and usage of the baseball diamonds at
the township park and asked for permission to construct dugouts for the South
diamond. He explained the physical characteristics of the dugouts and said that
all labor and materials would be donated.
Motions by Dahlstrom to approve the construction of dugouts for the South
baseball diamond at the township park and to have the township’s Building
Inspector, Mark Miller oversee the project on behalf of the township.
Seconded by Hayes.
Carried unanimously
AUDIT
Treasurer Eyster explained that she has met with the auditors and said that new
941 Federal forms will be generated with revised social security and Medicare
figures. This should clear up the issues that are preventing the work on the
audit.
Treasurer Eyster said that she will be unable to attend the October 2nd Board
meeting, but will furnish reports as usual.
Trustee Hayes asked that the attorney report regarding the 401a investigation
be place on the township’s website.
Supervisor Martin adjourned the meting at 6:55 p.m.
__________________
Howard M. Dahlstrom
Township Clerk
October 2, 2007
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 pm at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Trustee Wright, Trustee Hayes, Trustee Williams
    Clerk Dahlstrom and Supervisor Martin.
Absent: Treasurer Eyster.
Also Present: Michael Fielek, Planning Commission Chair & Building Inspector,
Mark Miller.
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
CONSENT AGENDA
§   Minutes of 9/11/07 (open & closed) & 9/18707 Meetings
§   Treasurer Report
§   Building Inspector Report
§   Accounts Payable
§   Revenue /Expenditure Report
During discussion it was the consensus to remove the regular minutes of 9/11/07
and 9/18/07, the Treasurer Report, the Accounts Payable listing and the
Revenue-Expenditure Report from the consent agenda.
Motion by Hayes to approve the Consent Agenda.
Seconded by Wilbrink.
Carried unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:06 p.m.
Helen LeBlanc-4720 Jadestone Dr.
regarding the listing of “Correspondence” on the Board agenda.
John Kennedy-4787 Barton Rd.
commented on the statements of a public comment speaker at a previous meeting.
Roger Philip-5350 Barton Rd.
regarding Board conduct and campaign promises from those who were elected.
Trustee Wilbrink
read from a prepared statement regarding actions and attitudes of Board
members.
Trustee Williams
regarding enforcement of time limits for public comment.
Judge Tom Boyd
regarding October as Domestic Violence Awareness Month.
Trustee Hayes
disagreeing with comments from Trustee Wilbrink.
 
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:30 p.m.
PLANNING COMMISSION
Planning Commission Chairman Michael Fielek commented on recent commission
business as outlined in the submitted minutes of the September 18, 2007
meeting. Supervisor Martin asked Clerk Dahlstrom, liaison to the Parks
Committee, to enlist members of the committee to attend the overlay workshops
and seminars being arranged by the Planning Commission.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Branch School
Tom Johnson, Historic Committee Chairman, explained the submitted restoration
plan for Branch School. Lafollette Designers, creator of the submitted
blueprint, explained the variables involved with the plan including materials
that will be used and the reasons for certain design features. Agreeing that
the plan was impressive, discussion ensued regarding various items including
parking and budget for the refurbishment.
Motion by Wright to approve the concept of the refurbishment of Branch School
and to ask that the Historic Committee return with budget figures and further
details of the plan.
Seconded by Williams.
Carried unanimously.
Supervisor Martin stated that this project could be published in the Township
Newsletter to elicit comments and volunteers.
 
Investigation Costs
Supervisor Martin stated that costs for the investigation stand at $2,555.00,
but that there was one more expected invoice.
NEW BUSINESS
Pathways-Grant Proposal
Planning Commissioner/Planning Assistant Wanda Bloomquist explained that grant
money is available from various entities for 10-foot wide pedestrian pathways
along a 2.5 mile section of Grand River Avenue, between the City of Williamston
and Meridian Township. The Michigan Department of Transportation has encouraged
submission of applications for grant funds, which are reviewed on a quarterly
basis. She stated that the process is long and involved, explaining that
applications submitted now, would see fruition in 2010. She stated that the
state funds are combined with local matching funds to enable projects and that
she would work with a representative of Michigan Trailways regarding the
application process.
Motion by Wright to approve the continuance of research of availability of
grant money for pedestrian pathways for the Township.
Seconded by Williams.
Carried unanimously.
 
Township Asset Level
Supervisor Martin explained the need to set an asset level minimum for
township-owned real property and equipment, and she recommended that level be
set at $5,000.00.
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP RESOLUTION #64
ESTABLISHING ASSET LEVEL MINIMUM
Resolution by Trustee Hayes.
Be it resolved that the minimum asset level for township owned property and
equipment shall be set at five thousand dollars ($5,000.00)
Seconded by Trustee Wilbrink
Roll call vote:
Supervisor Mickey Martin:   yes
Clerk Howard Dahlstrom:   yes
Trustee Frans Wilbrink:      yes       
Trustee Martin Wright:       yes       
Trustee Bob Hayes:       yes      
Trustee Rick Williams:      yes    
Treasurer Janet T. Eyster - absent   
Motion by Hayes to approve the Board minutes of September 11, 2007 and
September 18, 2007 with the following corrections.
9/11-pg.4: Trustee Williams stated that he was unable to trust Clerk Dahlstrom
in the position of Clerk and demanded that asked for the Clerk to resign.
9/18-pg.1: Motion by Hayes to approve the following items for Summit Cemetery:
∙   Removal of old storage building and return to grade.
∙   Drilling of a new water well
∙   Definition of current property that is suitable for internments.
And to approve the concept of the construction of columbarium.
Seconded by Hayes Williams.
Carried unanimously.
 
Seconded by Williams.
Carried unanimously.
 
The treasurer report would be held until the return of the Treasurer.
Clerk Dahlstrom explained the Accounts Payable listing, calling for check
approval in the total amounts of $42,604.31-Township and $3804.98-Cemetery.
Supervisor Martin stated that the revenue-expenditure report correction
research would continue with the Treasurer and Clerk. Trustee Williams asked
that there be a review of the expenditures in the Board conference line item.
Motion by Wright to approve the closed session minutes of September 11, 2007.
Seconded by Williams.
Carried unanimously.
 
A recess was ordered at 8:25pm and the meeting reconvened at 8:40pm.
Motion by Wright to approve township check numbers 16653-16708 in the total
amount of $45,586.15 and cemetery check numbers 5560-5572 (omitting #5566) in
the total amount of $4,080.99, with the provision that a revised final listing
be created for approval.
Seconded by Wilbrink.
Carried unanimously.
REPORTS
Clerk Dahlstrom commented on the great work with the landscaping and sign at
the township park. Discussion ensued regarding parking problems with
participants of the Red Cedar Recreation Association events. Trustee Wright
said that the association has to do a better job of policing the parking near
the entrance. He suggested that a letter be sent to the association requesting
improvement in the enforcement. Supervisor Martin will send a letter to the Red
Cedar Recreation Association on behalf of the Board.
Trustee Williams asked that two members of the Cable Commission be sent to an
MTA seminar in January dealing with pertinent issues of the commission.
Supervisor Martin explained that the Road Commission contract work for Ebright
and Oakleaf Hills subdivisions would continue this fall, weather permitting,
with completion scheduled for spring if inclement weather inhibits work. She
stated that if any funds remain in the road budget allocations from the Ingham
County Road Commission would roll over into the next year.
Supervisor Martin said that a special Board meeting would be scheduled for
October 30, 2007 at 5:30pm to accommodate for a presentation by the auditors
and to accommodate other Board matters of importance (corrected with minutes
approval on 11/13/07).
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 9:00 pm.
Helen LeBlanc-4720 Jadestone Dr.
regarding attorney funds in the revenue-expenditure report.
Nancy Williams-131 Bismark
regarding the 401a investigation.
John Kennedy-4787 Barton Rd.
regarding the 401a investigation.
Wendell Proudfoot-5380 Barton Rd.
regarding the 401a investigation.
Jim Fleeser-Webberville
regarding dissension among the Board members.
Mike Fielek-797 Sherwood Rd.
regarding his appreciation for all the work done by the Board.
Darrell Brown-6500 Shoeman Rd
regarding the Board working together as a team.
Supervisor Martin
regarding her resolve to work together will all members of the Board.
Trustee Williams
regarding the need to work together as a team with all members of the Board.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 9:24 pm.
Supervisor Martin called an adjournment at 9:25 pm.
____________________________
Howard M. Dahlstrom
Township Clerk
October 30, 2007
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 5:30 pm at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Trustee Wright, Trustee Hayes, Treasurer Eyster,
Trustee Williams
    Clerk Dahlstrom and Supervisor Martin.
Absent: None.
Also Present: Building Inspector, Mark Miller.
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin explained the use of the timer and the application of rules
for public comment. Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 5:35 p.m. -
There was none.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 5:35 p.m.
AUDIT REPORT
Auditor Aaron Stevens explained the submitted draft audit for the year 2006-07.
He highlighted various areas including new auditing standards, fund balances,
bank reconciliation’s and investment policies, and revenue and expenditures for
the year. He elaborated on the degree of independence the auditors must retain
in relation to the amount of auxiliary financial accounting help he can
provide. There will be a need to discuss the amount and type of work that the
auditors will be able to provide. He also stated that the audit would be
submitted to the State Treasurer’s office and subsequently be posted on their
website.
Public Comment
Helen LeBlanc-4720 Jadestone Dr.
regarding the exclusion of the Senior Center grant information in the draft
audit
Al LeBlanc-4720 Jadestone Dr.
regarding changes in accounting software and non-dispersed tax dollars in the
draft audit.
Cindy Davis-1375 Epley Road
regarding previous documentation procedures used in the financial work of the
township.
CABLE COMMISSION UPDATE
Marv Thomson reviewed the submitted document from the commission outlining
expanded responsibilities for the commission, the development of a revised
right-of-way ordinance and video recording of Board Meetings.
Motion by Hayes to expand the responsibilities of the Cable Commission to
include all issues relating to video, data and voice telecommunication areas.
Seconded by Williams.
Carried unanimously.
The Commission was asked to get samples of other Right-of-way ordinances and
return with an estimated budget figure to revamp the ordinance. They were also
asked to return with an estimate for the video recordings of the Board
meetings.
Mr. Thomson also gave an update on the tower construction for the broadband
internet, saying that the FAA is in the process of approving the permit and
should conclude their research within a month.
TORNADO ASSISTANCE
Supervisor Martin explained various activities and services that were provided
to assist residents with damage suffered as a result of the tornado that swept
through the area on the night of Thursday, October 19, 2007. She stated that
there were 100 homes in the area that sustained damage, 10 of which were left
uninhabitable. She thanked the Williamston DPW, Building Inspector Mark Miller,
Granger Disposal and various companies who provided tree-chipping service. The
cooperation between government entities and private companies was commendable.
The communities, their leaders and their residents came together in admirable
fashion in this time of distress and tragedy.
Discussion ensued regarding the short-term plan to provide additional services
and Supervisor Martin would contact a volunteer group who was instrumental in
providing resources and labor assistance to ascertain if they would avail
themselves to coordinate further efforts. It was estimated that $7,000.00 was
spent to date for chipping services and she would inquire as to their help in
estimating further costs and the provision of future services by their resource
contacts. It was thought that the final amount for these services could be
three times what was already spent.
Supervisor Martin said that another letter would be sent to residents of the
affected area to ask that they line their driveway with materials that need
chipping, as opposed to the roadside, for safety and accessibility reasons. She
also stated that the Road Commission would avail a central site in the area for
residents to bring fallen trees to for incineration.
There have been calls from residents in the township asking for special burn
permission in addition to their regular four-day monthly allocations.
Supervisor Martin stated that the burn ordinance includes the possibility of a
variance if the residents of a subdivision petitioned the Board.
Discussion also ensued regarding the availability of township saws and
machinery in times of emergency. A knox box would be installed at the township
hall and cemetery for NIESA.
PARKS & RECREATION MASTER PLAN
Supervisor Martin explained that the Parks Committee requested guidance from
the Planning Commission in proceeding with the construction of a pavilion at
the park. The Planning Commission recommends we apply for grants next April for
the construction. In order to apply we must update our Parks & Recreation
Master Plan and it is recommended that the Planning Commission be authorized to
go forward with this.
Motion by Hayes to authorize the Planning Commission to undertake an update of
the Parks & Recreation Master Plan.
Seconded by Dahlstrom.
Carried unanimously.
Trustee Williams commented on the MTA workshop he recently attended and on the
new seating arrangements for the Board.
Supervisor Martin called an adjournment at 7:20 pm.
____________________________
Howard M. Dahlstrom
Township Clerk
November 13, 2007
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 pm at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order.
Supervisor Martin asked that a purchase requisition for the Historical
Committee be placed on the agenda under Unfinished Business.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Trustee Wright, Trustee Hayes, Trustee Williams
    Clerk Dahlstrom Treasurer Eyster and Supervisor Martin.
Absent: None
Also Present: Michael Fielek, Planning Commission Chair & Building Inspector,
Mark Miller.
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
CONSENT AGENDA
§   Minutes of 10/2/07 & 10/30/07 Meetings
§   Treasurer Report
§   Building Inspector Report
§   Accounts Payable
§   Revenue /Expenditure Report
During discussion it was the consensus to remove all items from the consent
agenda with the exception of the Building Inspector Report.
Motion by Eyster to approve the Consent Agenda.
Seconded by Hayes.
Carried unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:04 p.m. There was none.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:04 p.m.
PLANNING COMMISSION
Planning Commission Chairman Michael Fielek commented on recent commission
business as outlined in the submitted minutes of the October 16, 2007 meeting
and the October 23, 2007 workshop synopsis. Supervisor Martin said that at a
recent seminar an intergovernmental meeting at Meridian Township (corrected
with minutes approval on 12-4-07) she learned that it was becoming more
advantageous for builders and developers to undertake their projects within
environmentally friendly standards. She also mentioned that “walkability” was
becoming a very important issue in many communities.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Audit follow-up
Treasurer Eyster explained the documents distributed, citing changes to
sections 6-3,6-4 and 4-5. She also explained that the ACH policy the auditors
were urging the township to adopt was already included in the financial policy
adopted by the Board in 2006. She elaborated on the different format for the
Treasurer Reports and added that bank reconciliations are furnished to the
Clerk and Supervisor (added with minutes approval 12-4-07) and are available
for review.
 
Tornado Assistance
Supervisor Martin stated that there were workers and chippers in the area again
this past weekend. She commented on the number of building permits issued and
the purchase of knox boxes enable NIESA to enter township buildings in cases of
emergency.
 
Park-posts to control parking
Discussion ensued regarding the need to cordon off the parking area from the
grassy areas at the township park to restrict vehicular traffic. Research would
be done regarding the best size and materials to use, the cost of same and the
development of a plan to complete this project.
Motion by Hayes to approve the research of costs and development of a plan for
placing posts at the township park to restrict vehicular traffic.
Seconded by Williams.
Carried unanimously.
 
Historical Committee Purchase Request
Supervisor Martin explained that the Historical Committee has an opportunity to
purchase 20 old, ornate iron and wood desks/seats that are in good shape. This
would be an acquisition continuing with the refurbishments and artifact
placement at the Branch School.
Motion by Wright to approve the acquisition of twenty (20) old, ornate iron and
wood desks/seats at a cost not to exceed $1,200.00.
Seconded by Wilbrink.
Carried unanimously.
 
Trustee Wilbrink said that the Committee is seeking permission to remove the
back of the Branch School, as presented in their earlier refurbishment plan.
Motion by Wright to approve the removal of the back of the Branch School, as
presented in their earlier refurbishment plan.
Seconded by Wilbrink.
Carried unanimously.
NEW BUSINESS
Hideaway Woods Extension
Motion by Wilbrink to extend the preliminary plat approval for Hideaway Woods
#5 for one additional year, to November 9, 2008.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
Resolution-fees
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP
RESOLUTION #65
ESTABLISHING TREASURY DEPARTMENT FEES & PENALTIES
Resolution by Treasurer Janet T. Eyster
Be it resolved that the Treasurer is enabled and directed to:
∙   Charge $10.00 or the bank nonsufficient funds fee, whichever is higher, as
a fee for checks returned for nonsufficient funds
∙   Refund only amounts over $2.00
∙   Bill for amounts due over $2.00
∙   Charge a 3% late penalty fee to be imposed from February 15 through
February 28.
∙   Accept partial payments to include all of one taxing unit, such as all
school or county etc.
 
Seconded by Trustee Rick Williams
Roll call vote:
Supervisor Mickey Martin:   yes   
Treasurer Janet T. Eyster:   yes
Clerk Howard Dahlstrom:   yes
Trustee Frans Wilbrink:   yes           
Trustee Martin Wright:   yes         
Trustee Bob Hayes:    yes          
Trustee Rick Williams:   yes   
Ingham County Road Patrol
Supervisor Martin explained that there might be an elimination of the Ingham
County Road Patrol by the County Commissioners because of budget problems. It
is apparent that they want the townships to pass a millage to fund their own
police. Supervisor Martin said that residents already pay for this patrol in
our county taxes and it would be unfair to burden our residents with another
tax. She said it is imperative that we pressure the Commissioners to keep us at
the level we have now.
 
Budget 2008-09
Supervisor Martin explained that the first draft of the new budget is being
distributed today. Budget recommendations from departments and committees are
requested, with an approval timeline of a February public hearing and a March
adoption. Supervisor Martin asked that comments regarding this first draft, as
well as the first recommendations, be forwarded to her by November 21 st to
enable distribution of the revisions by November 27 th .
 
Board of Review
Supervisor Martin explained that one of the regular Board members has moved
from the township and that Kurt Guter is amenable to serving on the December
Board of Review.
Motion by Martin to appoint Kurt Guter to the December Board of Review.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
 
Minutes of 10/2/07 & 10/30/07 Meetings
Motion by Eyster to approve the Board minutes of October 30, 2007 as submitted
and the minutes of October 2, 2007 with the following corrections.
10/2-pg.4: Supervisor Martin said that a special Board meeting would be
scheduled for October 30, 2007 at 5:30pm to accommodate for a presentation by
the auditors and to accommodate other Board matters of importance.
Seconded by Hayes.
Carried unanimously.
 
Treasurer Report
Treasurer Eyster explained the submitted reports and answered questions
regarding the still outstanding report from the October 2, 2007 meeting. She
explained variables involved in the CD rollovers and said that a revised format
will now be used for the presentation of Treasurer Reports.
Motion by Williams to approve the Treasurer’s Report submitted on October 2,
2007, reflecting financial activity of August 2007, as submitted.
Seconded by Martin.
Carried unanimously.
 
Motion by Williams to approve the Treasurer’s Report submitted on November 13,
2007, reflecting financial activity of September 2007, as submitted.
Seconded by Hayes.
Carried unanimously.
 
Accounts Payable & Payroll
Motion by Williams to approve the previous report with corrected amounts for
cemetery accounts payable checks 5567-5568 & 5570-5572 in the amount of $811.09
and previous report with corrected amounts for cemetery payroll checks 5560-
5566 & 5569 in the amount of $2,363.31- for a grand total of $3,174.40.
Seconded by Eyster.
Carried unanimously.
 
Motion by Wilbrink to approve the previous report with corrected amounts for
township accounts payable checks 16659-16708 in the amount of $24,859.11 and
previous report with corrected amounts for township payroll checks 16653-16686
+EFTPS in the amount of $16,715.83- for a grand total of $41,571.94.
Seconded by Eyster.
Carried unanimously.
 
Motion by Eyster to approve the cemetery accounts payable and payroll paid-
checks 5573-5591 +EFTPS, in the amount of $4,461.30 and cemetery accounts
payable and payroll for approval-checks 5592-5599 in the amount of $11,328.51-
for a grand total of $15,789.81.
Seconded by Williams.
Carried unanimously.
 
Motion by Eyster to approve the township accounts payable and payroll paid-
checks 16709-16806+EFTPS, in the amount of $32,791.91 and township accounts
payable and payroll for approval-checks 16807-16831, omitting check #16824, in
the amount of $14,033.57- for a grand total of $46,825.48.
Seconded by Williams.
Carried unanimously.
 
REPORTS
Trustee Wilbrink said that corrections to line items that were over-expended
would be needed to the current budget. He also said that NIESA should be in
their new building before the end of the month. He asked that the Plunkett &
Cooney report be removed from the front page of the township website, and
Supervisor Martin agreed that it was time to remove it from the opening page.
Supervisor Martin commented on her attendance at a joint meeting with Meridian
Township, a November 26 th meeting regarding candidates for the director of the
Ingham County Road Commission, a program establishing “safe routes” to school,
informed the Board that Burnham & Flowers would be here on December 5, 2007 at
2:00pm to meet with interested officials regarding their 401a account and
announced that a new employee will begin on Tuesday, November 20 th to assist
in office duties.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 9:22 pm. There was none.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 9:22 pm.
Supervisor Martin reviewed the meeting and called an adjournment at 9:25 pm.
____________________________
Howard M. Dahlstrom
Township Clerk
December 4, 2007
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 pm at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order.
Supervisor Martin asked that a purchase requisition for the Historical
Committee be placed on the agenda under Unfinished Business.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Trustee Wright, Trustee Hayes, Trustee Williams
    Clerk Dahlstrom Treasurer Eyster and Supervisor Martin.
Absent: None
Also Present: Michael Fielek, Planning Commission Chair & Building Inspector,
Mark Miller.
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
CONSENT AGENDA
§   Minutes of 11/13/07 Meeting
§   Treasurer Report
§   Building Inspector Report
§   Accounts Payable
§   Revenue /Expenditure Report
During discussion it was the consensus to remove all items from the consent
agenda with the exception of the Building Inspector Report.
Motion by Hayes to approve the Consent Agenda.
Seconded by Wilbrink.
Carried unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:03 p.m.
John Kennedy-4787 Barton Rd. commented on his submitted document regarding
previous Board actions
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:06 p.m.
PLANNING COMMISSION
Planning Commission Chairman Michael Fielek commented on recent commission
business as outlined in the submitted minutes of the November 20, 2007 meeting
and the November 27, 2007 workshop synopsis. Chairman Fielek elaborated on the
Commission’s recommendation to change part of the zoning ordinance regarding
pond regulations.
Motion by Hayes to approve the following change to zoning ordinance regarding
pond regulations.
Section 27.02, sub-section B.2, item c, of the Zoning Ordinance shall read:
Any excavation, filling, soil removal, mining, or creation of ponds that are
less than one-half acre in area, provided that any such activity is normally
and customarily incidental to single family and agricultural uses described in
this sub-section for which site plan approval is not required.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
Discussion ensued regarding the workshop held on November 27 regarding
trailways and paths and their possible placements in the township.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Budget
Supervisor Martin explained the revised draft of the new budget that was
distributed. Discussion ensued regarding various line items in the budget.
Supervisor Martin asked that changes or suggestions be submitted to her by
December 18, 2007 for inclusion in the January Board packet. A timeline of a
February public hearing and a March adoption was suggested.
Ingham County Road Patrol
Supervisor Martin explained that the County is proposing an elimination of the
Ingham County Road Patrol in the 2009 county budget. It is apparent that they
want the townships to pass a millage to fund their own police. Supervisor
Martin said that residents already pay for this patrol in our county taxes and
it would be unfair to burden our residents with another tax. She said it is
imperative that we pressure the Commissioners to keep us at the level we have
now. A document of opposition, composed by legal staff of Aurelius Township,
was distributed.
Motion by Dahlstrom to enjoin Aurelius and other townships in their opposition
to the elimination of the road patrols and to forward concurrence of this
opposition to the County Commissioners.
Seconded by Williams.
Carried unanimously.
NEW BUSINESS
Planning Commission Appointments
Motion by Martin to re-appoint, with a three-year term, Rex LaMore, Wanda
Bloomquist and Martin Wright as members of the Planning Commission.
Seconded by Hayes.
Carried unanimously.
McKenna Contract
Motion by Hayes to approve an update to the contract for services, effective
December 4, 2007, for the planning consulting firm of McKenna Associates.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
Minutes of 11-13-07 Board Meeting
Motion by Hayes to approve the Board minutes of November 13, 2007 with the
following corrections.
Pg.1 under Planning Commission--Supervisor Martin said that at a recent
seminar an intergovernmental meeting at Meridian Township (corrected with
minutes approval on 12-4-07) she learned that it was becoming more advantageous
for builders and developers to undertake their projects within environmentally
friendly standards.
Pg. 2 under Audit follow-up--She elaborated on the different format for the
Treasurer Reports and added that bank reconciliations are furnished to the
Clerk and Supervisor (added with minutes approval 12-4-07) and are available
for review
Seconded by Eyster.
Carried unanimously.
Treasurer Report
Treasurer Eyster explained the submitted reports and discussed the status of
the audit issues list. She said that she would be meeting with Burham & Flower
regarding employee contributions from early 2007. She stated that she would be
gone for 4 weeks and would be donating $1000.00 to the township to cover extra
expenses incurred with extra work by the Deputy Treasurer.
Motion by Dahlstrom to approve the Treasurer’s Report submitted reflecting
financial activity in October 2007.
Seconded by Hayes.
Carried unanimously.
Accounts Payable & Payroll
Motion by Dahlstrom to approve the township accounts payable and payroll paid -
checks 16832-16867, in the amount of $15,972.56.
Seconded by Hayes.
Carried unanimously.
Motion by Martin to approve township accounts payable, payroll for approval -
checks 16868-16888 + eftps, in the amount of $27,053.63, pending generation of
a BS&A report for final review and approval of the Treasurer.
Seconded by Williams.
Carried unanimously.
Motion by Dahlstrom to approve the cemetery accounts payable and payroll paid -
checks 5600-5606, in the amount of $3,697.98.
Seconded by Wilbrink.
Carried unanimously.
Motion by Dahlstrom to approve cemetery accounts payable for approval -checks
5607-5609, in the amount of $242.14, pending generation of a BS&A report for
final review and approval of the Treasurer.
Seconded by Eyster.
Carried unanimously.
REPORTS
Clerk Dahlstrom explained needed budget amendments for election line items in
lieu of the presidential primary scheduled for January 15, 2008.
Motion by Martin to approve budget amendments as follows:
Increase line item   101-191-703   $1600.00
Increase line item   101-191-864    $ 240.00
Increase line item   101-191-730    $ 365.25
Decrease line item   101-890-965   $2205.25
Seconded by Eyster.
Carried unanimously.
Trustee Williams expressed interest in obtaining photos of the Board and the
Board in action to exhibit at the MTA Conference in January. He also expressed
the need for a policy regarding audience participation at the meetings. Clerk
Dahlstrom said that such a policy is being formulated and should be available
for the January Board meeting.
Supervisor Martin commented on her attendance, along with Treasurer Eyster and
Trustee Hayes, at a seminar regarding Township Law. She also mentioned the
submitted CADL letter regarding library millages.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 8:40 p.m.
John Kennedy-4787 Barton Rd.
commented on Board actions and Board comments regarding expenditures.
Rod Imhoff-2380 Wilgus Rd.
Inquired as to the status of the broadband internet tower.
Bob Cwiertniewicz-Mason, Michigan.
commented on department formatted budgets and line item formatted budgets.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 8:48 p.m.
Supervisor Martin reviewed the meeting and called an adjournment at 8:50 pm.
____________________________
Howard M. Dahlstrom
Township Clerk
2008 Meeting Minutes
January 16, 2008
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 pm at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Trustee Wright, Trustee Williams, Clerk Dahlstrom,
Treasurer Eyster Supervisor Martin and Trustee Hayes (in at 7:10pm).
Absent: none
Also Present: Michael Fielek, Planning Commission Chair & Building Inspector,
Mark Miller.
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
CONSENT AGENDA
§   Minutes of 12/04/07 Meeting
§   Treasurer Report
§   Building Inspector Report
§   Accounts Payable
§   Revenue /Expenditure Report
During discussion it was the consensus of the Board to remove the Treasurer’s
Report, the Accounts Payable Report and the Revenue/Expenditure Report from the
consent agenda.
Motion by Wilbrink to approve the Consent Agenda.
Seconded by Williams.
Carried unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:07 p.m.
There was none.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:08 p.m.
Trustee Hayes entered the meeting at 7:10 pm.
PLANNING COMMISSION
Planning Commission Chairman Michael Fielek commented on recent commission
business as outlined in the submitted minutes of the December 18, 2007 meeting.
Chairman Fielek elaborated on the Commission’s recommendation to approve a
Special Use Permit for Burgdorf Winery. Board discussion ensued regarding the
issues of size, water use & drainage and ingress & egress to the property.
Public Comment:
Dennis Stiffler, 5620 Shoeman Road: spoke against approval citing the issues of
size and dirt removal involved with the expansion. He also said that a petition
against the approval has been submitted at tonight’s meeting.
Shawn Canfield, 5627 Shoeman Road: spoke against the approval saying that the
expansion does not fit with the area and that his children should not have to
be exposed to the traffic and business environment.
Wendy Ridenour, 5615 Shoeman Road: spoke against the approval saying that she
has a 16 year old driver in her household and the traffic, safety and quietness
would be impacted with the expansion.
N.L. Horton, 5632 Shoeman Road: spoke against the approval saying that drainage
is a problem currently and that the expansion would only increase this problem.
Attorney Malcolm McKinnon, 455 Red Cedar Blvd: representing the neighbors of
the location, stated that he has reviewed the township’s documents regarding
this location and found that they were incomplete. He stated that building
permits and other necessary licenses and permits were not obtained by the
business. He said more documentation is needed before approval.
Sue Stiffler, 5620 Shoeman Road: spoke against the approval saying that before
receiving the public hearing notice from the Planning Commission she had no
idea the business was expanding. She cited issues of traffic and noise
increases, events becoming more numerous and said that the expansion does not
fit with the surrounding community.
Shawn Canfield, 5627 Shoeman Road: said that he sent a letter to the township
in opposition to the approval but apparently it was never received.
Supervisor Martin said that the township’s mail log would be reviewed to
determine whether the letter was received. She also stated that because of the
concerns raised at tonight’s meeting it would be best to send the special use
permit back to the Planning Commission for further review.
Motion by Martin to return the special use permit to the Planning Commission
for further review and recommendation and to inform all residents within five
hundred feet of the location when further discussions will take place.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Budget
Supervisor Martin explained the ongoing process of compiling the 2008-09
budget.
Discussion ensued regarding the status of, and recommendations for, the
following items.
Video Taping-recommended to budget $20,000.00 for this item.
Auditors providing financial administrative services-a presentation to the
Board will be arranged with Abraham & Gaffney to discuss this issue and
determine a financial commitment for these services.
Payroll Outsourcing-Treasurer Eyster will research firms and prices for this
service.
Revenue Sharing-this item will be reduced to $325,000 from the current year’s
$340,000.
Supervisor Martin said that the Board would meet on January 22, at 5:30 pm to
further discuss the budget.
NEW BUSINESS
Poverty Guidelines and Asset Level
Discussion ensued leading to the following resolution.
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP
RESOLUTION #66
POVERTY GUIDELINES RESOLUTION
Resolution by Supervisor Mickey Martin
Be it resolved that:
WHEREAS, the adoption of guidelines for poverty exemptions is within the
purview of the Township Board; and
WHEREAS, the homestead of persons who, in the judgment of the Supervisor and
Board of Review, by reason of poverty, are unable to contribute to the public
charges is eligible for exemption in whole or part from taxation under Public
Act 390, 1994 (MCL 211.7u); and
WHEREAS, pursuant to PA 390, 1994 Williamstown Township, Ingham County adopts
the following guidelines for the supervisor and Board of Review to implement.
The guidelines shall include but not be limited to the specific income and
asset levels of the claimant and all persons residing in the household,
including any property tax credit returns, filed in the current or immediately
preceding year;
To be eligible, a person shall do all the following on an annual basis:
1.   Be an owner of and occupy as a homestead the property for which an
exemption is requested.
2.   File a claim with the Supervisor or Board of Review, accompanied by
federal and state income tax returns for all persons residing in the homestead,
including any property tax credit returns filed in the immediately preceding
year or in the current year.
3.   Produce a valid drivers’ license or other form of identification if
requested.
4.   Produce a deed, land contract, or other evidence of ownership of the
property for which an exemption is requested, if requested.
5.   Meet the federal poverty income standards as defined and determined
annually by the United States Office of Management and Budget.
6.   The application for an exemption shall be filed after January 1, but
before the day prior to the last day of Board of Review.
7.   Any additional eligibility requirements as determined by the Township
Board;
The Board of Review shall follow the above stated policy and federal guidelines
in granting or denying an exemption, unless the Board of Review determines
there are substantial and compelling reasons why there should be a deviation
from the policy and federal guidelines and these are communicated in writing to
the claimant.
Be it further resolved to adopt the Federal Poverty Guidelines for 2008 with an
increase of 50% in all sections as shown below, and to limit assets to one
principle residence and one licensed vehicle for each resident, with a maximum
of two.
Size of Family Unit             Poverty Guidelines
1                               $15,315
2                               $20,535
3                               $25,755
4                               $30,975
5                               $36,195
6                               $41,415
7                               $46,635
8                               $51,855
For each additional person, add $5220
 
Seconded by: Martin Wright
Roll call vote:
Supervisor Mickey Martin:   yes
Treasurer Janet T. Eyster:   yes
Clerk Howard Dahlstrom:   yes
Trustee Frans Wilbrink:   yes
Trustee Martin Wright:   yes
Trustee Bob Hayes:       yes
Trustee Rick Williams:   yes
Budget Amendment Request-Clerk
Discussion ensued regarding the submitted request from Clerk Dahlstrom calling
for the transfer of funds to the line items for Deputy Clerk salary and
Elections Deputy salary.
Motion by Wilbrink to approve a budget amendment transferring $500.00 from
Clerk Conferences & Training to Deputy Clerk salaries and $500.00 from
Elections Training to Elections Deputy salaries.
Seconded by Dahlstrom.
Roll call vote:
Supervisor Mickey Martin:   no      
Treasurer Janet T. Eyster:   no      
Clerk Howard Dahlstrom:   yes
Trustee Frans Wilbrink:   yes           
Trustee Martin Wright:   no         
Trustee Bob Hayes:       no         
Trustee Rick Williams:   no
Motion FAILED.
Grant Proposal-McKenna
It was stated that the documentation submitted was incorrect and this item will
be addressed at the next meeting.
Meals On Wheels Request
Discussion ensued regarding the request. Clerk Dahlstrom was requested to
procure information that would verify that the recipients were senior citizens
and that they were residents of the township.
Treasurer Report
Treasurer Eyster withdrew her report and said that she would submit a revised
report for the January 22, 2008 meeting.
Accounts Payable & Payroll
Trustee Williams inquired about check # 16925 issued for attorney fees.
Motion by Dahlstrom to approve the township accounts payable and payroll paid -
checks 16889-16964, noting that check # 16900 was voided, in the amount of
$33,039.89.
Seconded by Wilbrink.
Carried unanimously.
Motion by Dahlstrom to approve the cemetery accounts payable and payroll paid -
checks 5610-5624 + the EFTPS, in the amount of $3,375.94.
Seconded by Wilbrink.
Carried unanimously.
Motion by Dahlstrom to approve township accounts payable, payroll for approval
-checks 16964-16982, in the amount of $12,908.79, pending generation of a BS&A
report for final review and approval of the Treasurer.
Seconded by Eyster.
Carried unanimously.
Motion by Dahlstrom to approve cemetery accounts payable for approval -checks
5625-5629, in the amount of $440.14, pending generation of a BS&A report for
final review and approval of the Treasurer.
Seconded by Eyster.
Carried unanimously.
REPORTS
Trustee Wilbrink said that there would be a dedication of the new NIESA fire
station on April 19, 2008.Supervisor Martin said that the MTA conference was
great and that there was myriad of useful information disseminated. Others who
attended also remarked that it was very informational. Supervisor Martin would
like to have a meeting in March to discuss the information presented at the
conference. A tentative meeting date was set for March 18, 2008.
Supervisor Martin distributed a list of meeting dates and changes for approval.
Motion by Eyster to approve the following schedule of meetings.
January 22, 2008-Budget Board Meeting at 5:30pm
February 12, 2008-Public Hearing-Budget 2008-2009 at 5:30pm
March 4, 2008-Board Meeting cancelled
March 5, 2008-Board Meeting at 7:00pm
Seconded by Hayes.
Carried unanimously.
Supervisor Martin reminded the Board of the Ingham County MTA meeting scheduled
for January 23, 2008 in Stockbridge.
Because of the displacement/inconvenience to the Yoga group that meets on
Wednesdays in the Township Hall, due to the rescheduling of the Board meeting
because of the primary election, the following motion was offered.
Motion by Dahlstrom to waive the fee that the Yoga instructor would pay for the
evening rental on the date of January 16, 2008.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 9:35 p.m.
Helen LeBlanc-4720 Jadestone Dr.
commented on financial policies and township computer passwords.
Wanda Bloomquist-Planning Assistant
said that a Parks Survey form was available on the township website.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 9:39 p.m.
Supervisor Martin reviewed the meeting and called an adjournment at 9:40 pm.
____________________________
Howard M. Dahlstrom
Township Clerk
January 22, 2008
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 5:30 pm at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order.
Motion by Eyster to add approval of 2008-09 Board Meetings dates to the agenda.
Seconded by Williams.
Carried unanimously.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Trustee Hayes, Trustee Wright, Trustee Williams,
Clerk Dahlstrom, Treasurer Eyster and Supervisor Martin.
Absent: none
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 5:32 p.m.
There was none.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 5:32 p.m.
BUDGET 2009
   PRESENTATION FROM ABRAHAM & GAFFNEY
Aaron Stevens from Abraham & Gaffney gave a presentation outlining accounting
services that his company could provide for the township. He explained that
should the township contract with the company for these services, they would
need to make arrangements for another entity to do the annual audit. The
company would not be able to do both. Discussion ensued regarding different
aspects of services that could be provided and variables involved in some of
the services. It was decided that the Supervisor, Treasurer and Clerk would
meet with Abraham & Gaffney to determine what services would be needed by the
township and develop a plan to implement the possible accounting services by
the company.
PAYROLL OUTSOURCING
Treasurer Eyster said that her research has shown that payroll should remain
in-house. After talking with BS&A, it was her opinion that the software should
work and perhaps Abraham & Gaffney could provide advice or direction when
needed.
PARKS
Discussion ensued regarding posts and installation and Clerk Dahlstrom would
check into needed funds for water testing under this budget department. It was
a consensus to add $1000.00 to line item 751-703 and to leave line item 751-881
at $13,100.00.
HISTORIC COMMITTEE
Discussion ensued regarding requested budget items. It was a consensus to raise
line item 751-882 to $25,000.00 and to increase line item 751-704 by $500.00.
CABLE COMMISSION
Discussion ensued regarding a possible increase in the number of meetings and
an update of the Right Of way Ordinance. It was the consensus to keep line item
425-702 at 3,600.00.
MEALS ON WHEELS
Discussion ensued regarding the need to verify that meals were only being
delivered to township senior citizens sixty years of age or older. Trustee
Wilbrink asked if we would need to verify information received from the Senior
Center in the same manner. (added with minutes approval on 2/5/08)
CEMETERY
Discussion ensued regarding the columbarium and sexton wages. It was the
consensus to leave the $1000.00 increase in the sexton wages and to place
$70,000.00 in line item 276-980 for the columbarium.
TREASURER REPORT
Treasurer Eyster elaborated on her submitted report detailing financial
activity for the month of November 2007.
Motion by Hayes to accept the Treasurer Report as submitted.
Seconded by Williams.
Carried unanimously.
GRANT WRITING PROPOSAL
Supervisor Martin explained that documentation had not yet been received
regarding this item. Discussion ensued regarding the proposal to prepare a
Transportation Enhancement Grant Application.
Motion by Wright to accept the proposal submitted by McKenna Associates to
prepare a Transportation Enhancement Grant Application for the amount of
$2,500.00.
Seconded by Hayes.
Carried unanimously
BOARD MEETING DATES 2008-09
Discussion ensued regarding the proposed meeting dates for the upcoming fiscal
year.
Motion by Dahlstrom to approve 2008-09 meeting dates for the Township Board
meetings as follows:
First Meeting       Second Meeting
Tuesdays-7:00pm   Tuesdays-5:30pm
April 1, 2008       April 15, 2008
May 6, 2008       May 20, 2008
June 3, 2008      June 17, 2008
July 8, 2008      July 15, 2008
August 12, 2008   August 19, 2008
September 9, 2008    September 16, 2008
October 7, 2008      October 21, 2008
November 12, 2008   November 18, 2008
December 2, 2008   December 16, 2008
January 6, 2009      January 20, 2009
February 3, 2009   February 17, 2009
March 3, 2009      March 17, 2009
Seconded by Eyster.
Carried unanimously.
Supervisor Martin reminded the Board of the MTA Ingham County Chapter meeting
to take place tomorrow. She also made mention of roadwork being done on Barry
Road.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:02 p.m.
Darryl Brown commented on the Meals on Wheels program.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:03 p.m.
Supervisor Martin adjourned the meeting at 7:04 pm.
____________________________
Howard M. Dahlstrom
Township Clerk
February 5, 2008
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 pm at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Trustee Wright, Trustee Williams, Trustee Hayes,
Clerk Dahlstrom, Treasurer Eyster and Supervisor Martin.
Absent: none
Also Present: Michael Fielek, Planning Commission Chair & Building Inspector,
Mark Miller.
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
CONSENT AGENDA
§   Minutes of 1/16/2008 and 1/22/2008 Meetings
§   Treasurer Report
§   Building Inspector Report
§   Accounts Payable
§   Revenue /Expenditure Report
During discussion it was the consensus of the Board to remove the Minutes, the
Accounts Payable Reports and the Revenue/Expenditure Report from the consent
agenda.
Motion by Eyster to approve the Consent Agenda.
Seconded by Hayes.
Carried unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:05 p.m.
Helen LeBlanc-4720 Jadestone Drive regarding the financial assistance proposal
submitted by Abraham & Gaffney.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:08 p.m.
PLANNING COMMISSION
Planning Commission Chairman Michael Fielek commented on recent commission
business as outlined in the submitted minutes of the January 22, 2008 meeting.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Budget 2009
Supervisor Martin initiated discussion regarding the 2008-09 budget.
Park Budget-recommended to add $1000.00 for the park post project.
Park Budget-recommended to add $6800.00 for the burn project and to do further
research.
Life Insurance (851-714)-recommended to add $1000.00.
Supervisor Martin explained new line item numbers that will be added for
Building and Grounds-Monthly Services. She also explained the account number
revisions for AFLAC, Building Inspector, Metro Narcotics and various payroll
liability expenditures.
Clerk Dahlstrom initiated discussion regarding the elections budget and agreed
the budgeted amount was sufficient. No changes were made.
Trustee Wilbrink initiated discussion regarding costs involved with the
Internet Tower.
Motion by Hayes to take the budget to a public hearing after tonight’s changes
are inserted.
Seconded by Wilbrink.
Roll call vote:
Supervisor Mickey Martin:   yes      
Treasurer Janet T. Eyster:   yes      
Clerk Howard Dahlstrom:   yes
Trustee Frans Wilbrink:   no           
Trustee Martin Wright:   yes         
Trustee Bob Hayes:       yes         
Trustee Rick Williams:   yes
Motion passed.
Meals On Wheels
Clerk Dahlstrom explained that he has received information from the
organization indicating that there are four recipients in the township who
received this service. Supervisor Martin requested that all supporting
documents from which the Board made their decision on, be attached to the
request for future reference.
Motion by Eyster to approve a donation of $300.00 to the Meals On Wheels
program.
Seconded by Williams.
Carried unanimously.
NEW BUSINESS
Springbrook Extension Request
Supervisor Martin commented that due to the state of the economy the developer
is requesting the extensions of approvals previously given.
Motion by Wright to extend, for one year, approvals from the Zoning Board of
Appeals for the water and sewer lines crossing the Suttell Drain and the
Preliminary Plat for Springbrook Estates.
Seconded by Dahlstrom.
Carried unanimously.
Public Comment Policy
Clerk Dahlstrom explained the proposed resolution setting a revised policy for
public comment at the Board meetings. Discussion ensued regarding the impact of
various provisions. Trustee Hayes suggested text changes and further discussion
ensued regarding the placement of the consent agenda on the meeting agenda. It
was the consensus that Trustee Hayes would forward suggested changes to Clerk
Dahlstrom and a revised resolution would be presented at the February 12, 2008
meeting.
Senior Center Agreement
Supervisor Martin explained that the submitted documentation would be the
required information needed for a grant appropriation for the Senior Center.
She further explained that the previous documents that were used for past
appropriations couldn’t be located in the township’s files and the entire Board
packet for the meeting is missing. Discussion ensued regarding the need for an
attorney review of the submitted information.
Motion by Dahstrom to request that the township attorney review the
documentation submitted by the Senior Center for regulatory compliance in
relation to the township’s grant to the Senior Center.
Seconded by Eyster.
Motion carried.
Discussion ensued regarding the minutes of 1/16/08 and 1/22/08.
Motion by Williams to approve the Board minutes of 1/22/08 with the following
correction.
Pg 2-Meals on Wheels-to read: Discussion ensued regarding the need to verify
that meals were only being delivered to township senior citizens sixty years of
age or older. Trustee Wilbrink asked if we would need to verify information
received from the Senior Center in the same manner.
Seconded by Hayes.
Carried unanimously.
The minutes from January 16, 2008 were not approved.
Motion by Williams to rescind the following motion passed by the Board on
January 16, 2008.
Motion by Dahlstrom to approve township accounts payable, payroll for approval
-checks 16964-16982, in the amount of $12,908.79, pending generation of a BS&A
report for final review and approval of the Treasurer.
Seconded by Eyster.
Carried unanimously.
Seconded by Eyster.
Roll call vote:
Supervisor Mickey Martin:   yes      
Treasurer Janet T. Eyster:   yes      
Clerk Howard Dahlstrom:   yes
Trustee Frans Wilbrink:   yes           
Trustee Martin Wright:   yes         
Trustee Bob Hayes:       yes         
Trustee Rick Williams:   yes
Motion passed.
Motion by Williams to approve township accounts payable, payroll for approval -
checks 16966-16988, in the amount of $13,565.59.
Seconded by Eyster.
Carried unanimously.
Motion by Eyster to rescind the following motion passed by the Board on January
16, 2008.
Motion by Dahlstrom to approve the township accounts payable and payroll paid -
checks 16889-16964, noting that check # 16900 was voided, in the amount of
$33,039.89.
Seconded by Wilbrink.
Carried unanimously.
Seconded by Dahlstrom.
Roll call vote:
Supervisor Mickey Martin:   yes      
Treasurer Janet T. Eyster:   yes      
Clerk Howard Dahlstrom:   yes
Trustee Frans Wilbrink:   yes           
Trustee Martin Wright:   yes         
Trustee Bob Hayes:       yes         
Trustee Rick Williams:   yes
Motion passed.
Motion by Eyster to approve the township accounts payable and payroll paid -
checks 16889-16965, noting that check # 16900 was voided, in the amount of
$33,039.89.
Seconded by Hayes.
Carried unanimously.
Motion by Wilbrink to approve the township payroll paid -checks 40000-40028, in
the amount of $14,961.93.
Seconded by Eyster.
Carried unanimously.
Motion by Hayes to approve the township accounts payable paid -checks 16989-
17007 + EFTPS, in the amount of $7,548.38.
Seconded by Dahlstrom.
Carried unanimously.
Motion by Dahlstrom to approve the cemetery accounts payable paid -checks 5625-
5629 + EFTPS, in the amount of $779.59.
Seconded by Wilbrink.
Carried unanimously.
Motion by Martin to approve cemetery accounts payable for approval , [checks
5636-5639] (brackets added with minutes approval on 3/5/09) in the amount of
$7,125.13 with missing check numbers 5630-5635 to be reflected on the next
report.
Seconded by Eyster.
Carried unanimously.
Motion by Eyster to approve the township accounts payable for approval -checks
17008-17026, excluding check # 17015, in the amount of $3,998.53.
Seconded by Hayes.
Carried unanimously.
The revenue-expenditure report was not approved.
REPORTS
Supervisor Martin commented on the township website, the county MTA chapter
meeting, Ingham County Road Patrol, zoning amendments, assessment notices. The
Board agreed by consensus to have an annual newsletter in addition to the 3
regular editions.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 9:48 p.m.
John Kennedy-4787 Barton Road commented on the proposed public comment policy.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 9:50 p.m.
Supervisor Martin reviewed the meeting and called an adjournment at 9:52 pm.
____________________________
Howard M. Dahlstrom
Township Clerk
February 12, 2008
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 5:30 pm at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Trustee Hayes, Trustee Wright, Trustee Williams,
Clerk Dahlstrom, Treasurer Eyster and Supervisor Martin.
Absent: none
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 5:32 p.m.
Darryl Brown: regarding the proposed public comment policy.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 5:32 p.m.
PUBLIC HEARING-BUDGET 2009
Supervisor Martin opened the public hearing for the 2008-09 budget and
explained some of the big ticket items included in the document. She also
commented on various line items changes and a clearer definition of salary line
items.
Darryl Brown: inquired as to the affect on property tax revenue in lieu of the
declining real estate market. Supervisor Martin explained the $12,000.00
increase in the property tax revenue line item and explained property tax value
versus state equalized value.
Marv Thompson stated that potential changes in the internet tower contract may
affect the budget for next year. The company is seeking bank loans instead of
having the township involved in the financing of the tower purchase.
Motion by Wright to close the public hearing.
Seconded by Eyster.
Carried unanimously.
It was decided that there would not be deliberation on the 2008-09 budget at
this meeting.
Motion by Hayes to place the item of the internet tower financing on the
agenda.
Seconded by Wright.
Motion carried.
Supervisor Martin explained that in order for FreedomNet to acquire bank
financing instead of township financing the contract would have to be revised.
Discussion ensued.
Motion by Hayes to change the contract between the township and FreedomNet to
allow bank financing and allow for necessary changes to clauses regarding split
revenues for co-location of other entities on the tower, with the revised
contract to be forwarded to the Board for approval.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
Truck Proposal
Supervisor Martin explained that transmission problems with the current truck
and said that it has been recommended to allow for an $18,000.00-$19,000.00
expenditure for a replacement vehicle. Discussion ensued regarding the purchase
and other equipment that would need to be installed after purchase.
Motion by Wright to expend up to $24,000 for a replacement vehicle and
additional equipment with funds to be transferred from the contingency fund to
the appropriate line items.
Seconded by Williams.
Carried unanimously
Public Comment Resolution
Discussion ensued regarding the proposed policy, including comments from the
public. The Board and public offered various changes and it was decided that
Clerk Dahlstrom would revise the policy resolution and offer it to the Board at
the next meeting.
Accounts Payable
Motion by Martin to rescind the following motion passed at the February 5, 2008
meeting.
Motion by Eyster to approve township accounts payable for approval -checks
17008-17026, in the amount of $3998.53, excluding check # 17015.
Seconded by Hayes.
Carried unanimously.
Seconded by Eyster.
Roll call vote:
Supervisor Mickey Martin:   yes      
Treasurer Janet T. Eyster:   yes      
Clerk Howard Dahlstrom:   yes
Trustee Frans Wilbrink:   yes           
Trustee Martin Wright:   yes         
Trustee Bob Hayes:       yes         
Trustee Rick Williams:   yes
Motion passed.
Motion by Martin to approve township accounts payable for approval-checks
17008-17025, excluding check # 17015,[deleted with minutes approval on 3/5/
08] in the amount of $3998.53.
Seconded by Dahlstrom.
Carried unanimously.
Supervisor Martin explained the role of the Township in releasing property from
PA 116. When a property owner requests to be released from a PA 116 agreement
the State of Michigan requires the local Township to agree to the removal of
the property from the PA 116. In doing so this does not in any way mean a split
or boundary change approval from the Township. For a parcel to be split a
boundary change application must be submitted and approved according to the
ordinance and the County with new tax identification numbers assigned.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 6:46 p.m.
Darryl Brown commented on financial obligations for the internet tower.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 6:50 p.m.
Supervisor Martin adjourned the meeting at 6:50 pm.
____________________________
Howard M. Dahlstrom
Township Clerk
February 28, 2008
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP
BOARD OF TRUSTEES SPECIAL MEETING
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 9:00 a.m. at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Clerk
Dahlstrom called the meeting to order.
Motion by Wilbrink to appoint Clerk Dahlstrom as Chair of the meeting.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Trustee Hayes, Trustee Wright and Clerk Dahlstrom.
Absent: Trustee Williams Treasurer Eyster and Supervisor Martin.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Clerk Dahlstrom called for public comment at 9:01 a.m. There was none.
PARKS & RECREATION MASTER PLAN
Discussion ensued regarding the Parks & Recreation Master Plan.
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP
INGHAM COUNTY, MICHIGAN
RESOLUTION OF THE TOWNSHIP BOARD
ADOPTING THE PARKS AND RECREATION MASTER PLAN
At a special meeting of the Township Board of Williamstown Township, Ingham
County, Michigan, held on February 28, 2008 at 9:00 a.m. prevailing local time.
PRESENT: Dahlstrom, Wilbrink, Hayes, Wright.
ABSENT: Martin, Williams, Eyster.
The following Preamble and Resolution were offered by Member Wright and
supported by Member Wilbrink.
WHEREAS, Williamstown Township has completed a Five Year Parks and Recreation
Master Plan that describes the physical features, existing recreation
facilities, and the desired actions to be taken to improve and maintain parks
and recreation facilities during the period between 2008 and 2012; and
WHEREAS, a public comment session was held on February 19, 2008, at the
Williamstown Township Hall to provide an opportunity for citizens to express
opinions, ask questions, and discuss all aspects of the Parks and Recreation
Master Plan; and
WHEREAS, Williamstown Township has developed the plan for the benefit of the
entire community and proposes to adopt the plan as a document to assist in
meeting the recreation needs of the community; and
WHEREAS, the Township Board reviewed the Parks and Recreation Master Plan and
concurs with the findings, recommendations, and implementation strategies
outlined in the plan.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED THAT the Williamstown Township Board hereby
adopts the Parks and Recreation Master Plan, dated February 14, 2008, as a
guideline for improving recreation for the residents of Williamstown Township.
AYES: Wright, Dahlstrom, Wilbrink, Hayes.
NAYS: None.
RESOLUTION DECLARED ADOPTED
I, Howard Dahlstrom, Williamstown Township Clerk, do hereby certify that the
foregoing is a true and original copy of a resolution adopted by the
Williamstown Township Board at a special meeting held on February 28, 2008.
Clerk Dahlstrom adjourned the meeting at 9:13 a.m.
____________________________
Howard M. Dahlstrom
Township Clerk
March 5, 2008
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP
BOARD OF TRUSTEES MEETING
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 pm at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Trustee Wright, Trustee Hayes, Trustee Williams,
Clerk Dahlstrom, Treasurer Eyster and Supervisor Martin.
Absent: none.
Also Present: Michael Fielek, Planning Commission Chair & Building Inspector,
Mark Miller.
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
Motion by Hayes to add a communication regarding police department access from
Grand River, under the New Business section of the meeting.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
CONSENT AGENDA
§   Minutes of 1/16/2008, 2/5/2008 and 2/12/2008 Meetings
§   Treasurer Report
§   Building Inspector Report
§   Accounts Payable
§   Revenue /Expenditure Report
During discussion it was the consensus of the Board to remove the 2/5/2008 & 2/
12/2008 Minutes, the Accounts Payable Reports and the Revenue/Expenditure
Report from the consent agenda.
Motion by Eyster to approve the Consent Agenda.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:05 p.m. There was none.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:05 p.m.
PLANNING COMMISSION
Planning Commission Chairman Michael Fielek commented on recent commission
business as outlined in the submitted minutes of the February 19, 2008 meeting.
He explained the site plan approval recommendation that was submitted regarding
the Hasemann Pond.
Motion by Hayes to approve the site plan for the Hasemann Pond with the
following stipulations:
·   The proposed pond is relocated 25 feet to the north, and so noted on
current maps and plans.
·   All spoils will be placed in non-wetland areas and stabilized to prevent
erosion
·   A shallow shelf, approximately 1.5 to 2 feet deep and 25 to 30 feet wide
shall be constructed between the northern edge of the lake sedge area and the
southern end of the pond.
·   The size of the pond shall be less than one acre.
Seconded by Eyster.
Carried unanimously.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Budget 2008-09 Deliberation
Supervisor Martin initiated discussion regarding the 2008-09 budget explaining
changes made to enable a truck purchase this year.
Motion by Hayes to approve the Township budget for 2008-2009. Line items within
a Department may be temporarily exceeded as long as the total for the
Department is not exceeded. However salary lines may not be exceeded and funds
allocated for salaries may not be used to balance other line items in the
Department that temporarily exceed their budget limit. The budget line items
for salaries (added with minutes approval-4/1/08) can be increased and
decreased only by a vote of the Board. At the discretion of the Supervisor and
concurrence of the Treasurer and Clerk new line items can be funded at $1 from
the contingency fund if needed to facilitate paying a bill.
Seconded by Williams.
Roll call vote:
Supervisor Mickey Martin:   yes
Treasurer Janet T. Eyster:   yes
Clerk Howard Dahlstrom:   no
Trustee Frans Wilbrink:   no
Trustee Martin Wright:   yes
Trustee Bob Hayes:      yes
Trustee Rick Williams:   yes
Motion Passes
Public Comment Policy
Clerk Dahlstrom explained the revised proposed resolution setting a policy for
public comment at the Board meetings. Discussion ensued regarding the impact of
various provisions. Trustee Hayes suggested text changes eliminating “shall”
and inserting “requested” in two places. Further discussion ensued.
Motion by Hayes to approve the policy with changes mentioned at the meeting.
Seconded by Eyster.
   Motion by Wilbrink to table the Public Comment Policy.
Seconded by Dahlstrom.
Carried unanimously.
MSHDA Project
Supervisor Martin explained this township/city joint venture proposal
(corrected with minutes approval-4/1/08) for senior citizen housing, including
responsibilities of a Housing Authority, and a draft ordinance for “Payment In
Lieu Of Taxes” (PILOT) that has been forwarded to the Township’s legal counsel
for review.
Internet Tower
Supervisor Martin introduced Marv Thomson who gave an update of the project. He
stated that the company, FreedomNet, has secured third party financing for the
project and that there would be a meeting with Freedom Net on March 6, 2008 to
review changes to the contract between the township and the company. Mr.
Thomson said that the service it is expected to be up and running by May 2008,
barring any additional unforeseen delays.
Truck Purchase
Supervisor Martin said that a truck has been located and, after deciding to go
with the option of a new snow plow, the cost would be within the range passed
by the Board at a previous meeting.
NEW BUSINESS
GL Accounts-New and Not Funded
Supervisor Martin explained that salary line items would need to adhere to GASB
requirements and line items previously used for salaries cannot be utilized.
Motion by Wright to allow the Supervisor to transfer dollars from one GL
account number to another within the same department when a GL account number
is created and dollars are needed to fund the new GL account number. The amount
of transfer must be verified and approved by the Supervisor, Treasurer and
Clerk before transfer occurs.
Seconded by Williams.
Carried unanimously.
Access to Williamston Police Station
Supervisor Martin distributed a copy of a letter forwarded to her by the City
of Williamston regarding the ability of Williamston police officers and the
general public to access the police department off from Grand River Avenue and
back onto Grand River Avenue. The letter explained that this circumstance is
due to the blocking of the only entrance to the location by semi tractor-
trailers that are making deliveries to, or picking up items from, Demmer
Corporation, immediately west of the police building. Safety issues involved
were cited and it was asked that the situation be remedied. Discussion ensued
and it was agreed that Trustee Wright Supervisor Martin (corrected with minutes
approval-4/1/08) would send a letter to the corporation asking for solution to
this problem within ten days. It was agreed that the letter would be copied to
Ingham County Road Commission, Ingham County Weighmaster, Michigan State
Police, Ingham County Sheriff, Michigan Department of Transportation and the
Williamston Police Department.
Motion by Dahlstrom to approve the Board minutes of 2/5/08 with the following
correction(s).
Motion by Dahlstrom to approve the cemetery accounts payable for approval
–checks 5636-5639 in the amount of $7,125.13 with missing check numbers 5630-
5635 to be reflected on the next report.
Seconded by Eyster.
Motion by Dahlstrom to approve the Board minutes of 2/12/08 with the following
correction(s).
Motion by Martin to approve township accounts payable for approval -checks
17008-17025 in the amount of $3,998.53
Seconded by Eyster.
Motion by Hayes to TABLE approval of accounts payable paid and payroll paid
involving check numbers 17026-17054 plus EFTPS and check numbers 40029-40063.
Seconded by Dahlstrom.
Carried unanimously.
Supervisor Martin called for a recess at 8:50 pm and reconvened the meeting at
8:55 pm.
Motion by Dahlstrom to approve cemetery accounts payable and payroll paid -
checks 5630 – 5635 in the amount of $610.00.
Seconded by Eyster.
Carried unanimously.
Motion by Dahlstrom to approve cemetery accounts payable paid -checks 5640 –
5648, noting that checks #5540, 5642, 5644, 5646 and 5647 were voided, in the
amount of $494.71.
Seconded by Eyster.
During discussion this motion was withdrawn and the item tabled.
Motion by Wilbrink to approve township accounts payable for approval -checks
17055 – 17075, in the amount of $34,189.00, pending verification of a BS&A
report by the Supervisor, Treasurer and Clerk.
Seconded by Eyster.
Carried unanimously.
Motion by Dahlstrom to approve cemetery accounts payable for approval -checks
5649 – 5653, in the amount of $552.97, pending verification of a BS&A report by
the Supervisor, Treasurer and Clerk .
Seconded by Wilbrink
Carried unanimously.
The revenue/expenditure report was not approved.
REPORTS
Clerk Dahlstrom stated that he would be attending the March 13, 2008 County
Commission meeting.
Supervisor Martin announced that the local branch Ingham County Chapter
(corrected with minutes approval-4/1/08) of the Michigan Townships Association
would be meeting here in the township hall on April 19 23, 2008. More details
would be forthcoming.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 9:12 p.m.
Nancy Williams-131 Bismark commented on the chairs used for the public seating
area.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 9:13 p.m.
Tuesday, March 25, 2008 at 5:30 pm was set as a tentative Board Meeting date.
Supervisor Martin reviewed the meeting and called an adjournment at 9:15 pm.
____________________________
Howard M. Dahlstrom
Township Clerk
March 25, 2008
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP
BOARD OF TRUSTEES MEETING
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 5:30 pm at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order.
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 5:31 p.m. There was none.
To allow for retrieval of documentation, Supervisor Martin recessed the meeting
at 5:32 pm and reconvened at 5:33 pm
ACCOUNTS PAYABLE
Motion by Williams to table the listing (#1) with checks #17026-17054.
Seconded by Hayes
Carried Unanimously.
Motion by Dahlstrom to approve (#2) payroll paid involving check numbers 40029-
40063 plus EFTPS in the amount of $23,437.11.
Seconded by Wilbrink
Carried unanimously.
Motion by Eyster to table the listing (#3) with cemetery accounts payable paid.
Seconded by Williams.
Carried Unanimously.
Motion by Dahlstrom to table the listing (#4) with township accounts payable
for approval.
Seconded by Eyster.
Carried Unanimously.
Motion by Dahlstrom to table the listing (#5) with cemetery accounts payable
for approval.
Seconded by Wilbrink.
Carried Unanimously.
Motion by Hayes to approve the following budget amendments to the 2007-2008
township budget.
101-191-702 Salaries-Election Deputy        Increase 19.51
101-215-703 Wages-Deputy Clerk              Decrease 19.51
101-191-703 Salaries-Election Workers       Increase 71.63
101-191-864 Elections Conference & Training Decrease 71.63
101-294-980 Capital Outlay                  Increase 2000.00
101-890-965 Contingency Fund                Decrease 2000.00
101-400-812 Planning Consultant Fees        Increase 7500.00
101-890-965 Contingency Fund                Decrease 7500.00
Seconded by Eyster.
Carried Unanimously.
SENIOR CENTER GRANT - Resolution
Supervisor Martin stated this is what the attorney had sent back as the
proposed Resolution with his changes. Clerk Dahlstrom asked to see the report
or letter saying these were his changes as requested last month. Supervisor
stated that this was all he had sent. No report or no cover sheet. Clerk
Dahlstrom also brought up the fact this was in fact a new Grant as the old one
included 2006, 2007.2008 and 2009. This one is for 2007 through 2010. Trustee
Wilbrink also gave comments on this issue. Supervisor Martin explained that the
first grant was for 2006-2007, second payment 2007-2008, third payment for
2008-2009, and fourth payment for 2009-2010.
Discussion ensued regarding the wording of this grant that says we made a
motion in 2006. Supervisor Martin stated she was sure that we had a motion in
2006.
Trustee Williams also asked questions about the Attorney and what he was to do.
Discussion ensued.
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP
RESOLUTION #69
Williamston Senior Center Grant Resolution
Resolution by Supervisor Mickey Martin
Be it resolved that:
WHEREAS, the Williamston Area Senior Center (WASC) is located at 201 School
Street, P0 Box 343, Williamston, MI 48895; and
WHEREAS, the WASC provides activities and services for residents 60 years of
age and older (see attached Memorandum from WASC dated January 24, 2008 and
WASC Bylaws); and
WHEREAS, pursuant to PA 39 of 1976, the WASC will conduct its business
operations and organization under established bylaws, and at the direction of a
Board of Directors elected by the membership~
WI-IEREAS, in accordance with PA 39 of 1976, the Williamstown Township Board
approved a Motion in 2006 to establish a four-year grant for WASC and the
following funding schedule was set up:
2007 — first year grant (paid)
2008 — second year grant (paid)
2009 — third year grant (to be paid)
2010 — fourth year grant (to be paid)
WHEREAS, written information that memorialized the Motion of the Board in 2006
has either been lost or destroyed, and by this resolution the Township Board
desires to rememorialize this grant.
NOW THEREFORE, Williamstown Township reaffirms that it has budgeted and
appropriated $7,000.00 annually to WASC for the periods of 2007, 2008, 2009 and
2010 as related above. Further, Williamstown Township resolves that it will
require an annual report of revenues and expenditures, and/or other year-end
reports generated by WASC.
Seconded by: Trustee Williams
Supervisor Mickey Martin:   yes
Treasurer Janet T. Eyster:   yes
Clerk Howard Dahlstrom:   yes
Trustee Frans Wilbrink:      yes
Trustee Martin Wright:      yes
Trustee Bob Hayes:      yes
Trustee Rick Williams:      yes
Resolution passes.
FREEDOM NET- AGREEMENT AMENDMENT
Marv Thompson, Chair of the Communication Commission presented the FreedomNet –
Agreement Amendment No. 1 to the Board.
Motion by Wright to approve Agreement Amendment No. 1 with FreedomNet regarding
the broadband internet project.
Seconded by Hayes.
Roll Call Vote:
Supervisor Mickey Martin:   yes
Treasurer Janet T. Eyster:   yes
Clerk Howard Dahlstrom:   yes
Trustee Frans Wilbrink:   no
Trustee Martin Wright:   yes
Trustee Bob Hayes:      yes
Trustee Rick Williams:   yes
Motion passes.
MTA REPORTS
Treasurer Eyster and Trustee Williams gave reports regarding sessions attended
at the January 2008 MTA conference in Detroit.
EMPLOYEE BENEFITS
Treasurer Eyster initiated discussion regarding employee benefits. After review
it was the consensus to prepare a revised document and present it at a future
meeting.
Supervisor Martin called an adjournment at 7:10 pm.
____________________________
Howard M. Dahlstrom
Township Clerk
April 1, 2008
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP
BOARD OF TRUSTEES MEETING
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 pm at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Trustee Wright, Trustee Hayes, Trustee Williams,
Clerk Dahlstrom, Treasurer Eyster and Supervisor Martin.
Absent: none.
Also Present: Michael Fielek, Planning Commission Chair & Building Inspector,
Mark Miller.
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
CONSENT AGENDA
§   Minutes of 2/28/2008 and 3/5/2008 Meetings
§   Treasurer Report
§   Building Inspector Report
§   Accounts Payable
§   Revenue /Expenditure Report
During discussion it was the consensus of the Board to remove the 3/5/2008
Minutes, the Treasurer Report, Accounts Payable Reports and the Revenue/
Expenditure Report from the consent agenda.
Motion by Williams to approve the Consent Agenda.
Seconded by Eyster.
Carried unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:03 p.m. There was none.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:03 p.m.
It was agreed to delay the presentation by Drain Commissioner Pat Lindemann
till later in the meeting.
PLANNING COMMISSION
Planning Commission Chairman Michael Fielek commented on recent commission
business as outlined in the submitted minutes of the March 18, 2008 meeting. He
explained the approval recommendation that was submitted regarding the Cemetery
Columbarium.
Motion by Hayes to approve the columbarium master plan, per the recommendation
of McKenna Associates, with the following conditions set forth my McKenna:
·   We recommend that landscape edging be provided around the catmint beds as
this plant spreads rhizomes and is highly invasive.
·   Some of the woody plant material selections have serious sustainability and
appearance issues as they mature. We recommend the following substitutions that
have the same texture and foliage color but are more hardy in the Michigan
climate: a) Redbud: Cornus kousa, Amelanchier Canadensis, or Acer ginnala; b)
Compact inkberry: Viburnum triluburn ‘Compactum,’ Rhus arornatica, or Hydrangea
quercifolia; c) Potentilla: Spirea bulmada, Rosa ‘Radrazz’ or Cotoneaster
apiculatus.
·   We recommend that general Structural Note No. 1 on the Columbarium Detail
sheet be revised to indicate that the footing should be four feet below grade.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
Patrick Lindemann, Ingham County Drain Commissioner
Drain Commissioner Lindemann gave a presentation of the digital
orthophotography mapping capabilities available in partnership with his office
and explained drain office operations, assessments and maintenance.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Video Recording Board Meetings Recommendation
Marv Thomson of the Cable Commission spoke about the research and criteria
involved with the video recording of Board meetings. He highlighted the
commission’s recommendation to purchase a system from BIS Digital of Fort
Lauderdale, Florida.
Motion by Hayes to approve the purchase of equipment and training from BIS
Digital, as listed in their quote number Q-8002366-3.7.2008 dated March 7,
2008, with a total amount of said purchase to be $11,199.00.
Seconded by Dahlstrom.
Carried unanimously.
Discussion ensued regarding the renaming of the Cable Commission.
Motion by Dahlstrom to rename the Cable Commission to the “Communications
Commission”.
Seconded by Hayes.
Carried unanimously.
The Board agreed to take up the agenda issue “Building Permit Violation-986
Gulick Rd.” at this time.
Motion by Wilbrink to table the issue “Building Permit Violation-986 Gulick
Rd.” until the meeting of April 15, 2008.
Seconded by Hayes.
Carried unanimously.
Public Comment Policy
Clerk Dahlstrom explained the revised proposed resolution setting a policy for
public comment at the Board meetings. Discussion ensued regarding the impact of
various provisions.
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP
RESOLUTION # 69
PUBLIC COMMENT RULES FOR BOARD MEETINGS
Resolution by Dahlstrom.
Whereas, the Township Board wishes to accept public comment at their meetings
in accordance with the Open Meeting Act, and
Whereas, the Township Board deems it important to receive comments to enable
informed decisions regarding township business, and
Whereas, the Township Board wishes to conduct their meetings in an orderly and
efficient manner, effectuating a productive atmosphere.
Now, Therefore Be It Resolved, that the Township adopts the following public
comment rules.
There shall be two periods for public comment during each meeting. Public
comment at the beginning of the meeting and at the end of the meeting, in
accordance with the approved agenda. These comments are for any agenda or non-
agenda items.
Speakers wishing to make public comment are requested to come forward to the
podium and state their name and address and provide the same on the meeting
speaker sign-in sheet.
Speakers making public comment are requested to ensure that their comments
pertain to township business.
Speakers shall address the Chair of the meeting and refrain from discussions
and/or comments for/with other members of the public.
Speakers will be limited to one three-minute timeframe, during each public
comment period, with extensions to be granted only by motion and majority
approval of the Board.
Public comment periods are an opportunity for the public to provide information
or to highlight concerns, questions, issues or topics of importance to the
township.
The Chair or the Majority of the Board will have the ability to open public
comment for a specific agenda item.
Seconded by Hayes.
Roll call vote:
Supervisor Mickey Martin:   yes
Treasurer Janet T. Eyster:   yes
Clerk Howard Dahlstrom:   yes
Trustee Frans Wilbrink:   no
Trustee Martin Wright:   yes
Trustee Bob Hayes:      yes
Trustee Rick Williams:   no
Date Change-May Board Meeting
Due to the school election being held on Tuesday, May 6, 2008, discussion
ensued regarding rescheduling the Board meeting scheduled for that date.
Motion by Williams to cancel the Board Meeting of Tuesday, May 6, 2008 and to
schedule a regular Board Meeting for Tuesday, May 13, 2008 at 7:00 p.m.
Seconded by Eyster.
Carried unanimously.
Wetland Mapping Proposal
Supervisor Martin explained the importance of having wetlands mapped accurately
and said that this proposal will update the wetlands maps. Discussion ensued in
lieu of the mapping capabilities illustrated earlier in the meeting by Drain
Commissioner Pat Lindemann. It was decided to receive more information
regarding possible wetlands mapping in the Drain Commissioner’s mapping
capabilities, to insure there would be no conflicts or duplications.
Motion by Wright to approve the Board Minutes of March 5, 2008 with the
following corrections:
Pg.2-Motion by Hayes to approve the Township budget for 2008-2009. Line items
within a Department may be temporarily exceeded as long as the total for the
Department is not exceeded. However salary lines may not be exceeded and funds
allocated for salaries may not be used to balance other line items in the
Department that temporarily exceed their budget limit. The budget line items
for salaries (added with minutes approval-4/1/08) can be increased and
decreased only by a vote of the Board. At the discretion of the Supervisor and
concurrence of the Treasurer and Clerk new line items can be funded at $1 from
the contingency fund if needed to facilitate paying a bill.
Seconded by Williams.
Pg.3-Supervisor Martin explained this township/city joint venture proposal 
(corrected with minutes approval-4/1/08) for senior citizen housing, including
responsibilities of a Housing Authority, and a draft ordinance for “Payment In
Lieu Of Taxes” (PILOT) that has been forwarded to the Township’s legal counsel
for review.
Pg.3-Safety issues involved were cited and it was asked that the situation be
remedied. Discussion ensued and it was agreed that Trustee Wright Supervisor
Martin (corrected with minutes approval-4/1/08) would send a letter to the
corporation asking for solution to this problem within ten days.
Pg.5-Supervisor Martin announced that the local branch Ingham County Chapter 
(corrected with minutes approval-4/1/08) of the Michigan Townships Association
would be meeting here in the township hall on April 19 23, 2008.
Seconded by Eyster.
Carried unanimously.
Treasurer Eyster said that she would present the Treasurer’s Report for the
April 15, 2008 meeting.
Motion by Dahlstrom to approve of accounts payable paid involving check numbers
17026-17054 in the amount of $47,289.96. Also Payroll checks 17029,17034,17035,
and 17038 for $1,623.96. Noting that 17039 & 17041 have been voided, for a
combined total of $48,913.92 and #17041 was printed in payroll.
Seconded by Eyster
Carried unanimously.
Motion by Dahlstrom to approve cemetery accounts payable paid -checks 5640 –
5648, noting that checks #5640, 5643, 5644, 5646 and 5647 were voided, in the
amount of $494.71.
Seconded by Eyster
Carried unanimously.
Motion by Dahlstrom to rescind the following motion passed at the March 5, 2008
Board Meeting.
Motion by Wilbrink to approve township accounts payable for approval -checks
17055 – 17075, in the amount of $34,189.00, pending verification of a BS&A
report by the Supervisor, Treasurer and Clerk.
Seconded by Eyster.
Carried unanimously.
Seconded by Williams.
Carried unanimously.
Replacement motion for the rescission was withdrawn.
Motion by Dahlstrom to rescind the following motion passed at the March 5, 2008
Board Meeting.
Motion by Dahlstrom to approve cemetery accounts payable for approval -checks
5649 – 5653, in the amount of $552.97, pending verification of a BS&A report by
the Supervisor, Treasurer and Clerk .
Seconded by Wilbrink
Carried unanimously.
Seconded by Wilbrink
Carried unanimously.
Motion by Dahlstrom to approve cemetery accounts payable for approval -checks
5649 – 5653, in the amount of $752.97,
Seconded by Wilbrink.
Carried unanimously.
Motion by Dahlstrom to approve cemetery accounts payable paid --checks 5654
thru 5663, including void check #5655, in the amount of $18,840.52.
Seconded by Wilbrink.
Carried unanimously.
Motion by Dahlstrom to approve township accounts payable paid --checks 17076
thru 17122, including void check #’s-17082,17087,17092,17108, in the amount of
$44,248.65.
Seconded by Eyster.
Carried unanimously.
Motion by Dahlstrom to approve payroll checks paid --checks 40064 thru 40102
and EFTPS, including void check #40098, in the amount of $25,783.58.
Seconded by Eyster.
Carried unanimously.
Motion by Dahlstrom to approve township accounts payable to pay --checks 17123
thru 17138, including void check #17129, in the amount of $3,962.40.
Seconded by Eyster.
Carried unanimously.
Clerk Dahlstrom reported on attending a County law enforcement committee
meeting and discussion ensued regarding other important upcoming County
meetings dealing with the road patrol issue.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 10:05 p.m.
There was none.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 10:05 p.m.
Supervisor Martin reviewed the meeting and called an adjournment at 10:06 pm.
____________________________
Howard M. Dahlstrom
Township Clerk
APRIL 15, 2008
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP
BOARD OF TRUSTEES MEETING
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 5:30 pm at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Trustee Wright, Trustee Hayes, Treasurer Eyster,
Trustee Williams
    Clerk Dahlstrom and Supervisor Martin.
Absent: None.
Also Present: Building Inspector, Mark Miller.
Motion by Dahlstrom to add the Treasurer’s Report and Accounts Payable to the
agenda. Seconded by Hayes.
Carried unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 5:33 p.m.
Ruth Templeton re: property lines and land surveys for the township hall
property.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 5:35 p.m.
986 Gulick Road – Building Permit Violation
Building Inspector Mark Miller explained that the violation began when a semi-
tractor trailer was left on the property after construction. It was to be used
as a temporary storage facility during construction and was to be removed when
the project was completed. Mr. Haynes, representing the property owners, The
McCalvey’s, contended that the zoning ordinance allowed for the trailer to
remain. Discussion ensued.
Motion by Wright to compel the property owner to remove the trailer from the
property at 986 Gulick Road within ten days of this date, April 15, 2008.
Failure to remove the trailer will result in the matter being referred to the
Township Attorney.
Seconded by Hayes.
Carried unanimously.
Motion by Wilbrink to rescind the previous motion and to compel the property
owner to remove the trailer from the property at 986 Gulick Road before May 31,
2008 with the Township Building Inspector to inspect on that day  periodically
check for compliance (corrected with minutes approval on May 13, 2008). Failure
to remove the trailer will result in the matter immediately (inserted with
minutes approval on May 13, 2008) being referred to the Township Attorney.
Seconded by Williams.
Motion carried.
Supervisor Martin said that she would send a copy of the motion to Mr. Haynes
and the property owners of record.
Employee Benefits
Treasurer Eyster stated that Trustee Wilbrink withdrew from disagreed with the
recommendations by (corrected with minutes approval on May 13, 2008) the sub-
committee that was charged with compiling this possible employee benefit and
that the policy came from the work of herself and Trustee Hayes (deleted with
minutes approval on May 13, 2008). Further explanation was offered regarding
the variables of the policy.
Motion by Hayes to adopt the sick day employee benefit policy as presented.
Seconded by Williams.
Discussion ensued.
   Motion by Wilbrink to table the matter.
Seconded by Hayes.
Motion carried.
Accounts Payable
Clerk Dahlstrom presented the proposed motion.
Motion by Dahlstrom to approve accounts payable checks 17055—17075 in the
amount of $47,338.76. With voided checks of 17057, 17070 and voided check 17069
on 3/12.
Seconded by Eyster.
Carried Unanimously.
Treasurer Report
Treasurer Eyster presented the report, leading to the following motion.
Motion by Eyster to accept the Treasurer’s Report for the month ending February
2008.
Seconded by Dahlstrom.
Motion carried.
Supervisor Martin reported:
·   Broadband Tower would be erected on Friday, April 18, 2008.
·   Local chapter of the MTA would meet here at the Township Hall on April 23,
2008.
·   There is a meeting regarding wetlands mapping scheduled for April 30, 2008.
Clerk Dahlstrom reported on the controlled burn at the township park and
Trustee Wilbrink said that the NIESA Open House is scheduled.
Supervisor Martin called an adjournment at 7:20 pm.
____________________________
Howard M. Dahlstrom
Township Clerk
May 13, 2008
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 pm at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Trustee Wright, Trustee Hayes, Trustee Williams,
Clerk Dahlstrom, Treasurer Eyster and Supervisor Martin.
Absent: none.
Also Present: Michael Fielek, Planning Commission Chair & Building Inspector,
Mark Miller.
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
CONSENT AGENDA
§   Minutes of 3/25/2008, 4/1/08 and 4/15/2008 Meetings
§   Treasurer Report
§   Building Inspector Report
§   Accounts Payable
§   Revenue /Expenditure Report
During discussion it was the consensus of the Board to remove the 3/25/2008
Minutes, the 4/15/2008 Minutes, Accounts Payable Report “D” and the Revenue/
Expenditure Report from the consent agenda. It was noted that there would not
be a Treasurer Report for tonight’s meeting.
Motion by Eyster to approve the Consent Agenda.
Seconded by Williams.
Carried unanimously.   
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR AGENDA & NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:09 p.m.
Darrell Brown-6500 Shoeman Road
-asked about financial obligations of the township regarding the wireless
tower.
Al LeBlanc-4720 Jadestone Drive
-said he was not able to find tonight’s agenda on the township website.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:12 p.m.
PLANNING COMMISSION
Planning Commission Chairman Michael Fielek commented on recent commission
business as outlined in the submitted minutes of the April 15, 2008 meeting. He
explained the Partnership for Change Grant Program and asked for Board comment
regarding the concept and application process.
Motion by Hayes to approve and encourage the Planning Commission to pursue the
grant opportunity with Partnerships for Change, as set forth in the submitted
documentation and to contact surrounding communities to inquire as to their
interest in the program, which would create an arena in which neighboring
municipalities and townships can meet and exchange ideas of mutual interest and
provide a regional benefit for residents of all the districts through
partnerships.
Seconded by Williams.
Carried unanimously.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Tower Update
Marv Thomson of the Communications Commission submitted documentation and gave
an update regarding the wireless internet project, citing connection statistics
and comments on sites that have reported unacceptable signal strength.
Columbarium Update
Supervisor Martin explained the submitted plans, sketches and blueprints and
said that the project will be put out for competitive bidding. Fitzgerald &
Henne will help cull through the bids received to assist in the selection
process of a contractor.
Supervisor Martin also stated that the mapping of the cemeteries continues and
that, in the future, there would be online access to view the cemetery layout
and occupancy.
Employee Benefits
Treasurer Eyster explained the latest draft of the “paid sick leave” benefit.
Discussion ensued and it was decided that a determination would need to be made
on whether this is to be considered a “funded benefit”, necessitating budget
line item appropriations, before activating the benefit.
NEW BUSINESS
2008 Road Commission Recommendation
Supervisor Martin explained the memo from the Road Improvement Committee
recommending five projects for the upcoming year.
Motion by Wright to approve the 2008 repair recommendations from the Road
Improvement Committee as follows:
1.   Last years carry over Damon Rd, Ebright Road, Oakleaf Hills
Subdivision      $61,787
   Last years approved amount was $58,710.90
2. Cherry Ridge entire subdivision                     $24,456
3. Harvey Drive                            $19,773
4. Hiddenview Lane                           $51,710
5. Baan Gan Aka Subdivision                        $43,138
                           TOTAL    $200,864
Seconded by Williams.
Carried unanimously.
New Hire-Caretaker Maintenance Assistant
Supervisor Martin explained that twelve applications were received and six
interviews conducted with the results yielding Marc Donnelly, a township
resident, as the new Caretaker Maintenance Assistant.
Auditor Selection
Supervisor Martin explained the communications received from auditing firms,
one of which declined to submit a bid due to a conflict of interest. It was
further explained that the firm of Layton & Richardson was her recommendation
and the recommendation of the former auditor, Abraham & Gaffney (added with
minutes approval on 6/3/08).
Motion by Wilbrink to approve the 4-year proposal, 2008-2012, for auditing
services from the firm of Layton & Richardson.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
Pool Contribution Request
Supervisor Martin explained the document submitted by the Williamston School
System, and said that the school system was informed that last year’s
contribution from the township would be the last. Supervisor Martin has asked
that the school system submit a proposal, which would list benefits to the
residents of the township, however such a proposal has not been received.
March 25, 2008 Minutes
Clerk Dahlstrom, beginning by stating that he is in favor of the Senior Citizen
Center grant, said that resolution #69 included in the minutes is inaccurate
and he would like this rescinded and a resolution with correct wording passed.
Discussion ensued.
Motion by Wilbrink to rescind Township resolution #69 passed on February 25,
2008.
Seconded by Dahlstrom.
Motion fails.
Discussion ensued and it was determined that Clerk Dahlstrom would submit
revised wording for a new proposed resolution and deliberation would take place
at the Tuesday, May 20, 2008 meeting. Supervisor Martin said that the previous
motion could be rescinded at that time, but the minutes of the meeting could be
approved.
Motion by Hayes to approve the minutes of March 25, 2008 as submitted.
Seconded by Williams.
Motion passes.
April 15, 2008 Minutes
Motion by Hayes to approve the minutes of April 15, 2008 as corrected.
Seconded by Williams.
Motion passes.
Discussion ensued regarding check number 17226, listed on Accounts Payable
Document “D”, for posthole digging. Supervisor Martin said that Clerk Dahlstrom
had indicated that this would be done free of charge. Clerk Dahlstrom said that
originally it was to be free of charge, but circumstances changed and there was
a reasonable charge of $325.00 incurred.
Motion by Wilbrink to approve payments for Accounts Payable Document “D” in the
total amount of $21,386.70.
Seconded by Dahlstrom.
Motion carries.
The revenue-expenditure report contained inaccuracies that should be corrected
by the June meeting. The report submitted was not approved.
Treasurer Eyster said that there were reconciliation issues, which prevented
the monthly Treasurer’s Report. She is working with Bill Tucker on this issue.
Trustee Williams cited problems with AFLAC deductions on his paycheck and he
asked that they be rectified.
Supervisor Martin reported on the MTA County Chapter meeting held at the
township, road patrol issues, upcoming Joint Meeting with Williamston and
progress on the PILOT ordinance.
Clerk Dahlstrom reported on the small election turnout for the May 6, 2008
school election.
Trustee Wilbrink said the Board should be informed when a Newsletter is being
sent to residents. He said that he was unaware of the publication of the recent
edition sent as a year in review. Supervisor Martin said that this item was
announced at previous Board Meetings.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 9:21 p.m.
Ruth Templeton-Epley Road
-asked about regulations regarding township expenditures referred to as
“grants”.
Helen LeBlanc-Jadestone Drive
-stated that at the precinct where she worked for the school election, the
turnout was 7%.
Rod Imhoff-Wilgus Road
-asked about road repairs/improvements to Barry Road.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 9:28 p.m.
Supervisor Martin reviewed the meeting and called an adjournment at 9:30 p.m.
____________________________
Howard M. Dahlstrom
Township Clerk
May 20, 2008
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 5:40 p.m. at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Clerk
Dahlstrom called the meeting to order.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustees Wilbrink, Hayes, Williams & Wright and Treasurer Eyster and
Clerk Dahlstrom.
Absent: Supervisor Martin.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Clerk Dahlstrom called for public comment at 5:41 p.m.
Marlene Epley re: Library Foundation fundraiser to be held on June 19, 2008.
Helen LeBlanc re: satisfaction with changes to Senior Center Grant resolution.
Motion by Dahlstrom to appoint Trustee Martin Wright as Chair of the meeting.
Seconded by Wilbrink.
Motion carries.
SENIOR CENTER RESOLUTION
Discussion ensued regarding changing the wording of resolution #69 previously
adopted by the Board.
Motion by Trustee Wright to amend the previously adopted Resolution #69 as
indicated below.
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP
RESOLUTION #69
Williamston Senior Center Grant Resolution
Resolution by Supervisor Mickey Martin
Be it resolved that:
WHEREAS, the Williamston Area Senior Center (WASC) is located at 201 School
Street, P0 Box 343, Williamston, MI 48895; and
WHEREAS, the WASC provides activities and services for residents 60 years of
age and older (see attached Memorandum from WASC dated January 24, 2008 and
WASC Bylaws); and
WHEREAS, pursuant to PA 39 of 1976, the WASC will conduct its business
operations and organization under established bylaws, and at the direction of a
Board of Directors elected by the membership~
WI-IEREAS, in accordance with PA 39 of 1976, the Williamstown Township Board
approved a Budget (inserted with amendment to previously adopted motion) Motion
in 2006 to establish a four-year grant for WASC and the following funding
schedule was set up:
FY 2007 — first year grant (paid)
FY 2008 — second year grant (paid)
FY 2009 — third year grant (to be paid)
FY 2010 — fourth year grant (to be paid)
(FY, for each year, inserted with amendment to previously adopted motion)
WHEREAS, written information that memorialized the Budget (inserted with
amendment to previously adopted motion) Motion of the Board in 2006 has either
been lost or destroyed, and by this resolution the Township Board desires to
rememorialize this grant.
NOW THEREFORE, Williamstown Township reaffirms that it has budgeted and
appropriated $7,000.00 annually to WASC for the periods of 2007, 2008, 2009 and
2010 as related above. Further, Williamstown Township resolves that it will
require an annual report of revenues and expenditures, and/or other year-end
reports generated by WASC.
Seconded by: Trustee Williams
Supervisor Mickey Martin:   yes
Treasurer Janet T. Eyster:   yes
Clerk Howard Dahlstrom:   yes
Trustee Frans Wilbrink:   yes
Trustee Martin Wright:   yes
Trustee Bob Hayes:   yes
Trustee Rick Williams:   yes
Seconded by Trustee Hayes.
Treasurer Janet T. Eyster:   yes
Clerk Howard Dahlstrom:   yes
Trustee Frans Wilbrink:   no
Trustee Martin Wright:      yes
Trustee Bob Hayes:      yes
Trustee Rick Williams:      yes
Motion carries.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Trustee Wright called for public comment at 6:00 p.m.
Bob Hanna re: appreciation for the grant for the Senior Citizen center.
Trustee Wright adjourned the meeting at 6:02 p.m.
____________________________
Howard M. Dahlstrom
Township Clerk
June 3, 2008
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP
BOARD OF TRUSTEES MEETING
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 pm at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Trustee Wright, Trustee Hayes, Trustee Williams,
Clerk Dahlstrom, Treasurer Eyster and Supervisor Martin.
Absent: none.
Also Present: Michael Fielek, Planning Commission Chair & Building Inspector,
Mark Miller.
Motion by Martin to add to the agenda under Unfinished Business, discussion of
the trailer on the property at 986 Gulick Road.
Seconded by Dahlstrom.
Carried unanimously.
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
CONSENT AGENDA
§   Minutes of 5/13/2008, 5/15/08 and 5/20/2008 Meetings
§   Treasurer Report 2
§   Building Inspector Report
§   Accounts Payable-Paid
§   Payroll-Paid
§   Accounts Payable-For Approval
§   Revenue /Expenditure Report
During discussion it was the consensus of the Board to remove the 5/13/2008
Minutes, the April, 2008 Treasurer’s Report, Accounts Payable Report-For
Approval from the consent agenda.
Motion by Eyster to approve the consent agenda consisting of minutes of 5/15/08
and 5/20/08, Treasurer’s Report of March 2008, Building Inspector Report for
May 2008, Revenue-Expenditure report for April 2008 plus the following accounts
payable paid, payroll paid & accounts payable for approval:
[A] to approve PAID accounts payable checks 17227-17242 in the amount of
$37,425.99.
[B] to approve PAID payroll checks 40144-40157 in the amount of $5,292.47.
Seconded by Dahlstrom.
Carried unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:06 p.m.
Helen LeBlanc-4720 Jadestone Drive -regarding placing public comment before the
consent agenda on the meeting’s agenda.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:07 p.m.
PLANNING COMMISSION
Planning Commission Chairman Michael Fielek commented on recent commission
business as outlined in the submitted minutes of the May 20, 2008 meeting. He
commented on the trail ways concept and possible grant funding.
Motion by Hayes to approve the contract with McKenna for preparation of a grant
application for funding trail ways in Williamstown Township.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Employees Benefits
Treasurer Eyster explained that this would be an unfunded benefit, meaning that
separate line items or funding for the same, would not be necessary. Funds
would be taken from the budgeted wage line items when a sick day is used.
Motion by Eyster to approve paid sick leave benefits for employees as outlined
in the May 2, 2008 memo from Treasurer Eyster to the Board.
Seconded by Hayes.
Roll call vote:
Supervisor Mickey Martin:   yes
Treasurer Janet T. Eyster:   yes
Clerk Howard Dahlstrom:   yes
Trustee Frans Wilbrink:   no
Trustee Martin Wright:   yes
Trustee Bob Hayes:      yes
Trustee Rick Williams:   yes
Motion Passes.
Pilot Ordinance
Supervisor Martin explained that the proposed ordinance would be on the agenda
for the June 17, 2008 Board meeting at 5:30pm.
FreedomNet Security
Supervisor Martin explained the policies used by the company regarding personal
data and alternative funds for subscription to the service.
Video Taping
Marv Thomson, of the Communications Commission, explained the installation
situation with the equipment and said that it was his opinion that an audio
splitter was not necessary at this time.
986 Gulick Road
Building Inspector Miller explained that the trailer, ordered to be removed by
the Board, was still on the property. He said the trailer was moved closer to
the house on the property, but had not been removed from the property.
Motion by Dahlstrom to refer the matter to the township attorney.
Seconded by Hayes.
Carried unanimously.
NEW BUSINESS
Noise Measurement Device
Building Inspector Miller explained the prices and data submitted for this
item. He said that if the township was going to enforce ordinance clauses
having to do with decibel levels, a measurement device was needed.
Motion by Wright to approve the purchase of a sound measurement device, not to
exceed $400.00, for ordinance compliance.
Seconded by Hayes.
Carried unanimously.
Building Inspector Back-Up
Building Inspector Miller explained that he backs up Tim O’Neil from Leroy
Township when he is on vacation and feels that a reciprocal agreement with Mr.
O’Neil, at $45.00 per inspection would be advantageous for the township.
Motion by Wilbrink to contract with Tim O’Neil to serve as the back-up Building
Inspector.
Seconded by Dahlstrom.
Carried unanimously.
Foreclosed Land Purchase
Treasurer Eyster explained that the township has the option to bid for a
foreclosed property on Beeman Road; however it is her opinion that the township
should pass a motion signifying that they will not exercise this option.
Motion by Eyster that Williamstown Township does not bid for the foreclosed
property on Beeman Rd. between 4470 and 4480 Beeman.
Seconded by Dahlstrom.
Wetlands Coastal - Contract
Discussion ensued regarding the proposed contract for representatives from
Wetland Coastal resources to meet with the township on an “as needed” basis.
Motion by Hayes to accept the proposal from Wetland Coastal Resources for
meeting attendance and assistance, at the request of Township Board members.
Seconded by Williams.
Carried unanimously.
May 13 Minutes
Motion by Eyster to approve the minutes of the May 13, 2008 Board Meeting as
corrected. Seconded by Dahlstrom.
Carried unanimously.
Acccounts Payable for Approval
Motion by Dahlstrom to approve accounts payable checks 17243-17264, with voided
checks # 17249 & 17262 and checks 17273 & 17274 submitted FOR APPROVAL, in the
amount of $23,835.62.
Seconded by Eyster.
Carried unanimously.
Treasurer Eyster clarified sections of the April 2008 Treasurers Report.
Supervisor Martin called for reports from the Board.
Clerk Dahlstrom commented on recent County Road Patrol meetings.
Supervisor Martin commented on the recent Joint Meeting, Parks Committee
minutes, and Porta-Johns at the parks.
Trustee Williams reported on a possible “green energy” project for the township
hall.
Supervisor Martin commented on the document submitted by Keep Michigan
Beautiful.
Treasurer Eyster commented on postage and envelope costs for tax receipts, and
it was the consensus of the Board to mail receipts to those who request them.
Supervisor Martin said that the next meeting agenda will include a cemetery
plot discrepancy issue.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 8:22 p.m.
Billie Jo O’Berry-Mason, Michigan -commented about her candidacy for 55 th
District Court Judge.
Rod Imhoff-Wilgus Road -commented that Marv Thomson has done a great job with
the Broadband Tower project.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 8:34 p.m.
Supervisor Martin reviewed the meeting and called an adjournment at 8:35 p.m.
____________________________
Howard M. Dahlstrom
Township Clerk
June 17, 2008
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP
BOARD OF TRUSTEES MEETING
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 5:30 pm at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Trustee Wright, Trustee Hayes, Treasurer Eyster,
Trustee Williams Clerk Dahlstrom and Supervisor Martin.
Absent: None.
Motion by Martin to add discussion of the County ballot proposal for the
preservation of farmland and open spaces, and a discussion regarding candidate
public speaking to the agenda.
Seconded by Dahlstrom.
Carried unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 5:31 p.m.
Ruth Templeton re: requested an update on the employee pension plan.
Al Leblanc re: the agenda for the evening’s meeting was not available on the
website.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 5:32 p.m.
Gaming License
Motion by Dahlstrom to authorize resolution number 71, which recognizes the
Williamston Football Boosters as a nonprofit organization operating in the
community for the purpose of obtaining charitable gaming licenses.
Seconded by Eyster.
Carried unanimously
Video Recording/Tower Fence update
Marv Thomson informed the Board that tonight’s meeting would be the first trial
taping for the new video system. He also asked that the language regarding
fence material surrounding the tower be changed to “commercial-grade galvanized
fencing”.
Motion by Wright to authorize the tower fence to be made of commercial grade
galvanized fencing instead of vinyl clad to avoid the long-term costs of fence
replacements.
Seconded by Eyster.
Carried unanimously.
PILOT Ordinance
Supervisor Martin explained that if the Board wishes to waive the
confidentiality clause regarding the Township Attorney’s correspondence
regarding this issue, a motion would be in order.
Motion by Wilbrink to waive the attorney/client confidentiality clause
regarding the PILOT Ordinance.
Seconded by Williams.
Carried unanimously.
Township Attorney Spagnuolo explained the reason for a Payment In Lieu Of Taxes
ordinance and the included components of the ordinance before the Board
enabling an agreement with the developers of the Red Cedar Meadows Senior
Apartments, to be located at 2365 E. Grand River. Further discussion ensued.
Motion by Hayes to approve, with language changes discussed at tonight’s
meeting, the Tax Exemption Ordinance presented by the Township Attorney, which
is an ordinance to provide for a service charge in lieu of taxes for a proposed
multiple family dwelling project for senior persons of low income to be
financed or assisted pursuant to the provisions of the State Housing
Development Authority Act. Public Act 346 of 1996, as amended.
Seconded by Dahlstrom.
Carried unanimously.
Carol Sober Cemetery Plots
Supervisor Martin explained the variables involved in this issue of lack of
verification of a purchase of cemetery plots. Discussion ensued.
Motion by Wright to offer two cemetery plots to Carol Sober at the reduced
price of $400.00 each, if said purchase is made within 90 days of today’s’
date-June 17, 2008.
Seconded by Williams.
Motion carried.
Ballot Proposal Endorsement
Supervisor Martin explained the County ballot millage proposal for the
preservation of farmland and open spaces that would be on the August primary
ballot. An endorsement was suggested for the proposal, which will help protect
farmland and other open spaces including waterways, wildlife habitat, wetlands
and other natural lands.
Motion by Hayes to endorse a yes vote on the County ballot millage proposal for
the preservation of farmland and open spaces that would be on the August
primary ballot.
Seconded by Williams.
Motion carried.
Discussion ensued regarding the policy regarding candidates speaking at Board
meetings and it was the consensus of the Board to not list those requesting
time at the meeting and to follow the established public comment policy rules.
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 6:44 p.m.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 6:44 p.m.
Supervisor Martin called an adjournment at 6:45 pm.
____________________________
Howard M. Dahlstrom
Township Clerk
July 8, 2008
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP
BOARD OF TRUSTEES MEETING
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 pm at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Trustee Wright, Trustee Hayes, Trustee Williams,
Clerk Dahlstrom, Treasurer Eyster and Supervisor Martin.
Absent: none.
Also Present: Michael Fielek Rex Lamore (corrected with minutes approval on 8/
12/08) , Planning Commission Co-Chair & Building Inspector, Mark Miller.
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
CONSENT AGENDA
§   Minutes of 5/13/2008, 5/15/08 and 5/20/2008 Meetings
§   Treasurer Report 2
§   Building Inspector Report
§   Accounts Payable-Paid
§   Payroll-Paid
§   Accounts Payable-For Approval
§   Revenue /Expenditure Report
During discussion it was the consensus of the Board to remove the 6/3/2008 & 6/
17/2008 Minutes, the Treasurer’s Report, Accounts Payable Report-Paid, Accounts
Payable Report-For Approval, Payroll Paid Report and the Revenue Expenditure
Report from the consent agenda.
Motion by Hayes to approve the consent agenda consisting of the Building
Inspector Report for June 2008.
Seconded by Williams.
Carried unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR AGENDA & NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:04 p.m. There was none.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:04 p.m.
PLANNING COMMISSION
Planning Commission Co-Chairman Rex LaMore commented on recent commission
business as outlined in the submitted minutes of the June 17/24, 2008 meeting.
The Commission’s site plan approval recommendation for the Red Cedar Meadows
Senior Housing Project was discussed
Motion by Wilbrink to approve the site plan for the Red Cedar Meadows Senior
Housing Project with the following stipulations:
∙   Retain the southwest corner of the property as openspace.
∙   Provide an easement to the township for a 10-foot wide path at the high
water mark.
∙   Procurement of a variance for the front building setback.
∙   Procurement of a variance for exterior building materials.
∙   Exterior sign illumination shall be from downlit lighting.
∙   Approval of the plan by the office of the Ingham County Drain Commissioner
Seconded by Hayes.
Carried unanimously.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Pension Plan Update Report
Bill Tucker of Abraham & Gaffney reported on various financial items he has
been working on including the pension plan, audit preparation and assistance,
IRS 941 reports and proper department charges in accounts payable and payroll.
Treasurer Eyster commented on the history of the IRS overpayment/refund
situation.
Carol Sober – cemetery plots
Supervisor Martin explained the alleged discrepancy regarding the purchase of
two cemetery plots, for which there are no receipts or paperwork. Carol Sober
explained that she cannot locate the receipts for this purchase but was certain
that it took place. Discussion ensued among the board members, leading to the
following motion.
Motion by Martin to offer two cemetery plots to Carol Sober for the reduced
price of $300.00 each, with the offer to expire thirty days from today.
Seconded by Wilbrink.
Carried unanimously.
Minutes Approval
Motion by Martin to approve the minutes of the June 3, 2008 and June 17, 2008
Board Meetings with the following corrections:
6-3-08 pg 1- add “agenda” to public comment items.
6-3-08 pg 3- Motion by Wright to approve the purchase of a (omit) sound
measurement device (insert)  decibel meter for sound measurement, not to exceed
$400.00, for ordinance compliance.
6-3-08 pg 3-insert “carried unanimously” after foreclosed land purchase motion.
6-3-08 pg. 3-insert corrections that were made to the May 13, 2008 minutes.
6-17-08 pg 1- add “agenda” to public comment items.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
Treasurers Report
Treasurer Eyster elaborated on her submitted report covering financial activity
for the month of May 2008.
Motion by Dahlstrom to approve the Treasurer’s Report covering financial
activity for the month of May 2008.
Seconded by Wright.
Motion carried.
Motion by Dahlstrom to approve PAID accounts payable checks 17275-17312, in the
amount of $37,608.67, noting that #17307 has been voided.
Seconded by Eyster.
Carried unanimously.
Motion by Dahlstrom to approve PAID payroll checks 40158-40222 and EFTPS 6 & 7,
in the amount of $44,055.72, noting that checks 40170, 40171, 40172 and 40175
have been voided.
Seconded by Wilbrink.
Carried unanimously.
Motion by Dahlstrom to approve accounts payable checks 17313- 17335 17336
(corrected with minutes approval on 8/12/08), submitted FOR APPROVAL, in the
amount of $19,194.49, noting that #17320 has been voided.
Seconded by Eyster.
Carried unanimously.
No action was taken on the Revenue-Expenditure Report.
Treasurer Eyster commented on the possibility of changing insurance policy
deductibles as a way to save money.
Trustee Williams reported that he was able to find the meeting agenda for the
last meeting on the township website immediately following the meeting,
contrary to what was reported during the public comment of that meeting.
Clerk Dahlstrom commented on the Absentee Counting Board training that he and
the Deputy Clerk recently attended.
Supervisor Martin commented on the non-activity regarding establishing a four-
way traffic light at Zimmer & Grand River, the upcoming meeting of the Ingham
County Chapter of the Michigan Townships Association scheduled for July 23,
2008 in White Oak Township Webberville  (corrected with minutes approval on 8/
12/08) and commented that the township audit would begin this coming week.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 8:28 p.m.
Al LeBlanc
-commented about the sound system at the meetings and the great work of Marv
Thomson with the audio/video equipment.
Darryl Brown
-commented on the broadband tower and the intersection of Grand River & Zimmer.
Helen LeBlanc
-commented on the need for the AV Counting Board, based on her experience as an
election precinct worker.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 8:34 p.m.
Supervisor Martin reviewed the meeting, stated that the next meeting would be
held on July 15, 2008 at 5:30 pm and called an adjournment at 8:35 p.m.
____________________________
Howard M. Dahlstrom
Township Clerk
July 15, 2008
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP
BOARD OF TRUSTEES MEETING
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 5:30 pm at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Trustee Wright, Trustee Hayes, Treasurer Eyster,
Trustee Williams
    Clerk Dahlstrom and Supervisor Martin.
Absent: None.
Motion by Martin to add the approval of repaving bids to the agenda.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR AGENDA & NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 5:32 p.m. There was none.
Columbarium Bid Approval
Greg Lammers of the Cemetery Committee explained that there were 6 bids
received for this project. Discussion ensued regarding various aspects of the
project. Mr. Lammers stated that after careful consideration and review the
Committee is recommending that the bid from the Barkum Company be accepted in
the amount of $28,697.00.
Motion by Dahlstrom to accept the bid, submitted in accordance with the
proposed specifications, from the Barkum Company, in the amount of $28,697.00,
for the Columbarium Project.
Seconded by Hayes.
Carried unanimously.
Video Taping/Internet Update
Marv Thomson gave an update regarding the video taping of the Board meetings
and the Broadband project. Supervisor Martin commented that the videos would
not be the official record of the meeting.
Williamston Road Improvements
Supervisor Martin explained that the Road Commission is planning to improve a
section from Haslett Road to Bismark Street in the spring of 2009. Preliminary
plans have been developed with future meetings and input upcoming.
Repaving Bids
Supervisor Martin provided revised figures for the repaving project involving
Hiddenview, Cherry Ridge and Harvey Drive. The estimate was $95,393.00 but the
actual cost will be $109,350.84. A difference of $13,411.84, with the ICRC
waiving the 7% distributive costs.
Motion by Martin to proceed with this repaving project.
Seconded by Wright.
Motion carried.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR AGENDA & NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 6:15 p.m. There was none.
Supervisor Martin called an adjournment at 6:15 pm.
____________________________
Howard M. Dahlstrom
Township Clerk
August 12, 2008
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP
BOARD OF TRUSTEES MEETING
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 pm at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Trustee Wright, Trustee Hayes, Trustee Williams,
Clerk Dahlstrom, Treasurer Eyster and Supervisor Martin.
Absent: none.
Also Present: Michael Fielek, Planning Commission Chair & Building Inspector,
Mark Miller.
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
CONSENT AGENDA
§   Minutes of 7/8/2008 and 7/15/2008 Meetings
§   Treasurer Report 2
§   Building Inspector Report
§   Accounts Payable-Paid
§   Payroll-Paid
§   Accounts Payable-For Approval
§   Revenue /Expenditure Report
During discussion it was the consensus of the Board to remove the 7/8/2008 & 7/
15/2008 Minutes, and the Revenue Expenditure Report from the consent agenda.
Motion by Eyster to approve the consent agenda consisting of the Building
Inspector Report for July 2008, Treasurers Reports for June 2008 & July 2008,
PAID accounts payable checks 17337-17378 and checks 17386-17414, in the total
amount of $238,646.28, noting that #17342, 17357 and 17413 have been voided,
PAID payroll checks 17379-17385, 40223-40252 and EFTPS 8, in the total amount
of $25,299.93 and accounts payable checks 17415-17432, submitted FOR APPROVAL,
in the amount of $11,912.46.
Seconded by Dahlstrom.
Carried unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR AGENDA & NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:02 p.m.
Al LeBlanc-requested a reference point for information regarding political yard
signs.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:03 p.m.
PLANNING COMMISSION
Planning Commission Chairman Michael Fielek commented on recent commission
business as outlined in the submitted minutes of the July 15, 2008 meeting.
Discussion took place regarding the Gun Club site plan for an accessory
building and an upcoming public hearing for amendments to the zoning ordinance
regarding wind energy.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Alternative Energy Project
Supervisor Martin stated that Planning Assistant Bloomquist is researching the
feasibility and availability of an energy audit for the township hall. Trustee
Williams reported that he is still looking at grants, grant writers and
auditors to bring the alternative energy project to reality. He stated that
there are many opportunities available and the project may turn out to be a
combination of many variables from changing light bulbs to more energy-
efficient stock to the installation of wind or solar energy equipment. The work
continues.
Insurance Costs - Deductibles
Clerk Dahlstrom explained the submitted documentation, which showed that there
would be no savings as a result of switching deductibles. Treasurer Eyster
suggested a closer look at our inventory to establish if there are items that
do not need to be covered.
NEW BUSINESS
Investment Depository Designation Amendment
Trustee Hayes asked for a few minutes to review the proposed resolution. The
Board moved to the next item on the agenda.
International Maintenance Code
Supervisor Martin explained that there have been a number of complaints
received regarding homes that are abandoned or in disrepair. Ticketing the
owner and/or occupant, after adopting the International Maintenance Code may
remedy the situation. Building Official, Mark Miller, explained the difference
between ticketing the owner or the occupants, depending on the individual
situation. It was the consensus of the Board to move forward with adopting the
Code and Supervisor Martin said that a refined version would have to be created
and the township attorney would need to review before presentation and
adoption.
Investment Depository Designation Amendment
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP
RESOLUTION # 72
INVESTMENT AND DEPOSITORY DESIGNATION RESOLUTION
Resolution by Treasurer Eyster.
WHEREAS, the Board of Williamstown Township, Ingham County, in exercising its
fiduciary responsibilities desires to safeguard the funds of the township that
may be invested from time to time, and
WHEREAS, public Act 77 of 1989 (MCL 41.77) requires that the township board
designate the banks or depositories for the money belonging to the township,
including the time for which the deposits shall be made and all details for
carrying into effect the authority given in this act, and
WHEREAS, Public Act 196 of 1997 (MCL 129.91, et seq) requires township boards,
in consultation with the township treasurer, to adopt an investment policy, now
THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED, That this policy is applicable to all public funds
belonging to Williamstown Township and in the custody of the township
treasurer.
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, That the Williamstown Township treasurer is authorized
to manage funds belonging to the township, including depositing funds in
township board approved financial institutions and administration of
investments in conformance with MCL 41.77 and policies set forth in this
resolution.
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, That the board approves the following institutions and
their successors as depositories of township funds: Bank One/Chase, Independent
Bank, Vanguard Securities, Fifth/Third Bank, Capitol National Bank, Flagstar
Bank, Mason State Bank, Dart Bank, National City Bank; Charter One Bank,
National Association; Citizens Bank, and LaSalle Bank Midwest National
Association/Bank of America.
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, That the treasurer shall recommend financial
institutions for approval for the safekeeping of township funds based on an
evaluation of the performance and solvency of the institution, as well as past
performance in exercising due care and prudence in managing the custody of
township funds held in trust, if applicable. The treasurer shall periodically
evaluate approved and potential financial depositories and shall make
recommendations as to appropriate changes in approved depositories when
warranted.
In determining safekeeping and custody qualifications, financial institutions
should be able, upon request, to document a minimum capital requirement of at
least $10,000,000 and at least five years of operation. All financial
institutions and brokers/dealers shall be pre-qualified by supplying the
following:
∙   Audited financial statements,
∙   Proof of NASD certification or FDIC insurance,
∙   Proof of state registration, and
∙   Certification of having read, understood and agreement to comply with the
Williamstown Township investment policy.
The treasurer shall periodically examine the financial condition and
registrations of qualified financial institutions and brokers/dealers by
obtaining annual updates of the information listed above.
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, That when the treasurer’s analysis of the township’s
cash flow requirements reveal that surplus funds will not be required to meet
current expenditures for a specific length of time, the treasurer is authorized
to make prudent investments for a length of time that will provide a reasonable
return on investment yet ensure that such funds will be available when needed
and will not be exposed to undue risk. The treasurer is authorized to invest
township funds in the following instruments:
a.   Bonds, securities, and other obligations of the United States or an agency
or instrumentality of the United States.
b.   Certificates of Deposit, savings accounts, deposit accounts, or depository
receipts of a financial institution, but only if the financial institution is
eligible to be a depository of funds belonging to the state under a law or rule
of this state or the United States.
c.   Commercial paper rated at the time of purchase within the 2 highest
classifications established by not less than 2 standard rating services and
that matures not more than 270 days after the date of purchase.
d.   Repurchase agreements consisting of instruments listed in subdivision (a).
e.   Bankers’ acceptances if United States banks.
f.   Obligations of this state or any of its political subdivisions that at the
time of purchase are rated as investment grade by not less than one standard
rating service.
g.   Mutual funds registered under the Investment Company Act of 1940, as
amended, Title 1 of Chapter 686, 54 Stat. 789, 15 U.S.C. 80 a-1 to 80 a-3 and
80 a-4 to 80 a-64, with authority to purchase only investment vehicles that are
legal for direct investment by a public corporation. However, a mutual fund is
not disqualified as a permissible investment solely by reason of either of the
following:
i)   The purchase of securities on a when-issued or delayed delivery basis
i)   The ability to lend portfolio securities as long as the mutual fund
receives collateral at all times equal to at least 100% of the value of the
securities loaned.
ii)   The limited ability to borrow and pledge a like portion of the
portfolio’s assets for temporary or emergency purposes.
Investments in mutual funds shall be limited to securities whose intention is
to maintain a net asset value of $ 1.00 per share. 
h.   Obligations described in subdivision (a) through (g) if purchased through
an interlocal agreement under the Urban Cooperation Act of 1967, PA 7 of 1967,
Ex.Sess., (MCLs 124.501 to 124.512).
i.   Investment pools organized under the Surplus Funds Investment Pool Act, PA
367 of 1982 (MCLs 129.111 to 129.118).
j.   The investment pools organized under the Local Government Investment Pool
Act, PA 121 of 1985 (MCLs 129.141 to 129.150).
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, That the objectives of this policy are:
∙   Foremost, maintain safety of principal of township funds;
∙   Secondarily, maintain a diversified investment portfolio;
∙   Maintain adequate liquidity;
∙   Achieve a market rate of return on relatively safe investment instruments.
To accomplish these objectives, decisions and actions involving the township’s
investment portfolio shall meet the following criteria:
Safety: Safety of principal is the foremost objective of Williamstown
Township’s investment practices. Investments shall be undertaken in a manner
that seeks to ensure the preservation of capital in the overall investment
portfolio.
Diversifications: The investments shall be diversified by security type, when
practical, and institution, in order that potential losses on individual
securities do not exceed the income generated from the remainder of the
portfolio.
Liquidity: The investment portfolio shall remain sufficiently liquid to meet
all operating requirements that may be reasonably anticipated.
Return on Investment: The investment portfolio shall be designed to attain a
market average rate of return during budgetary and economic cycles while taking
into account investment risk constraints and liquidity needs. Return on
investment is of secondary importance compared to safety and liquidity
objectives. The core of investments is limited to relatively low risk
securities, and a fair rate of return relative to risk is assumed.
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, That the treasurer shall make such investments and only
such investments as a prudent person would make in dealing with the property of
another, having in view the preservation of the principal and the amount and
regularity of the income to be derived.
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, That the treasurer shall refrain from personal business
activity that could conflict with the proper execution and management of
township investments, or that could impair the treasurer’s ability to make
impartial investment decisions.
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, That the treasurer shall annually provide a written
report to the township board concerning the investment of township funds.
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, That Township Resolution Number 40 is hereby replaced.
Seconded by Dahlstrom.
Carried by the following roll call vote.
YES: Martin, Eyster, Dahlstrom, Williams, Wright, Wilbrink & Hayes.
NO: None
Newman Road Repair
Supervisor Martin explained the submitted estimate from the Ingham County Road
Commission who would arrange for a contractor to do the work. Discussion ensued
regarding previous sub-standard work on Newman Road done by a County-hired
contractor. Trustee Wright said that it was his feeling that since the County
hired the contractor that the County should fix the mess that was created, or
at least split the costs of the new repairs. Trustee Williams said that the
damage has been done and while he was doubtful there would be an agreement, he
felt that the County should be asked to split the costs.
Motion by Hayes to approve the estimate of $25,352.00 for the repairs to Newman
Road, and to ask Ingham County to split the costs of the repairs. It was
further requested that results of any inquiry into any legal action against the
previous contractor be disclosed.
Seconded by Williams.
Carried unanimously.
Minutes Approval
Motion by Martin to approve the minutes of the July 8, 2008 and July 15, 2008
Board Meetings with the following corrections:
7-8-08 pg 1- correct “also present” to read “Rex Lamore, Planning Commission
Co-Chair” instead of Michael Fielek.
7-8-08 pg.3-FOR APPROVAL MOTION correct check numbers are #17313-17336
7-8-08 pg.3-correct location of MTA chapter meeting to read “White Oak
Township” instead of Webberville.
7-15-08 pg.1- correct “also present” to list Building Official, Mark Miller.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
Revenue-Expenditure Report
Motion by Martin to approve the revenue-expenditure report pending
administrative changes suggested by the Treasurer.
Seconded by Eyster.
Carried unanimously.
Treasurer Eyster explained the report settings used on the Treasurer Reports,
noted that both June and July could be produced because of the later meeting
date. Discussion ensued regarding the Certificate of Deposit Reports and the
necessity of the Board receiving the reports with projected interest.
Supervisor Martin cited her included “Park Security memo” and said that the
leash restrictions were not being followed at the park. Trustee Wright noted
that those witnessing the incidents should notify the County animal officer and
the amount of violations that are occurring could be tracked. Supervisor Martin
said that there were a large number of incidents. Trustee Williams said that
the County doesn’t respond to traffic accidents and he doubted that there would
be a prompt response to dog nuisance calls. Clerk Dahlstrom suggested signs
that included the Animal Control officer direct contact information so that
patrons of the park could notify the Animal Officer as the incidents were
occurring. It was the consensus to look into signs of this nature.
Supervisor Martin gave an update on parks grants and the Columbarium project.
Clerk Dahlstrom gave an update on primary election results from August 5, 2008.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 8:31 p.m.
Al LeBlanc
-commented on the need for the Treasurer to alliterate Certificate of Deposit
interest, per auditor discussions when he was the Township Treasurer.
Helen LeBlanc
-stated that perhaps taking digital pictures and tracking license plate
information would help quell the leash law violators at the park.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 8:34 p.m.
Supervisor Martin reviewed the meeting and called an adjournment at 8:35 p.m.
____________________________
Howard M. Dahlstrom
Township Clerk
September 9, 2008
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP
BOARD OF TRUSTEES MEETING
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 pm at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order, reviewed the agenda and explained
procedures for public comment.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Trustee Wright, Trustee Hayes, Trustee Williams,
Clerk Dahlstrom, Treasurer Eyster and Supervisor Martin.
Absent: none.
Also Present: Michael Fielek, Planning Commission Chair & Building Inspector,
Mark Miller.
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR AGENDA & NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:04 p.m. There was none.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:04 p.m.
CONSENT AGENDA
§   Minutes of 8/12/2008 Meeting
§   Building Inspector Report
§   Accounts Payable-Paid
§   Payroll-Paid
§   Accounts Payable-For Approval
§   Revenue /Expenditure Report
§   Budget Amendment
During discussion it was the consensus of the Board to remove the Accounts
Payable-Paid, Payroll-Paid and the Accounts Payable-For Approval reports from
the consent agenda.
Motion by Dahlstrom to approve the consent agenda consisting of the minutes of
the August 12, 2008 Board Meeting, the Building Inspector Report for August
2008, the Revenue-Expenditure Report and the Budget Amendment transferring
$153,000.00 from the fund balance (101-000-390) to local road improvements
(101-441-814).
Seconded by Eyster.
Carried unanimously.
PLANNING COMMISSION
Planning Commission Chairman Michael Fielek commented on recent commission
business as outlined in the submitted minutes of the August 19 & 26, 2008
meetings. The affirmative recommendation for the Burgdorf Winery site plan and
special use permit was explained, with Chairman Fielek relaying that the
Planning Commission feels there is a need for a review of the definition and
parameters for a home occupation. Chairman Fielek also said that the Planning
Commission feels that the Green Vision project would be well received and that
Trustee Williams’ plans for the Township Hall aspect would be a good start.
Supervisor Martin called for public comment regarding the Burgdorf Winery site
plan and special use permit.
∙   Tom Sparks-110 W. Michigan Avenue--submitted documentation opposing the
project citing non-compliance with the township’s zoning ordinance regarding
such items as parking, expansion of a home-based business and detrimental
effects to the surrounding residents.
∙   Katherine Neils-5576 Shoeman Road--submitted documentation opposing the
project’s additional square footage and the increased traffic that would
result.
∙   Sue Stiffler-5620 Shoeman Road—opposed the project saying that this was a
good business with a bad business plan. The quality of life would be affected
for this area which is zoned residential. The increased traffic and special
events would be a detriment.
∙   Mike Evans-5544 Ebright Road—spoke in opposition, saying previous building
permits were not pulled and that the law needs to be followed.
∙   David Joseph-1048 Cherry Valle Lane—said that there sounds like there is
solid opposition to the approvals and that the Planning Commission should
review their recommendation.
∙   Wendy Rehnocer-5615 Shoeman Road—spoke in opposition citing increased
traffic and alcohol consumption on the premises.
∙   Ashley Wallis-5632 Haslett Road—said she was neutral until now, but is now
opposed because of the traffic increase and alcohol consumption.
∙   Carol Dunn-605 Haslett Road—spoke in opposition citing traffic and said
that this type of business should not be in the neighborhood.
∙   Richard Ringstrom-4690 Zimmer Road--spoke in opposition asking what the
zoning ordinance standards were for this area that would allow this size of
operation in a residential neighborhood.
∙   Linda Bostron-5735 Shoeman Road--spoke in opposition citing the increased
traffic problems.
∙   Pamela Porterfield-5340 Zimmer Road—spoke in favor saying that this was a
nice operation and that if any of the neighbors had a party it would generate
just as much traffic.
∙   Paula Pendergast-4683 Rocky Hill Drive--spoke in favor saying that the
operation was well run and the Burgdorf’s abide by all the regulations.
∙   Nancy Horton-5632 Shoeman Road--spoke in opposition citing the size of the
parcel, the increased traffic, alcohol consumption and possible additional
growth in the future.
∙   Ron Decker-1887 Barry Road—said that this was a quiet neighborhood and if
the business wanted to expand they should move to a commercial zone.
∙   Lisa Balbes-Missouri--said that she has a home based business where she
lives, and the regulations do not allow customers to come to her location.
∙   Paul Bostion-Locke Township--spoke in favor saying that the Burgdorf’s
should be applauded for keeping business in Michigan
∙   Tim Van Rowensavau-5630 Van Atta-Okemos--spoke in favor saying the township
should encourage the expansion.
∙   Charles Harrison-5805 Shoeman Road--spoke in favor saying that the winery
is compatible for the area, traffic in general has increased and that they
probably would never expand more than this.
∙   Tim Brady-5795 Shoeman Road—asked that there be no discussion of the
business aspect.
∙   Dennis Stiffler-5620 Shoeman Road—said his opposition has nothing to do
with the Burgdofr’s personally, just their business. It is in a residential
area and the publicity, special events and the growth makes them a commercial
operation.
∙   Kris Ridenour-5415 Shoeman Road-- spoke in opposition citing alcohol
consumption and agreeing with the previous speaker’s remarks.
∙   Tonya Canfield-5627 Shoeman Road—said she is happy with the business as it
is, but is opposed to expansion. She said more wine would be produced at the
location if allowed to expand.
∙   Brenda Brassington-6132 Shoeman Road-- spoke in favor saying that the
traffic problems exist now, that perhaps speed bumps would help and that she
was not happy with what she felt were untruths in a flyer distributed in the
area.
Supervisor Martin closed the public comment section at 8:04 pm.
Supervisor Martin read letters and phone messages received the day of the
meeting. Two were in favor and four were opposed.
Supervisor Martin asked Mark Miller, Building Official, if there was any
credence to the statement that past building permits were not issued. Mr.
Miller said that he spoke to the previous Building Official and was told that
in 2005 a permit was not required for the work done.
Supervisor Martin said she has further questions and would recommend that a
sub-committee of Boardmembers be set up to review the issue.
Motion by Martin to enable a sub-committee of Boardmembers Eyster, Williams and
Hayes to review the Burgdorf Winery site plan and special use permit and to
report back to the Board at the October meeting.
Seconded by Hayes.
Carried unanimously.
Dave Burgdorf said that he appreciated the work everyone has done on this
request and he hoped that everyone would be able to work together to get
through this process, and Mrs. Burgdorf said that the winery cannot sell wine
by the glass; consumption is for tasting purposes only.
Supervisor Martin asked the Board to forward any questions to her, and that the
public could forward any questions they might have to her by Tuesday, September
16, 2008.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Internet-Repeater Test
Marv Thomson of the Communication Committee reported the latest signup/problem
statistics to the Board and explained the possible need for a repeater to be
located in the township, which would relay the internet signal to some
locations currently experiencing problems with signal reception.
NEW BUSINESS
Flagpole-Cemetery
Greg Lammers of the Cemetery Board explained the progress of the Columbarium
saying that the walls have been constructed, grading will soon be complete and
the total cost should be in the area of the approved $46,000.00. He recommended
approval of the submitted flagpole bid from Flagpoles Etc.
Motion by Wright to approve the purchase of the powder-coated, 30-foot flagpole
from Flagpoles Etc. at a cost of $1,184.00 and approve the sale of the old
flagpole for $200.00.
Seconded by Hayes.
Carried unanimously.
Audit 2008-Layton Richardson
Vickie Crouch of Layton & Richardson explained the 2008 audit saying that the
township was in good shape. She highlighted the fact that for the year there
was $1,700 more in revenue than expenditures and that the township had a 150%
fund balance, which is very good. Supervisor Martin, on behalf of the Board,
thanked the Layton-Richardson for a job well done.
January Meeting Date Change
Supervisor Martin explained that due to schedule conflicts there has been a
request to change the January 2009 meeting from January 6, 2009 to January 13,
2009. Trustee Wilbrink said that there seemed to be a lot of problems with the
schedule of Tuesday meetings and that perhaps the Board should change the
meeting day.
Motion by Hayes to change the January 2009 meeting date from January 6, 2009 to
January 13, 2009.
Seconded by Williams.
Motion carried.
Planning Commission Appointments
Motion by Martin to appoint Rod Imhoff, Ger Schultink and Gerald Eidt to three
year terms on the township Planning Commission.
Seconded by Dahlstrom.
Carried unanimously.
After clarifications on check numbers 17443 and 17467 the following motion was
offered.
Motion by Dahlstrom to approve PAID accounts payable checks 17443-17457, in the
total amount of $24,531.42--noting that #17452 has been voided, to approve PAID
payroll checks 40253-40288, and EFTPS 9, in the total amount of $24,492.30 and
to approve accounts payable checks 17458-17485, submitted FOR APPROVAL, in the
amount of $65,670.39.
Seconded by Eyster.
Carried unanimously.
Clerk Dahlstrom shared information regarding upcoming election meetings and the
purchase of portable tabletop voting booths.
Treasurer Eyster distributed a prototype of a “Treasurer Report” form and
informed the Board that September 15, 2008 was the last day to pay taxes.
Supervisor Martin explained that employee Mac Donelly was recently certified in
pesticide disbursement and handling.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 9:10 p.m.
Mike Fielek
-commented on the diversity of the makeup of the Township Planning Commission.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 9:10 p.m.
Supervisor Martin reviewed the meeting and called an adjournment at 9:11 p.m.
____________________________
Howard M. Dahlstrom
Township Clerk
October 7, 2008
BOARD OF TRUSTEES MEETING
October 7, 2008
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 pm at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the agenda.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Trustee Wright, Trustee Hayes, Trustee Williams,
Clerk Dahlstrom, Treasurer Eyster and Supervisor Martin.
Absent: none.
Also Present: Michael Fielek, Planning Commission Chair & Building Inspector,
Mark Miller.
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR AGENDA & NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:04 p.m.
·   Sue Stiffler-5620 Shoeman Road---reiterated her position opposing the
expansion of the Burgdorf Winery.
·   Joe Williams-1615 Haslett Rd.---spoke in favor of the Winery expansion
stating they would provide jobs needed in the state.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:07 p.m.
CONSENT AGENDA
§   Minutes of 9/9/2008 Meeting
§   Treasurers Report
§   Building Inspector Report
§   Accounts Payable-Paid
§   Payroll-Paid
§   Accounts Payable-For Approval
§   Revenue /Expenditure Report
During discussion it was the consensus of the Board to remove the minutes of 9/
9/2008 and the Accounts Payable-For Approval reports from the consent agenda.
Motion by Dahlstrom to approve the consent agenda consisting of the Treasurers
Report, the Building Inspector Report for September 2008, the Revenue-
Expenditure Report and approval of PAID accounts payable checks 17486-17518, in
the total amount of $19,442.09, noting that #17489 & #17507 have been voided
and approval of PAID payroll checks 40289-40323, noting that #2, #40319 &
#040319 have been voided, in the total amount of $18,712.85.
Seconded by Eyster.
Carried unanimously.
PLANNING COMMISSION
Planning Commission Chairman Michael Fielek commented on recent commission
business as outlined in the submitted minutes of the September 16, 2008
meeting. The recommendation for amendments to the Zoning Ordinance regarding
wind energy was discussed.
Motion by Wright to approve the amendments to the Zoning Ordinance regarding
wind energy.
Seconded by Eyster.
Carried unanimously.
The recommendation for approval of the site plan for Joey’s Pet Outfitters Pond
was discussed.
Motion by Wilbrink to approve the site plan for the Joey’s Pet Outfitters Pond
with the following stipulations:
·   The proposed pond is relocated to upland per WCR recommendations, and so
noted on current maps.
·   All spoils will be placed in non-wetland areas and stabilized.
·   Pond area to be fenced.
Seconded by Eyster.
Carried unanimously.
Chairman Fielek said that there is a public hearing scheduled to take comment
about the proposed wetland buffer changes. Discussion ensued regarding the gun
club site plan and it was agreed to have Planning Assistant Bloomquist to
forward a letter to the department of Natural Resources requesting that they
enforce requirements already in place for the timely submission of operational
guidelines from the gun club.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Maintenance Code
Building Official Miller explained the information submitted regarding
enforcement of the maintenance code and the variables involved with handling
violations as a civil infraction or a misdemeanor. He further explained that
the township could take care of the enforcement or it could be place in the
hands of the County. It was the consensus of the Board to review the material
and take action regarding this matter at another time.
Sub-Committee - Winery
Trustee Hayes explained that the sub-committee has received needed
documentation and that they are currently compiling and reviewing this
information. He said there would be a meeting scheduled with citizens who wish
to be heard and that the meeting would be publicized when scheduled. Trustee
Hayes said that the sub-committee would not furnish a recommendation to the
Board; they will assemble all pertinent data and comments and forward all
information to the Board for their review and decision.
Newman Road Improvement
Supervisor Martin explained that the actual cost for this improvement is higher
than the original estimate and the new cost/bid is $28,049.00. Discussion
ensued.
Motion by Hayes to move forward with the Newman Road improvements at the
submitted cost of $28,049.00.
Seconded by Eyster.
Carried unanimously.
NEW BUSINESS
Sinking Fund
Supervisor Martin explained that information regarding this matter had not been
received.
Hall Rental Fees
Supervisor Martin explained that at this time we have three rental rates $50
for small portion of hall by kitchen, $100 for total tile area & $200 for the
entire room including the board area. She said it is increasingly difficult to
rent just the small area due to the access to the tables and chairs. They need
to be carried through several sets of doorways to the final destination. We are
only inviting damage to the furniture. She proposes that we eliminate the $50
rental (which is seldom rented) and make it just one fee of $100.
Motion by Wright to eliminate the $50 rental fee and institute one fee of $100
for hall rental.
Seconded by Dahlstrom.
Carried unanimously.
Minutes of September 9, 2008.
Motion by Dahlstrom to approve the minutes of the September 9, 2008 Board
Meeting with the discussed corrections.
Seconded by Hayes.
Carried unanimously
Accounts Payable for approval
Clerk Dahlstrom explained the two additional checks for postage and the Road
Commission.
Motion by Dahlstrom to approve accounts payable checks 17519-17539, submitted
FOR APPROVAL, in the amount of $88,333.30.
Seconded by Wilbrink
Carried unanimously.
Clerk Dahlstrom shared information regarding absentee ballots for the upcoming
election.
Trustee Wilbrink informed everyone of the upcoming pancake breakfast at NIESA.
Treasurer Eyster commented on the State Tax Memo that was included in the
packet for tonight’s meeting and stated that neither she nor Supervisor Martin
were in favor of this township level administration fee associated with tax
collection.
Supervisor Martin commented on an upcoming MTA meeting and a future article in
the MTA magazine regarding the township’s broadband internet project.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 8:15 p.m.
·   Greg Shannon--commented on the gun club and winery site plan issues.
·   Greg Crockett--commented on his candidacy for judge in the November
election.
·   Nancy Horton—reiterated her opposition to the expansion of the winery.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 8:22 p.m.
Supervisor Martin reviewed the meeting and called an adjournment at 8:24 p.m.
____________________________
Howard M. Dahlstrom
Township Clerk
November 12, 2008
BOARD OF TRUSTEES MEETING
November 12, 2008
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 pm at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the agenda.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Trustee Wright, Trustee Hayes, Trustee Williams,
Clerk Dahlstrom, Treasurer Eyster and Supervisor Martin.
Absent: none.
Also Present: Michael Fielek, Planning Commission Chair & Building Inspector,
Mark Miller.
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
CONSENT AGENDA
§   Minutes of 10/07/2008 Meeting
§   Treasurers Report
§   Building Inspector Report
§   Accounts Payable-Paid
§   Payroll-Paid
§   Accounts Payable-For Approval
§   Revenue /Expenditure Report
During discussion it was the consensus of the Board to remove the 10/07/08
minutes, the Treasurers Report and Accounts Payable-Paid from the consent
agenda.
Motion by Eyster to approve the consent agenda consisting of the Building
Inspector Report, PAID payroll checks 40324-40367 and EFTPS 10 & 11, in the
total amount of $34,082.35, accounts payable checks 17589-17618, submitted FOR
APPROVAL, in the amount of $29,342.27 and the Revenue-Expenditure Report for
the month ending October 31, 2008.
Seconded by Dahlstrom.
Carried unanimously.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR AGENDA & NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:05 p.m.
·   Sue Stiffler-reiterated her opposition to the winery special use permit and
site plan.
·   Wendy Ridenour-spoke in support of the expansion of the winery.
·   Helen LeBlanc-recommended more research regarding alcohol at outdoor
events.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:14 p.m.
PLANNING COMMISSION
Planning Commission Chairman Michael Fielek commented on recent commission
business as outlined in the submitted minutes of the October 21, 2008 meeting.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Winery SUP
Supervisor Martin explained the histories behind the special use permit and
site plan request. Treasurer Eyster and Trustee Hayes commented on the data
that was compiled by the sub-committee and forwarded to the Board. Discussion
ensued regarding various aspects of the use and plan including comments about
outdoor events, the total size of area used for the winery, alcohol production
and sales, parking and traffic concerns, and the use of other parcels for
parking. Trustee Wilbrink cited various problems with the plan, as he
alliterated his concerns in correlation to the summary sheet compiled by the
sub-committee. As much as possible all public concerns were address by the
Board.
Motion by Wilbrink to deny the special use permit for the Burgdorf Winery.
Seconded by Dahlstrom.
Roll call vote:
Supervisor Mickey Martin:   no
Treasurer Janet T. Eyster:   no
Clerk Howard Dahlstrom:   yes
Trustee Frans Wilbrink:   yes
Trustee Martin Wright:   no
Trustee Bob Hayes:      no
Trustee Rick Williams:   no
Motion fails.
Supervisor Martin asked Susan Stiffler what remaining concerns she had. At this
time she had none.
Motion by Hayes to approve the Special Use Permit for the Burgdorf Winery
subject to the following conditions:
·   Open hours of the winery not to exceed 12:00-5:00pm daily. This does not
include private functions or functions by appointment.
·   Limit of four (4) events a year, lasting not more than 6 hours each, with
written notification given to surrounding neighbors & Township not less than 1
month prior to event.
·   Adequate and approved parking provided per Memorandum of Understanding and
letter of agreement. If the Memorandum of Understanding and/or letter of
agreement becomes null and void, events will not be held until new agreements
are executed and approved by the Township.
·   There will be no planned semi truck deliveries for the winery.
·   Burgdorf Winery will provide copies of license renewals to the Township.
Seconded by Eyster.
Roll call vote:
Supervisor Mickey Martin:   yes
Treasurer Janet T. Eyster:   yes
Clerk Howard Dahlstrom:   no
Trustee Frans Wilbrink:   no
Trustee Martin Wright:   yes
Trustee Bob Hayes:      yes
Trustee Rick Williams:   yes
Motion carries.
Motion by Hayes to approve the Site Plan for the Burgdorf Winery subject to the
following conditions:
·   Building expansion shall not exceed 2,080 sq. ft. for wine production and
storage of equipment and finished wine. Sq. footage does not included addition
of front porch for aesthetic purposes. Height of building not to exceed 22 ft.
·   Access drive to the barns for light usage by applicant only. Not to be for
public use. Landscaping to be done along the drive to maintain the aesthetics
of the property.
·   Parking for customers will remain on the east side of the property on the
stamped concrete area and grassy area adjacent to the turn around.
·   Additional parking for events to remain on the north adjacent property, or
on existing neighboring commercial parking lots per agreements.
·   All building materials on the site will be stored inside buildings within
six months of completion of the addition.
·   Landscaping or a barrier will be added between the Burgdorf Winery and
property to the south in from of the Burgdorf residence.
Seconded by Wright.
Roll call vote:
Supervisor Mickey Martin:   yes
Treasurer Janet T. Eyster:   yes
Clerk Howard Dahlstrom:   no
Trustee Frans Wilbrink:   no
Trustee Martin Wright:   yes
Trustee Bob Hayes:      yes
Trustee Rick Williams:   yes
Motion carries.
Motion by Wilbrink to dissolve all township zoning ordinances.
Seconded by Dahlstrom.
Roll call vote:
Supervisor Mickey Martin:   no
Treasurer Janet T. Eyster:   no
Clerk Howard Dahlstrom:   yes
Trustee Frans Wilbrink:   yes
Trustee Martin Wright:   no
Trustee Bob Hayes:      no
Trustee Rick Williams:   no
Motion fails.
A recess was taken at 8:55 pm. The meeting reconvened at 9:00 pm.
NEW BUSINESS
AT&T Franchise
Marv Thomson explained that AT&T has applied for a franchise covering a very
small part of the township and that the township has returned the application/
agreement unsigned, per the recommendation of township legal council. It was
explained that while the township had no jurisdiction to prevent a franchise,
the best response to an application of this sort would be to return it unsigned
to prevent/enable future legal remedy/litigation, in the event of a change in
the law governing these franchises. Mr. Thomson also explained tower repeater
technology issues that will be revisited next spring in relation to FreedomNet
Solutions broadband internet.
Change in hours request
Supervisor martin explained the slow business day on the Wednesday before
Thanksgiving and recommended a shorter work day.
Motion by Martin that township hall office hours on Wednesday, November 26,
2008 will be 1:00 pm to 4:00pm.
Seconded by Hayes.
Motion carried.
Skating Pond
Clerk Dahlstrom explained the plan by Dan Demitroff to put in an ice rink at
the township park in January of 2009, at no expense to the township.
Motion by Eyster that township allow Dan Demitroff to place an ice rink at the
township park, providing that there is no liability or expense on the part of
Williamstown Township.
Seconded by Martin.
Motion carried.
Cemetery Fees
Motion by Martin to adopt the revised schedule of cemetery fees recommended by
the Cemetery Committee as submitted by the Treasurer and kept on file in the
office of the Clerk.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
Right of Way Ordinance proposal
Motion by Williams to accept the proposal from McKenna Associates to prepare a
right of way ordinance for the township, at a total cost of $1,900.00.
Seconded by Wright.
Carried unanimously.
Supervisor Martin commented on the documents distributed for the proposed 2009-
2010 budget. She asked for suggestions and/or comments by November 25, 2008.
Compensation Committee appointments
Motion by Martin to appoint Robert Lombardini to the Elected Officials
Compensation Committee, with a 5-year term beginning in December 2008.
Seconded by Wright.
Roll call vote:
Supervisor Mickey Martin:   yes
Treasurer Janet T. Eyster:   yes
Clerk Howard Dahlstrom:   no
Trustee Frans Wilbrink:   no
Trustee Martin Wright:   yes
Trustee Bob Hayes:      yes
Trustee Rick Williams:   yes
Motion carries.
Minutes of October 7, 2008
Supervisor Martin stated that the corrections should be listed in the motion to
approve the minutes, which appears inside the minutes.
Motion by Williams to approve the minutes of October 7, 2008 with corrections.
Seconded by Wilbrink.
Carried unanimously.
Motion by Martin to approve PAID accounts payable checks 17540-17588, in the
total amount of $14,209.31
Seconded by Eyster.
Carried unanimously.
Clerk Dahlstrom shared information regarding the Parks Committee and the
election held on November 4, 2008.
Trustee Williams commented on the research that would enable the township to
become a biofuel user.
Supervisor Martin commented on the Planning Enabling Act, Williamston Road
improvements for 2009 and the communication from Mitch Lutzke regarding a
cooperative effort to establish an effort to attract business to the
Williamston area.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 9:40 p.m.
Susan Stiffler
-commented on her disappointment with various aspects of the winery approvals
made at tonight’s meeting.
John Kennedy
-questioned procedure regarding the separation of the motions for the winery
site plan and the winery special use permit.
Helen LeBlanc
-concurred with the additional $50.00 paid to St. Katherine’s Church for the
rental on Election Day.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 9:52 p.m.
Supervisor Martin reviewed the meeting and called an adjournment at 9:54 p.m.
____________________________
Howard M. Dahlstrom
Township Clerk
November 20, 2008
BOARD OF TRUSTEES MEETING
November 20, 2008
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 1:05 p.m. at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the agenda.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Trustee Wright, Trustee Hayes, Trustee Williams,
Clerk Gaffner, Treasurer Eyster and Supervisor Martin.
Absent: none
PUBLIC COMMENT:
There was no public comment.
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP RESOLUTION #73 BANK SIGNATORIES
Resolution by Trustee Wright
Seconded by Trustee Wilbrink
Roll Call Vote:
Supervisor Mickey Martin:   yes
Clerk Ernie Gaffner:      yes
Treasurer Janet Eyster:      yes
Trustee Frans Wilbrink:      yes
Trustee Martin Wright:      yes
Trustee Bob Hayes:      yes
Trustee Rick Williams:      yes
Motion carried unanimously
BUDGET AMENDMENT FOR ELECTION DEPARTMENT
Supervisor Martin explained that the Township is over budget for election
workers and recommended that $1200 be transferred from line item 191-725
(supplies) to line item 191-703 (election workers) and $525 be transferred from
line item 191-725 (supplies) to line item 191-702 (election deputy).
Trustee Wright made the motion to approve the budget amendments
Seconded by Trustee Wilbrink
Motion carried unanimously
Supervisor Martin adjourned the meeting at 1:20 p.m.
__________________________________________
Ernie Gaffner
Township Clerk
December 2, 2008
BOARD OF TRUSTEES MEETING
December 2, 2008
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 p.m. at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the agenda.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Frans Wilbrink, Trustee Martin Wright, Trustee Bob Hayes,
Clerk Ernie Gaffner, Treasurer Janet Eyster, and Supervisor Mickey Martin.
Absent: Trustee Rick Williams
Also Present: Building Inspector, Mark Miller
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR AGENDA & NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:05 p.m.
·   Sue Stiffler, 5620 Shoeman Road, shared the November 20 draft of the
minutes voiced her opinion on the Burgdorf Winery.
·   Al LeBlanc, 4027 Jadestone, shared he would like extra copies of board
packets for the Citizen’s who attend the meeting. Also shared the township
webmaster is not keeping the website up-to-date.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:10 p.m.
CONSENT AGENDA
·   Township Board minutes of November 12, 2008 and November 20, 2008
·   Treasurer’s report of October, 2008 and November 2008
·   November building report
·   Correction: November accounts payable printed on 17589 through 17618, 17621
and 17622 with voids 17589 and 17616.
·   Accounts payable checks paid: 17619, 17620, 17623 through17643 and 17663
through 17671 for a total of $113,071.52 with voided checks 17623, 17624, 17637
and 17668
·   Payroll checks paid: 40369 through 40400 for $14,674.83 with voided checks
40373, 40376, 40388 through 40391
·   Accounts payable checks to pay: 17644 through 17662 for $9,434.74 with
voided check 17660
·   November Revenue and Expenditure Report
During discussion it was the consensus of the Board to pull for amendment the
November 12, 2008 and the November 20, 2008 minutes and to pull Accounts
Payable-Paid from the consent agenda.
·   MOTION by Trustee Hayes to approve the consent agenda consisting of the
Treasurer’s report of October, 2008 and November 2008; November building
report; Correction: November accounts payable printed on 17589 through 17618,
17621 and 17622 with voids 17589 and 17616; Payroll checks paid: 40369 through
40400 for $14,674.83 with voided checks 40373, 40376, 40388 through 40391;
Accounts payable checks to pay: 17644 through 17662 for $9,434.74 with voided
check 17660; and November Revenue and Expenditure Report and then pull the
Township Board minutes of November 12, 2008 (as amended) and November 20, 2008;
Accounts payable checks paid: 17619, 17620, 17623 through17643 and 17663
through 17671 for a total of $113,071.52 with voided checks 17623, 17624, 17637
and 17668
Seconded by Treasurer Eyster
Carried unanimously
PLANNING COMMISSION
Planning Commission representative, Rex LaMore commented on recent commission
business as outlined in the submitted minutes of the November 18, 2008 meeting.
MOTION by Supervisor Martin to instruct the Planning Commission to pursue an
amendment to the Master Plan that would include plans for Trails & Greenways.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes
Carried unanimously
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Capitol City Rifle Club—Supervisor Martin shared they withdrew their
application for a site plan review. They applied for a building permit for a
3,800 sq. ft. accessory building in the same location. The township intends to
deny this request until a site plan review is requested. Supervisor Martin
shared the language for this response to the Capitol City Rifle Club has been
drafted and will be mailed out Wednesday, December 3, 2008.
Building Inspector, Mark Miller shared the building going on at the Capitol
City Rifle Club does not weaken any structure nor alter the building, so they
do not need a building permit.
Budget 2010—Supervisor Martin shared a proposed budget with the board. The
needs of all entities have been requested and are being considered, all hourly
employees were proposed to receive a 4.4 percent increase in salary (based on
CPI). Unemployment is up 8.9 percent. Supervisor Martin asked the township
board for their approval to move forward with budget adoptions.
Supervisor Martin shared if the board has any other items that will need to be
researched prior to January 13, 2009 meeting, please let her know. This item
will be recommended for a public hearing in January and plans for approval in
March.
Board recommendations: Security cameras, laptops for all township board
members, wireless internet—there are still funds appropriated in the budget.
Also, there was no value in drains (pg. 18).
Supervisor Martin shared she will get a quote for laptops for all board
members. Supervisor Martin also shared she will pull the wireless internet
appropriation from the budget if it is needed. Treasurer Eyster will get
Supervisor Martin a figure for value in drains.
Communications Commission—Marv Thompson spoke about the repeater station and
new technology, but is willing to pull this line item if needed. Trustee
Wilbrink feels Freedom Net should help pay some of the costs incurred.
NEW BUSINESS
Cemetery Ordinance—Treasurer Eyster shared the need to have a policy for the
perpetual care fund for the cemetery. The township would need an ordinance in
place for this addition. The township also needs a way to build a perpetual
fund that would help generate funds for maintaining the cemetery. Currently the
township has a capital improvement fund that is used to repave roads, or could
be used to help support the construction of a Columbarium. Treasurer Eyster has
a proposed ordinance made to fit Williamstown townships current practice.
Treasurer Eyster shared Section 6 and 7 are the most controversial and 7 may
have some legal issues to resolve. Section 21 and 22 have been added. The
proposed ordinance has been passed by the cemetery committee and passed on to
the township board. Next steps, the lawyers will review and work out legal
issues then pass it on for action at a public hearing.
Trustee Hayes raised the question, are the outside containers steel (see Pg.
14, Pg. 4)? Treasurer Eyster will confer with lawyers and check back with
Trustee Hayes.
Trustee Wilbrink—shared under Section 13 of the cemetery ordinance, Old
headstones could be repaired or replaced. Many of the headstones are weathered
and unreadable. Supervisor Martin shared the costs to fix headstones is very
expensive, but alternative preservations are being considered.
REPORTS
Supervisor Martin welcomed Ernie Gaffner, newly elected clerk and board member,
also the new Deputy Clerk, Shirley Mitchell.
Christmas Tree Sale—Trustee Wilbrink shared the Christmas tree sale is in full
swing and encourages everyone to support this fundraiser.
MTA Legislative Alert, House Bill 4090 (substitute H3)—Supervisor Martin shared
a MTA Legislative Alert dated December 1, 2008. The House poised to report
early voting bill. This would require one polling location be open per
jurisdiction the three days (Friday, Saturday, Monday) preceding each scheduled
election date, a minimum of 8 hours. Supervisor Martin encourages Clerk Gaffner
to review carefully and make contact with members of the House Ethics and
Elections Committee names and phone numbers are noted.
Wightman & Associates, Inc.—Supervisor Martin shared a letter dated November
19, 2008 from Wightman & Associates, Inc. regarding the Future of Michigan’s
Transportation is at a Crossroad . Everyone benefits from a reliable
transportation system. Each government entity must take a stake in Michigan’s
Transportation System.
Minutes of November 12, 2008, issue of Public Comment—Mr. Wilbrink questioned
the process for accounts payable paid items. He is concerned accounts paid are
more difficult to dispute after the fact vs. before they are paid. Supervisor
Martin shared she has never experienced difficulty with a vendor in disputing a
charge.
MOTION by Treasurer Eyster to approve Accounts payable checks paid: 17619,
17620 and 17623, through 17671 for a total of $113,071.52 with voided checks
17623, 17624, 17637 and 17668.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes
Carried unanimously
Changes to November 12, 2008 minutes
·   Page 3, under the Motion by Hayes, last item noted, it should read:
Landscaping or a barrier will be added between the Burgdorf Winery and property
to the south in front of the Burgdorf residence. Not in from of the Burgdorf
residence.
·   Page 4, under Change in hours request, Supervisor Martin not martin.
·   Page 4, under Skating Pond, Clerk Dahlstrom explained…there would be no
additional premium expense for liability insurance.
Regional Aquifer Model Presentation—Supervisor Martin shared a memo from Mrs.
Bloomquist regarding a presentation being held January 20, 2008 at 6:45 p.m. in
the Williamstown Township Hall. Supervisor Martin encourages Township Board
members to attend.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR AGENDA ITEMS AND NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Rod Imhoff, 2380 Wilgus Road—asked if plot owners want to sell their plots and
then purchase a Columbarium would this be allowed? Supervisor Martin shared
yes, anyone can sell their plot, but they would need to transfer the deed. A
reminder, there is a separate fee for residents and non-residents.
Supervisor Martin would like the Cemetery Committee to discuss burial swap at
their next meeting.
Al LeBlanc, 4702 Jadestone, Would like to know when the next elected
compensation committee meets?
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 8:28 p.m.
Supervisor Martin reviewed the meeting and called an adjournment at 8:30 p.m.
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner
Township Clerk
December 10, 2008
BOARD OF TRUSTEES MEETING
December 10, 2008
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 1:04 p.m. at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the agenda.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Trustee Wright, Trustee Hayes, Trustee Williams,
Clerk Gaffner, and Supervisor Martin.
Absent: Treasurer Eyster
PUBLIC COMMENT:
Al LeBlanc of 4720 Jadestone Drive suggested that it would be nice if the
compensation committee were to post their meeting dates on the Township
website.
COMPENSATION COMMITTEE APPOINTMENT
Moved by Supervisor Martin to appoint Sally Stewart to the Compensation
Committee, supported by Trustee Wright.
Motion carried unanimously.
BUDGET AMENDMENT
Election Budget 191
Invoices received from the Ingham County Clerk and PSI related to Township
Elections held 8/05/2008 and 11/04/2008.
Moved by Trustee Wright to amend 191-725 (printing & supplies) $2,000 from 890-
965 (contingency), Supported by Trustee Williams
Motion carried unanimously
Supervisor Martin adjourned the meeting at 1:10 p.m.
__________________________________________
Ernie Gaffner
Township Clerk
2009 Meeting Minutes
January 13, 2009
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP
BOARD OF TRUSTEES MEETING
January 13, 2009
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 p.m. at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the agenda.
PRESENT BY ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Frans Wilbrink, Trustee Martin Wright, Trustee Bob Hayes,
Trustee Rick Williams, Clerk Ernie Gaffner, Treasurer Janet Eyster, and
Supervisor Mickey Martin.
Absent: None
Also Present: Building Inspector, Mark Miller
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR AGENDA & NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:05 p.m.
·   Helen LeBlanc, 2009-10 budget comments.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:09 p.m.
CONSENT AGENDA
A.   Minutes of 12-02-08 and 12-10-08 meetings
B.   Treasurer’s Report for November/December
C.   Building Inspector December Permits Issued
D.   Building Inspector December Permits Finished
E.   Payroll checks paid: 40401 through 40435 with voided check 40417 for a
total of $15,548.23
F.   Accounts payable checks paid: 17663 through 17729 with voided checks
17668, 17677, 17697, 17713 and 17714 for a total of $52,927.68
G.   Accounts payable checks for Board approval: 17730 through 17752 with
voided Check 17739 for a total of $8,230.91
H.   Revenue and Expenditure Report ending 12/31/08
During discussion it was the consensus of the Board to pull for amendment the
December 2, 2008 minutes and to pull Revenue/Expenditure from the consent
agenda.
MOTION by Trustee Eyster to approve the consent agenda consisting of Items
(A)Minutes of 12-10-08 meeting; (B)Treasurer’s report for November/December,
2008; (C)Building Inspector December Permits issued; (D)Building Inspector
December Permits Finished; (E)Payroll checks paid: 40401 through 40435 with
voided check 40417 for a total of $15,548.23, (F)Accounts payable checks paid:
17633 through 17729 with voided checks 17668, 17677, 17697, 17713 and 17714 for
a total of $52,927.68, (G)Accounts payable checks for Board approval: 17730-
17752 with voided check 17739 for a total of $8,230.91
Seconded by Trustee Hayes
Carried unanimously
Moved by Trustee Wright & Second by treasurer Eyster to Amend Item A. – Minutes
of December 2, 2008, page 3, third paragraph old headstones could be repaired
or replaced (not removed).
Carried unanimously
PLANNING COMMISSION
Planning Commission representative, Mike Fielek, commented on recent commission
business as outlined in the submitted minutes of the December 16, 2008 meeting.
Supervisor Martin encourages board members to think about people they know in
the township who have Home Occupation/Home Based Business so when they read the
information from the Planning Commission they will be able to put the
information into context.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Budget 2009-2010—Supervisor Martin shared revenues taken from taxable values
are down from last year. Supervisor Martin reviewed the 2009-10 budget with
board members line-by-line. Comments and suggestions will be considered.
MOTION by Trustee Williams, moved that Williamstown Township hold a public
hearing to review the Williamstown Township budget for 2009-2010 on February 3,
2009, at 6:15 p.m.
Seconded by Clerk Eyster
Carried unanimously
NEW BUSINESS
Board Committee Appointments—Supervisor Martin reviewed the Williamstown
Township Committee List for 2009. The following board members were named to
fulfill committee assignments
·   Capital City Rifle Club, Franz Wilbrink (Mr. Wilbrink will contact the
Capital City Rifle Club to inquire about how to become an active member).
·   Library Foundation, Janet Eyster
·   Parks, Wanda Bloomquist
·   Tri-County Regional Planning, Bob Hayes
·   Williamston School Board, Ernie Gaffner
·   Williamston Chamber, Rick Williams
·   Zoning Board of Appeals, Mickey Martin
·   Historic Committee, Franz Wilbrink
·   Ingham County County Commissioners, Ernie Gaffner
·   Communications Commission, Rick Williams
·   Cemetery, Mickey Martin
·   Ingham County Assessor’s Association, Mickey Martin
·   Ingham County Road Commission, Mickey Martin
·   Planning Commission, Martin Wright
·   Transportation, Mickey Martin
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP
RESOLUTION #74
POVERTY GUIDELINES RESOLUTION
Resolution by Supervisor Mickey Martin
Be it resolved that:
WHEREAS, the adoption of guidelines for poverty exemptions is within the
purview of the Township Board; and
WHEREAS, the homestead of persons who, in the judgment of the Supervisor and
Board of Review, by reason of poverty, are unable to contribute to the public
charges is eligible for exemption in whole or part from taxation under Public
Act 390, 1994 (MCL 211.7u); and
WHEREAS, pursuant to PA 390, 1994 Williamstown Township, Ingham County adopts
the following guidelines for the supervisor and Board of Review to implement.
The guidelines shall include but not be limited to the specific income and
asset levels of the claimant and all persons residing in the household,
including any property tax credit returns, filed in the current or immediately
preceding year;
To be eligible, a person shall do all the following on an annual basis:
1.   Be an owner of and occupy as a homestead the property for which an
exemption is requested.
2.   File a claim with the Supervisor or Board of Review, accompanied by
federal and state income tax returns for all persons residing in the homestead,
including any property tax credit returns filed in the immediately preceding
year or in the current year.
3.   Produce a valid drivers’ license or other form of identification if
requested.
4.   Produce a deed, land contract, or other evidence of ownership of the
property for which an exemption is requested, if requested.
5.   Meet the federal poverty income standards as defined and determined
annually by the United States Office of Management and Budget.
6.   The application for an exemption shall be filed after January 1, but
before the day prior to the last day of Board of Review.
7.   Any additional eligibility requirements as determined by the Township
Board;
The Board of Review shall follow the above stated policy and federal guidelines
in granting or denying an exemption, unless the Board of Review determines
there are substantial and compelling reasons why there should be a deviation
from the policy and federal guidelines and these are communicated in writing to
the claimant.
Be it further resolved to adopt the Federal Poverty Guidelines for 2009 with an
increase of 50% in all sections as shown below, and to limit assets to one
principle residence and one licensed vehicle for each resident, with a maximum
of two.
Size of Family Unit             Poverty Guidelines
1                               $15,600
2                               $21,000
3                               $26,400
4                               $31,800
5                               $37,200
6                               $42,600
7                               $48,000
8                               $53,400
For each additional person, add $5,400
 
Seconded by: Treasurer Janet Eyster
Roll call vote:
Supervisor Mickey Martin:   Yes, Treasurer Janet T. Eyster:  Yes, Clerk Ernie
Gaffner: Yes,
Trustee Frans Wilbrink: Yes, Trustee Martin Wright: Yes, Trustee Bob Hayes:
Yes, Trustee Rick Williams: Yes,
Certification
I, the undersigned, duly qualified and Clerk of the Township of Williamstown,
Ingham County, Michigan, do hereby certify that the foregoing is a true and
complete copy of a Resolution adopted at a Board meeting held on January,
January 13, 2009.
Ernie Gaffner, Clerk, Township of Williamstown
Hazard Mitigation Plan
Williamstown Township Board
RESOLUTION TO ADOPT THE INGHAM COUNTY HAZARD MITIGATION PLAN
RESOLUTION #75
Resolution by: Trustee Wright
Be it resolved that:
WHEREAS, Ingham County recognizes the threat that natural, social, and
technological hazards pose to the people and community of Ingham County; and
WHEREAS, undertaking hazard mitigation actions will reduce the potential harm
to the people and property of Ingham County from future hazard occurrences; and
WHEREAS, an adopted hazard mitigation plan is required as a condition of future
funding for multiple Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) pre- and post-
disaster mitigation grant programs; and
WHEREAS, Ingham County fully participated in the mitigation planning process to
prepare this hazard mitigation plan; and
WHEREAS, the Michigan State Police Emergency Management Division and the
Federal Emergency Management Agency, Region V officials have reviewed the
Hazard Mitigation Plan and approved it contingent upon this official adoption
of the Ingham County Hazard Mitigation Plan.
THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED, that the Ingham County Board of Commissioners
approves the adoption of the Ingham County Hazard Mitigation Plan as an
official plan.
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, that the Ingham County Emergency Operations Director
will
Submit this adopted plan to the Michigan State Police Emergency Management
Division and the
Federal Emergency Management Agency, Region V officials to enable the Ingham
County Hazard Mitigation Plan’s final approval.
Seconded by: Trustee Wilbrink
Roll Call Vote:
Supervisor Martin Yes
Treasurer Eyster Yes  
Clerk Gaffner Yes
Trustee Wright Yes  
Trustee Hayes Yes
Trustee Williams Yes
Trustee Wilbrink Yes
Certification
I, the undersigned, duly qualified and Clerk of the Township of Williamstown,
Ingham County, Michigan, do hereby certify that the foregoing is a true and
complete copy of a Resolution adopted at a Board meeting held on Tuesday,
January 13, 2009.
Ernie Gaffner, Clerk, Township of Williamstown
Election recount release—Supervisor Martin shared the recount was unable to be
completed; therefore the township will repay the amount put forward and prepare
a release of Williamstown Township from all demands and claims.
MOTION by Trustee Martin moved that Williamstown Township pay $40.00 to Rodney
Imhoff upon his signing the Release of Williamstown Township from all demands
and claims on account of and all alleged errors in the electoral process for
Williamstown Township Trustee held on November 4, 2008, including but not
limited to, the subsequent vote recount.
SECONDED by Trustee Hayes
Carried unanimously
REPORTS
Cemetery Committee, Clerk Eyster, the committee continues to work on language
for their cemetery ordinance. Comments and suggestions need to be shared as
soon as possible. The committee will be substituting and removing language for
the portion deeds prior to passing the ordinance.
Trustee Williams shared Energy Star lighting and solar heating is the direction
he is moving in with the resource issue.
Supervisor Martin shared correspondence from Tri-County Planning Commission
congratulating Rex LaMore on the project he submitted. His project has been
selected as one of the three winning finalists for the University Economic
Development Association’s annual Award of Excellence competition.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR AGENDA ITEMS AND NON-AGENDA ITEMS--None
Supervisor Martin closes public comment at 8:15 p.m.
MOTION by Trustee Hayes supported by Trustee Williams moved to adjourn 8:15
p.m.
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner
Township Clerk
January 20, 2009
JOINT MEETING
BOARD OF TRUSTEES & PLANNING COMMISSION
January 20, 2009
CALL TO ORDER
The joint meeting of the Williamstown Board of Trustees and the Williamstown
Township Planning Commission convened at 6:45 p.m. at the Williamstown Township
Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor Mickey
Martin called the meeting to order and introduced Christine Spitzley from the
Tri-County Regional Planning Commission and Carol Luukkonen from the USGS
Michigan Science Center.
IN ATTENDANCE
Trustees Wilbrink, Wright and Trustee Williams, Clerk Gaffner, Supervisor
Martin, Treasurer Eyster, Building Inspector Miller and Planning Commission
Members Bloomquist, Feilek, Imhoff and Hoag.
PRESENTATION
The first segment of a Power Point presentation was given by Christine
Spitzley, concerning the research and history of the Tri-County aquifer study.
The goal is to make information available to better understand the water needs
of the various populated areas within the Tri-County district, the availability
of water to satisfy these needs and the routing of the water.
The second portion of the Power Point presentation was given by Carol
Luukkonen, concerning the availability of data for ground water flow, pumping
rates per location of municipal wells and water levels. The compiled data can
be used in various computer models to depict the present water levels and
various scenarios on “what if” situations.
PUBLIC COMMENT
A few questions and comments were offered at the end of the presentation,
concerning the involvement of various governmental agencies, pending
legislation concerning the maintenance of quality water for continued use by
the residents of the State of Michigan.
Supervisor Martin adjourned the meeting at 7:28 p.m.
__________________________________________
Ernie Gaffner
Township Clerk
February 3, 2009
BOARD OF TRUSTEES MEETING
February 3, 2009
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 p.m. at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the agenda.
PRESENT BY ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Frans Wilbrink, Trustee Martin Wright, Trustee Bob Hayes,
Trustee Rick Williams, Clerk Ernie Gaffner, Treasurer Janet Eyster, and
Supervisor Mickey Martin.
Absent: None
MOTION by Supervisor Martin moved that Sergeant Steve Sopocy of the Ingham
County Sheriff’s Department be added to the agenda after Public Comment.
Supervisor Martin also recommended items under New Business: Right of Way
Ordinance for discussion and Board of Review Appointments be moved under the
Consent Agenda.
SECONDED by Trustee Wright
Motion Carried
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR AGENDA & NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:05 p.m.
Al LeBlanc, 4720 Jadestone Drive, expressed concern about items being moved
from New Business to the Consent Agenda and questioned when the compensation
commission would meet..
Helen LeBlanc, 4720 Jadestone Drive, would like to receive emails from
Williamstown Township.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:10 p.m.
Sgt. Steve Sopocy— shared a report of calls to the Ingham County Sheriff’s
department for service that occurred in January, 2009. The report consisted of
911 calls, Criminal Complaints (written) ranging from burglarys to car
accidents, blotter calls (i.e., deer/car accident no damage to car), traffic
accidents and hours of patrol in the Township. Sgt. Sopocy also asked residents
to be on the look out for a suspicious black male and white female in a GMC
Astro type van, license plate No. 9JQY02 posing as salesmen selling shampoo and
soaps then stealing property from open garages and vehicles. Residents are
asked to drive cautiously this winter. Finally, Sgt. Sopocy has been assigned
to study intersections in Ingham County. This assignment will be funded by a
grant.
Discussion: The board would like Sgt. Sopocy to report at each Township Board
meeting, but request he email his report prior to each board meeting so that
they may place it in the board’s packet.
Bob Hayes arrived at 7:20 p.m.
CONSENT AGENDA
   Minutes of 1/13/09
   Minutes of 1/20/09
Treasurer’s Report
Building Inspector
Accounts Payable Checks – Paid
Payroll Checks – Paid
Accounts Payable Checks – Approval
Revenue Expenditure
Added item - appointments to the Board of Review: Ed Timm, Gerald Eidt and Kurt
Guter
During discussion a request was made to pull for amendment: Accounts Payable
Checks to be Approved and Revenue Expenditure from the consent agenda.
MOVED by Trustee Hayes to approve the consent agenda consisting of: Minutes of
1/13/09 meeting; Minutes of 1/20/09; Treasurer’s report for December 2008/
January 2009; Building Inspector January Permits Issued and finaled; Accounts
Payable Checks – Paid, checks #17753-17762; Payroll Checks – Paid, checks
#40436-40465 with voided check 40437 for $16,781.64; Added item - appointments
to the Board of Review: Ed Timm, Gerald Eidt and Kurt Guter
SECONDED by Trustee Williams
Motion Carried
MOVED by Treasurer Eyster after discussion and clarification of items to
approve Consent Agenda items: Accounts Payable Checks to Approve, checks
#17763-17791 for $11,376.23 and Revenue Expenditure Report ending 01/31/09.
SECONDED by Trustee Wright
Motion Carried
Right of Way Ordinance—Supervisor Martin shared the draft ordinance which had
been reviewed and modified, The ordinance has been reviewed by the
Communications Committee and recommended it move forward.. The ordinance will
now go to the township legal counsel for review.
PLANNING COMMISSION
Planning Commission representative, Mike Fielek, commented on recent commission
business as outlined in the submitted minutes of January 20, 2009 meeting,
Wetlands Ordinance Amendments and Zoning Ordinance Amendments—wetland buffer.
Amendments: Supervisor Martin shared changes to the Wetlands Ordinance on page
2-2 under Continuing Violation the word substantive should be placed after…but
no substantive ; then on page 4-4, Section 4.4, Protective of Wetlands During
Land Division and Development this item should be acceptable by the Township
Planner and Assessor prior to recording. and the ptoperty owner shal provide a
copy of the recorded affidavit or deed restriction to the township Then page 6-
2, Section 6-2, Mitigation should read 1. No Permitted Net Loss of ..,. first
sentence, remove the word net permitted net …second sentence, should read,
“Wherever wetland (not wetlands) area loss… acreage shall be at least 1:1
(change to 2:1).
MOTION by Trustee Hayes to move the approval of the Wetland Protection
Ordinance
(with December 2006 amendments and proposed amendments recommended to the
Township Board by the Planning Commission on October 21, 2008.)
SECONDED by Trustee Wright
Motion Carried
Amendments: Supervisor Martin shared Revisions to the Williamstown Township
Zoning Ordinance to Regulate Wetland Buffer Areas. Page 4, Item 17 should read
…maintain an established lawn or trail (added: or trail)  that was created…
MOTION by Trustee Hayes to move the approval of the revisions to the
Williamstown Township Zoning Ordinance to Regulate Buffer Areas as amended.
SECONDED by Treasurer Eyster
Motion Carried
Commissioner Fielek shared the Zoning Ordinance Public Hearing on definitions
is set for the next meeting in two weeks. The Home Business/Home Occupation is
still under discussion and finally the meeting last Tuesday with Williamston
City Planning Commission went well, there are some common interest and a wish
list is under discussion. The next time the two convene jointly they will
discuss CATA and how to better utilize this service.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Budget 2009-2010 Budget Approval—Supervisor Martin shared the Public Hearing
was held February 3, 2009, at 6:15 p.m. to review 2009-2010 budget.
Discussion: Mr. Gaffner shared after attending an interesting conference this
past week he has a better understanding of his statutory duties as clerk. This
position holds more responsibility than many others and additional funds will
most likely be requested for the position of deputy clerk. Many areas need to
be brought current to meet the requirements of the State and this will take
time and money. Board members feel Williamstown Township needs to keep costs
down, live within the income budget in order to stay fiscally responsible.
MOTION by Treasurer Eyster to adopt the 2009-2010 Budget presented at public
session on February 3, 2009, as presented.
SECONDED by Trustee Williams
Motion Carried
MOTION by Trustee Wilbrink for a Roll Call vote on the 2009-2010 Budget.
SECONDED BY Eyster
Motion Failed
NEW BUSINESS
Road Patrol – Grant—County Commissioner, Randy Schafer, stated Ingham County
used to have 35 road patrol on duty and now they have 23 with a 5 million
dollar deficit. Commissioner Schafer shared there are grants available up to
$100,000 to contract for police services. Commissioner Schafer recommends that
Williamstown Township submit a Resolution to Contract for Police Services for
this one-time grant and Mr. Schafer will take the Resolution to the Board of
Commissioners for review and ask that they live up to their grant offer which
will be available on January 1, 2010.
MOTION by Trustee Wilbrink to move Resolution #76 requesting a grant of
$200,000 for Ingham County to permit the Williamstown Township to contract for
police service for the Township.
ROLL CALL
Ayes: 7           Nays: 0   Motion Carried
Supervisor Martin Trustee Wright Trustee Williams
Trustee Hayes Clerk Gaffner
Trustee Wilbrink Treasurer Eyster
Property acquisition from County—Supervisor Martin shared Williamstown Township
has acquired property through forfeiture of non-payment of taxes due. Parcel
#33 03 03 26 201 026 consisting of 0.07 acres on Beeman Road, zoned R1. It was
recommended Williamstown Township sell the property.
MOTION by Williams to move that parcel number 33 03 03 26 201 026 consisting of
0.07 acres on Beeman Road, zoned R1 be sold by Williamstown Township,
contacting the adjacent property owners and contiguous neighbors before
advertising.
SECONDED by Clerk Gaffner
Motion Carried
Budget Amendment—Supervisor Martin shared in order to maintain sufficient funds
in Clerk Department #215-703 a budget adjustment of $1,000 is recommended.
MOTION by Trustee Wright to move the budget be amended to add $1,000 to GL 101-
215-703 (deputy clerk wage) and reduce GL 101-215-864 (Clerk’s department
conferences and training).
SECONDED by Trustee Hayes
Motion Carried
Reports--Departments & Committees
Supervisor Martin shared Trustee Williams, Trustee Hayes, Clerk Gaffner, and
Treasurer Eyster joined her at the MTA conference. Supervisor Martin asked
those who attended to submit a written report of their experience by the end of
the month. This information will be shared at the Williamstown Township Board
Meeting in March.
Communications Commission Meeting, January 21, 2009, Marv Thomson, shared an AT
& T Contract Update. Mr. Thomson shared Broadstripe a cable and Internet
provider is in chapter 11 Bankruptcy and plans to restructure their debt. They
expect to continue business as usual. AT & T will begin service in a small
portion of the township (Adjacent to Meridian Township) in the Pebblebrook
Subdivision area. Currently, the township has 167 Internet subscribers. Looking
to have equipment lease paid off by April, 2011 and the Tower fee is $167 per
month, at the present time. Subscriber issues have been Freedom Net is not
returning calls, one subscriber on Barry Road has had trouble with service and
it has not been fixed, speed of Internet service has been slow. Other than
that, service has been satisfactory.
Trustee Wright shared he attended a Road Commission Meeting. The topic of
discussion was concerning administration fees on road projects. Historically it
has been at 11 percent, then 7 percent then in 2008 0 percent. Further
discussion is required. For future reference, Resident, Tom Mitchell, sits on
the Road Commission. Supervisor Martin shared the Road Commission would like
Williamstown Township to work with them on Road Repair. It was recommended the
Road Commission Director attend the next Williamstown Township Board meeting in
March.
Trustee Williams shared Williamstown Township minutes by Clerk Gaffner and
recording Secretary Debbie Schultz have been superb.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR AGENDA ITEMS AND NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Nancy Williams, 131 Bismark, offered comments for property acquisition Parcel
#33 03 03 26 201 026.
Al Leblanc, 4720 Jadestone Drive. Offered comment on the use of a roll call
vote.
Rod Imhoff, 2380 Wilgus Road, shared comments regarding Road Commissions plan
to fix Williamston Road. Mr. Imhoff would like copies of board packets made
available to the public at the regular meetings.
Helen LeBlanc, 4720 Jadestone, commented on deputy raises, snow plowing and
mowing services.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment 9:06 pm.
MOTION by Trustee Williams supported by Trustee Hayes moved to adjourn 9:07
p.m.
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner
Township Clerk
March 3, 2009
BOARD OF TRUSTEES MEETING
March 3, 2009
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 p.m. at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the agenda.
PRESENT BY ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Frans Wilbrink, Trustee Martin Wright, Trustee Bob Hayes,
Trustee Rick Williams, Treasurer Janet Eyster, and Supervisor Mickey Martin.
Absent: Clerk Ernie Gaffner
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR AGENDA & NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:01 p.m.
Helen LeBlanc, 4727 Jadestone, shared information from an MTA Website that was
prepared by Evelyn David on “What needs a resolution”.
Closed public comment at 7:04
Sergeant Steve Sopocy—Ingham County Sheriffs Department—shared a report of
monthly criminal complaints, blotter calls, traffic accidents, citations, and
patrol time spent in the township. Sergeant Sopocy talked about the Ingham
County E-Complaint system found at the Ingham County website. Sergeant Sopocy
reminded everyone to be consciensous of hazardous potholes and with washouts
and report those that would cause a driving hazard to the Ingham County Road
Commission.
CONSENT AGENDA
Minutes of 2/3/09 for the Budget Hearing and the Williamstown Township Board
Meeting minutes
February Building Inspector permits issued and finalized.
Accounts Payable Paid for checks 17792 through 17817 for a total of $124,574.52
Payroll Checks 40466 through 40498 with voided check 40476 for a total of
$17,833.27
Accounts Payable for Approval for checks 17818 through 17840 for a total of
$25,633.51
February Revenue and Expenditure Report
Budget amendment to amend 101-191-725 (printing and supplies) $500 from 101-
890-965
(contingency)
During discussion it was the consensus of the Board to pull from the consent
calendar, subject to amendment, the Accounts Payable Paid and the February
Revenue and Expenditure Report..
MOVED by Trustee Hayes to approve the consent agenda consisting of:
Minutes of 2-03-09 for the Budget Hearing and the Williamstown Township Board
meeting minutes
Treasurer’s Report
February Building Inspector permits issued and finalized.
Payroll Checks 40466 through 40498 with voided check 40476 for a total of
$17,833.27.
Accounts Payable for Approval for checks 17818 through 17840 for a total of
$25,633.51.
Budget amendment to amend 101-191-725 (printing and supplies) $500 from 101-
890-965 (contingency).
SECONDED by Treasurer Eyster
Motion Passed
MOTION by Treasurer Eyster to approve the Accounts Payable Paid for checks
17792
through 17817 for a total of $124,574.52 and the February Revenue and
Expenditure Report
SECONDED by Trustee Williams
Motion Passed
PLANNING COMMISSION
Planning Commission representative, Mike Fielek, commented on recent commission
business as outlined in the submitted minutes of February 17, 2009. Discussion
continued around Home Occupation and Home Business and Article II of the
ordinance is being reviewed.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Williamston Road Improvements—Mr. William Conklin, Managing Director of Ingham
County Road Commission (I.C.R.C) shared the I.C.R.C. is looking for financial
help from local townships to assist with road improvement funding. The I.C.R.C.
would like a contribution of approximately $140,000. The I.C.R.C. is funding
Urban, Rural and Small Urban. The road improvements allocated for Williamston
are (Rural) Sherwood to Haslett the stimulus money will help fund this road
improvement, (Small Urban) from Bismark to Sherwood, there is no stimulus
funding for small urban projects. If the I.C.R.C. does not receive adequate
funding for these projects they will consider borrowing from another project
targeted for another year in order to keep current projects flowing.
Mr. Conklin will be attending the City of Williamston meeting on March 9, 2009,
to discuss their portion of the (Rural) segment, 600 feet. This costs has been
carved out at $51,825.
Supervisor Martin introduced Ingham County Road Commissioner, Tom Mitchell.
Williamstown Township has $30,000 targeted for township road repair and will
attach the $30,000 match from the I.C.R.C. for a total budget of $60,000 for
road improvements. The Township will consider the use of these budget dollars
to assist the I.C.R.C. with their request, but will need time to review their
wish list for other road improvements before making a final decision on the
allocation.
Mr. Conklin shared the I.C.R.C. will accept the match offer anytime the board
is willing to extend an offer.
The board recessed at 8:20 p.m.
The board returned to regular session at 8:24 pm.
Road Patrol—Supervisor Martin shared correspondence from Randy Schafer along
with information on Restructuring the Funding for Primary Law Enforcement
Services. In order to balance the 2010 budget services will be reduced. In
order to assist the 13 Townships in the transition, Ingham County may make a
$140,000 grant available to each township for 2010 and a $70,000 grant
available for 2011. For 2012 and the future, grant funding would not be
available. Mr. Hayes shared people are looking to see public safety as a basic
service we pay taxes for. Health, safety and welfare support with emphasis on
safety. Supervisor Martin shared we all pay 9.4 percent no matter what township
or county we live in and some are serviced and some are not. Why?
The township needs to determine what recourse they have to demand public safety
services.
Supervisor Martin will be attending a supervisor’s meeting on March 17, 2009
and she will request Larry Silsby to check with legal counsel on a plan of
action and request that Road Patrol be an agenda topic for the MTA Chapter
meeting on April 22, 2009.
Lutzke project/City of Williamston—Supervisor Martin shared the City of
Williamston is looking at data and information to determine the feasibility of
a cultural center for the Williamston area. Michelle Anoil, Development
Consultant for the City of Williamston and Wanda Bloomquist, Township Planning
Assistant are working on this project. The City of Williamston would like to
see Williamstown Township share in the cost of this feasibility study. This
would require the township to pay (½ costs up to 25 hours). The board is in
agreement of this shared endeavor but would like time to review the report and
find positive results prior to authorizing costs.
MOTION by Trustee Wright that Williamstown Township share in the research and
development costs up to ½ of the hours for Michelle Anoil with a maximum of 25
charged to Williamstown Township, after an initial report is written regarding
the feasibility of a cultural center for the Williamston area and after the
Williamstown Township Board has reviewed this report and concurs as to the next
action to be taken.
SECONDED by Trustee Williams
Motion Passed
NEW BUSINESS
Meeting Dates 2009-10—Supervisor Martin shared a board meeting schedule for
Williamstown Township for the 2009-10 year. The meetings are scheduled for the
first Tuesday of the month, except for May, November, January and February,
when the meetings will be held on the 2nd Tuesday beginning at 7:00 p.m.
MOTION by Trustee Wright that the Williamstown Township Board meetings for the
2009-10 fiscal year be held starting at 7:00 pm on the first Tuesday of each
month, except the meetings in May 2009, November 2009, January, 2010 and
February, 2010 when the meetings will be on the 2nd Tuesday. The second meeting
of each month will be tentatively scheduled on the 3rd Tuesday of the month
starting at 5:30 pm.
SECONDED by Trustee Hayes
Motion Passed
Cemetery Ordinance-review—Supervisor Martin shared the Township Cemetery
Ordinance that protects the public health, safety and general welfare and the
mutual protection of lot holders and the Township; to provide penalties for the
violation of said ordinance, and to repeal all ordinances or parts of
ordinances in conflict therewith.
DISCUSSION: Treasurer Eyster shared a revision in Section 17: Ground
Maintenance/Grave Decoration. The 6th and 7th paragraph should be removed
completely from this ordinance.
MOTION by Trustee Wright that the Williamstown Township Board hold a public
hearing regarding a MNRTF Grant application for parks on March 17, 2009 at 5:30
pm.
SECONDED by Trustee Williams
Motion Passed
MOTION by Trustee Wright that the Williamstown Township Board hold a public
hearing regarding the Cemetery Ordinance on March 17, 2009 at 5:30 pm.
SECONDED by Trustee Williams
Motion Passed
Budget-Compensation/Commission—Supervisor Martin shared the commission met
February 12, February 19, and March 2, 2009. The commission recommended salary
compensation based upon studies of townships deemed comparable and the
respective compensation benefits paid to elected officials. The Commission
recommendations reflect salary compensation for the Supervisor, Clerk,
Treasurer, and Trustees, for Fiscal years 2009/2010 and 2010/2011.
It was recommended by Supervisor Martin this item be tabled for discussion
until the March 24, 2009, meeting. The Board will discuss an increase for 2009/
2010 and no increase for 2010/2011.
Discussion on holding a special meeting on March 24, 2009 beginning at 5:30
p.m. for deliberation and action of public hearings of March 17,2009 in
consideration of compensation committee and budget amendments.
MOTION by Treasurer Eyster that the Williamstown Township Board hold a special
meeting at 5:30 on March 24, 2009 for deliberation and action on the public
hearings of March 17, 2009, consideration of the Compensation Committee
recommendation and budget amendments.
SECONDED by Trustee Hayes
Motion Passed
Reports—
Departments & Committees
MTA, 2009 Educational Conference—Trustee Williams shared topics of discussion
at the conference he attended included: Legislative updates, Planning and
Zoning for Alternative Energy, and Local Authority Proposed Policy Platform.
Trustee Williams found the information on alternative energy to be of interest
as it is becoming more and more important. Trustee Williams is currently
working on a renewal energy course through MSU and is becoming empowered on
getting projects completed. Trustee Williams believes going solar would be less
expensive than the windmill.
MTA Conference --Parliamentary procedure-- Supervisor Martin shared she
attended a very informative training on parliamentary procedure. Parliamentary
law is very extensive, confusing for most and complicated. Supervisor Martin
reviewed the following information for voting purposes: The motion is to be
stated four times, Handling a motion, Amendments, Calling the question, Roll
call votes. Supervisor Martin plans to implement these procedures the best she
can to improve Williamstown Township meetings.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR AGENDA ITEMS AND NON-AGENDA ITEMS--None
Supervisor Martin closed public comment 9:17 pm.
MOTION by Trustee Hayes supported by Trustee Williams moved to adjourn 9:20
p.m.
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner
Township Clerk
March 12, 2009
BOARD OF TRUSTEES SPECIAL MEETING
March 12, 2009
CALL TO ORDER
The special meeting of the Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 8:15 a.m.
at the Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston,
Michigan. Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order and since no one
from the public was in attendance, public comment time was not opened.
IN ATTENDANCE
Supervisor Martin, Treasurer Eyster, Clerk Gaffner and Trustee Hayes
ABSENT
Trustees Wilbrink, Wright and Williams,
PRESENTATION
Supervisor Martin explained the need to amend the 2008-2009 budget, by
transferring funds from the contingency (101-890-965.000) into the consultants
(101-400-812.000) category. Due to the lack of sufficient funds for planning
consultation, the board was advised that a transfer of $16,000 would be
sufficient to pay all expenses in the Planning Department.
Motion by Trustee Hayes, to amend the 2008-2009 budget by transferring $16,000
from 101-890-965.000 (contingency) to 101-400-812.000 (consultants).
Second by Treasurer Eyster
Motion Passed
Motion to adjourn by Clerk Gaffner – Second by Trustee Hayes
Supervisor Martin adjourned the meeting at 8:28 a.m.
__________________________________________
Ernie Gaffner
Township Clerk
March 17, 2009
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP
BOARD OF TRUSTEES SPECIAL MEETING
PUBLIC HEARING of the CEMETERY ORDINANCE and the MNRTF GRANT APPLICATION for
TOWNSHIP PARK
March 17, 2009
CALL TO ORDER
The public hearing on the Grant Application to the Michigan Natural Resources
Trust Fund (MNRTF) by the Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 5:30 p.m.
at the Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston,
Michigan, with Supervisor Martin presiding.
IN ATTENDANCE
Supervisor Martin, Treasurer Eyster, Clerk Gaffner, Trustees Hayes, Wilbrink
and Williams.
ABSENT
Trustee Wright.
PRESENTATION of GRANT APPLICATION
Supervisor Martin explained that the application for a grant from the Michigan
Natural Resources Trust Fund (MNRTF) was much like the grant application made
to the MNRTF in September 2008. Planning assistant Wanda Bloomquist, stated
that the revised grant application included changes suggested by the Department
of Natural Resources (DNR), increasing the opportunity for approval. The grant
will provide funds to improve trails, construct a picnic pavilion, provide
picnic tables, construct a barrier free restroom facility and construct two
sand volleyball courts. The funds would also make a portion of the walking
trails handicap accessible, by adding crush limestone.
Trustees Wilbrink, Hayes and Williams, encouraged the writers of the grant
application to review the application and see if there were areas that might be
modified to show the townships desire to make the park more accessible to
everyone. It was also suggested that effort be made to show how much the park
is presently used and how funds from the grant will not only increase
accessibility but provide opportunities for use without seasonal limitation.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin opened the meeting to public comment on the grant application
at 5:40 p.m. and with no one offering any public comment, the public comment
time closed at 5:40 p.m.
Motion by Trustee Hayes, to close the hearing on the MNRTF grant application.
Second by Trustee Williams
Motion Passed
The Williamstown Township Board will deliberate on the grant application at a
special meeting on 3/24/2009 at 5:30 p.m.
CALL TO ORDER
The public hearing on the Williamstown Township Cemetery Ordinance by the
Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 5:42 p.m. at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan, with
Supervisor Martin presiding
Treasurer Eyster presented the ordinance and made comment on the various
sections of the ordinance. She stated that the ordinance will institutionalize
those things that are already taking place, regulations on forfeiture of vacant
cemetery or burial spaces and provision for a perpetual care fund. The
ordinance provides for a Cemetery Board, comprised of one member from the
Williamstown Township Board, two Township residents appointed by the Township
Board and one representative appointed by the City of Williamston.
As Treasurer Eyster, reviewed the ordinance, Trustees Wilbrink, Hayes and
Williams offered comments and question relevant to the various section of the
ordinance. The essence of the comments was seeking clarification of various
aspects of the ordinance. One area of concern for clarification was the wording
in section 16, regarding the age limitation of an infant to be buried with a
parent. It was agreed that checking with the local mortician regarding their
policies and State requirements might provide a change in the wording, to be
more satisfactory to the board.
Minor corrections to word usage and sentence structure were noted for revising
the ordinance draft.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Supervisor Martin opened the meeting to public comment on the Cemetery
Ordinance at 6:22 p.m. and with no one offering any public comment, the public
comment time closed at 6:22 p.m.
Motion by Trustee Hayes, to close the hearing on the Cemetery Ordinance.
Second by Treasurer Eyster
Motion Passed
The Williamstown Township Board will deliberate on the Cemetery Ordinance at a
special meeting on 3/24/2009 at 5:30 p.m.
Motion by Trustee Hayes, to adjourn.
Second by Treasurer Eyster
Supervisor Martin adjourned the meeting at 6:25 p.m.
__________________________________________
Ernie Gaffner
Township Clerk
March 24, 2009
BOARD OF TRUSTEES MEETING
March 24, 2009
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 5:30 p.m. at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the agenda.
BOARD MEMBERS
Present: Trustee Frans Wilbrink,, Trustee Bob Hayes, Trustee Rick Williams,
Treasurer Janet Eyster, Clerk Gaffner and Supervisor Mickey Martin.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR AGENDA & NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 5:34 p.m.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 5:35
Trustee Martin Wright arrived 5:40
MOTION by Supervisor Martin to amend the Special Board Meeting Agenda to
include approval of minutes of 3/17/09 and add accounts paid for approval.
SECONDED by Clerk Gaffner
Motion Passed
DELIBERATION—MNRTF Grant application— The development of the Williamstown
Township Community Park is a high priority identified in the 2008 Williamstown
Township Parks and Recreation Master Plan, adopted by the Township Board on
February 28, 2008.
MOTION by Trustee Hayes to approve Resolution #77 authorizing a MNRTF grant
application.
Seconded by Treasurer Eyster
      Roll Call Vote: Ayes 7    Janet Eyster   Frans Wilbrink    Nays:
0   Motion passed.
                      Ernie Gaffner   Rick Williams
                       Robert Hayes Martin Wright
            Mickey Martin
Supervisor Martin shared a draft of the minutes prepared for the Board of
Trustees Special Meeting, Public Hearing of the Cemetery Ordinance and the
MNRTF Grant Application for Township Park. on 3/17/09
MOTION by Treasurer Eyster to approve the minutes of 3/17/09 special
Williamstown
Township Board Meeting, Public Hearing on the Cemetery Ordinance and the MNRTF
Grant
Application for the Township Park meeting.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes
Motion passed
Treasurer Eyster provided two pages of the proposed Cemetery Ordinance
containing minor corrections suggested by the board at the 3/17/09 hearing.
MOTION by Trustee Hayes to approve Resolution 78 approving Ordinance 45, The
Cemetery Ordinance.
Supported by Trustee Williams
   Roll Call Vote: Ayes 7    Janet Eyster   Frans Wilbrink    Nays: 0   Motion
passed.
                      Ernie Gaffner   Rick Williams
                       Robert Hayes Martin Wright
               Mickey Martin
Compensation Committee Recommendation/Budget amendment 2009-10—The Compensation
Committee, Wilber McNinch, Dave Robinson, Robert Lombardini, Dale Sheets and
Sally Martin Stewart, met Feburary 12, February 19, and March 2, 2009, thereby
completing commission business within the required forty-five (45) days. The
commission studied eight townships that were deemed comparable to Williamstown
Township. Many variables of comparison were used in the study to determine
compensation. Based on all the facts and data available to the commission, the
following compensation summary is recommended: For the position of Township
Supervisor, Treasurer and Clerk will receive a salary of $24,500 annually. The
trustees will receive $5,328 annually, plus an additional $65.00 for any third
meeting in one month they attend.
Motion by Trustee Hayes to approve the Williamstown Township Compensation
Commissions recommendations for compensating the supervisor, the clerk, the
treasurer and the trustees.
Seconded by Trustee Wright
Discussion of the Motion: Trustee Hayes would like to know the intent of the
compensation commission regarding the $65.00 and if the compensation is limited
to just the third meeting of the month. Treasurer Eyster shared with the hard
economic times, it is difficult for her to accept an increase. Clerk Gaffner
does not feel the numbers are equitable and Trustee Williams agrees.
Motion failed
Budget Amendments 2008-09—Treasurer Eyster shared she would like to move the
Treasurer’s Assistant’s wages of $1,000 to the Deputy Treasurer’s wages, as
there was no need for an assistant.
MOTION by Trustee Wright to amend the 2008-2009 budget to increase 101-253-703
(Deputy Treasurer wages) by $1,000 and to decrease 101-253-704 (Treasurer
Assistant wages) by $1,000.
Seconded by Supervisory Martin
Motion passed.
Accounts Payable for approval—Treasurer Eyster shared accounts payable for
approval in the amount of $25,221.39.
Discussion: Trustee Wilbrink would like clarification of the check register for
Williamstown Township.
MOTION by Trustee Hayes to approve Accounts Payable checks 17841 - 17863, check
17865, and checks 17868 – 17870 for a total of $25,221.39.
Seconded by Treasurer Eyster
Motion passed.
Accounts Payable Paid—Treasurer Eyster shared accounts payable for approval in
the amount of $61, 675.68.
MOTION by Trustee Eyster to approve Accounts Payable – paid checks 17864, 17866
and 17867 for a total of $61,675.68.
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Motion passed.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR AGENDA ITEMS AND NON-AGENDA ITEMS--None
Supervisor Martin closed public comment 6:25 p.m.
Supervisor Martin shared the Ingham County Road Commission road improvements
allocated for Williamston (Rural) Sherwood to Haslett and (Small Urban) from
Bismark to Sherwood are underway.
MOTION by Trustee Hayes supported by Trustee Williams moved to adjourn 6:40
p.m.
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner
Township Clerk
April 7, 2009
BOARD OF TRUSTEES MEETING
April 7, 2009
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the agenda.
PRESENT BY ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Martin Wright, Trustee Bob Hayes, Trustee Rick Williams,
Treasurer Janet Eyster, Clerk Ernie Gaffner and Supervisor Mickey Martin
Absent: Trustee Frans Wilbrink
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR AGENDA & NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:05 p.m.
Al Leblanc, 4720 Jadestone, Mr. Leblanc shared the idea of having the board
packet in electronic format in order to save staff time and materials. He
recommends the board packet also be placed on the web for public viewing.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:07 P.m.
INGHAM COUNTY SHERIFF
Sergeant Steve Sopocy, Ingham County Sheriff Deputy, shared Williamstown
Township Monthly Activity for March: Criminal Complaints 18, Blotter calls 11,
Traffic Accidents 5, Citations 15 and patrol time spent in the township 193.4
hours. Sergeant Sopocy also shared highlights in the areas of patrol, detective
and safety/crime. A reminder to slow down for farmers during the upcoming
season was advised.
Trustee Wright asked that traffic on Beeman Road be monitored during the
construction process.
Supervisor Martin stated that since the 3/31/2009 Revenue and Expenditure
report was handed out at the beginning of the meeting, it would not be included
in the consent agenda but would be voted upon at the next board meeting.
CONSENT AGENDA
   Minutes of 03/03/09, 03/12/09 and 03/24/09
   Treasurer’s Report
   March Building Inspector permits issued and finalized
   Accounts Payable Paid for checks #17871 – 17882 for a total of $1,132.10
   Accounts Payable for Approval for checks #17883 – 17895 for a total of
$3,042.47
   Payroll paid for checks #40499 – 40548 with voided checks 40516 – 40523,
40545 and 40546 for a total of $22,554.04
   MOVED by Treasurer Eyster to approve the consent agenda consisting of : 
   Minutes of 03/03/09, 03/12/09 and 03/24/09
   Treasurer’s Report
   March Building Inspector permits issued and finalized
   Accounts Payable Paid for checks #17871 – 17882 for a total of $1,132.10
Accounts Payable for Approval for checks #17883 – 17895 for a total of
$3,042.47
Payroll paid for checks #40499 – 40548 with voided checks 40516 – 40523 and
40545 - 40546 for a total of $22,554.04
SECONDED by Trustee Hayes
Motion Passed
PLANNING COMMISSION
—It was recommended by Supervisor Martin that this item be postponed until May.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Williamston Road Improvements—Supervisor Martin shared road improvements will
continue through the summer, the detour signs have not been put up yet, and
roads under construction should be avoided. Williamstown Township is hopeful it
will receive some additional funding from the stimulus package for Williamston
Road, Supervisor Martin will keep the board posted.
NEW BUSINESS
MOTION POLICY
   Moved by Trustee Hayes to adopt as policy the following parliamentary
procedures for motions at the board meeting. This procedure was based on the
text Parliamentary Procedure in Local Government author National Association of
Parliamentarians Education committee 2003-2005. One of the committee members
Connie Deford spoke at the MTA convention in January
All motions are to be stated four times.
1.   Original motion with a second
2.   Chair states the question stating who made and seconded the motion
3.   Chair puts the question to a vote
4.   Chair announces the result stating the motion
Handling a motion:
1.   Member MAKES A MOTION
2.   Another member SECONDS the motion
3.   The Chair STATES the question
4.   Members DEBATE the motion
5.   The Chair PUTS the question to a vote
6.   The Chair ANNOUNCES the result
Amendments:
If the chair has not yet stated the motion, the maker of the motion has the
ability to modify the original motion. The individual who seconded the motion
is not consulted. If, however the chair has stated the motion the board now
owns the motion not the member who made it. All amendments must be voted or
approved by general consent before they are added to the motion.
Calling the question:
Calling the question is stopping the debate not asking for a vote. This act of
calling the question must have a second and be brought to a vote and passed for
the debate to stop.
Roll call votes:
After a vote is taken and a member requests a roll call vote it must be
supported and voted on by the board before it can move forward
SECONDED by Treasurer Eyster
Motion Passed
TRASH PICKUP
Supervisor Martin shared several communities have Township, City or Village
wide trash and recycle pickup. Supervisor Martin would like to discuss this
option with the board to determine if it would benefit residents with lowering
trash pickup cost, less trash littered throughout the Township, illegal burning
and burying of trash, less wear on our roads.
Discussion: The board discussed this option and some members are concerned
about taking away people’s choice, concerned with smaller businesses being
unable to compete and forcing them out of business, and having the township
field complaints when service is not satisfactory. Other board members would
like Supervisor Martin to pursue quotes for this service and bring back to the
next Township meeting for further discussion.
Granger Representative shared he is a firm believer in the free market. Granger
has 65% of the residential disposal business in the township and their
customers hire them for their service. If the township pursues an all inclusive
vendor it will lower the price and in turn reduce the quality of service to the
customer when communities go with bulk rates.
TREE PURCHASE FOR PARK
Wanda Bloomquist shared the Parks Committee is recommending to the board to
approve the purchase of 40 trees, 8-10 ft tall, bur lapped to plant along the
entrance to the park.
Discussion: The Township board would like the Parks Committee to consider a
diverse selection of trees to prevent disease and loss of trees and check on
the warranty/guarantee on the trees. It is also important that the trees be
protected from deer during the winter months.
MOVED by Trustee Hayes that Williamstown Township purchase 40 trees, watering
tank and other materials not to exceed $5,500.00. This is contingent upon
volunteers help for planting the trees to be appropriately organized prior to
purchase and include three different species of trees.
SECONDED by Treasurer Eyster
Motion Passed
Ms. Bloomquist shared a Nature Hike will be held on May 1, 2009 at the
Williamstown Township Park to introduce the park. Plants and birds will be the
topic of the nature hike.
BOARD PACKET & COMPUTERS AT MEETINGS
Clerk Gaffner shared information on BoardBook a company which compiles all
board meeting material, places it in one large PDF file with bookmarks that
allow board members to easily move any place in the file. This system would
save the Township considerable money, using less time, less paper and less work
by printers and copy machines. Pricing of this concept has not been fully
researched, but preliminary figure is $6,000 that includes laptops for all
board members and one-year of BoardBook service. The Planning Commission is
researching the possibility of purchasing a “SmartBoard” or a screen and a
projector that attaches to a computer and would provide the Township Board
audience with a visual during the meetings. Mr. Gaffner also shared with Adobe
Acrobat Pro board members can make notes on the material during discussion. It
was recommended by the Township board that Clerk Gaffner pursue BoardBook to
include the Adobe Acrobat Pro and return with additional information and costs
at the next meeting in May.
REPORTS
Departments & Committees
Road Patrol Meeting—Trustee Hayes shared Ingham County Township representatives
met Friday, April 3, 2009, to discuss options for funding sheriff’s patrol in
townships.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR AGENDA & NON-AGENDA ITEMS--None
MOTION by Trustee Hayes supported by Trustee Williams moved to adjourn 9:02
p.m.
________________
Ernie Gaffner
Township Clerk
April 28, 2009
BOARD OF TRUSTEES MEETING
April 28, 2009
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 5:30 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the agenda.
PRESENT BY ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Martin Wright, Trustee Bob Hayes, Trustee Rick Williams,
Trustee Frans Wilbrink, Treasurer Janet Eyster, Clerk Ernie Gaffner and
Supervisor Mickey Martin
Absent: None
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
MOVED by Clerk Gaffner to add Revenue & Expenditures for month ended 3/30/09 to
the agenda. This item will be placed on the agenda under Accounts Payable and
Accounts paid.
SECONDED by Trustee Wright
MOTION PASSED
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR AGENDA & NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 5:31 p.m.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 5:32 p.m.
Resolution – PDR applications -- Supervisor Martin shared Williamstown Township
supports the efforts of the Ingham County Board of Commissions to establish and
fund an active farmland preservation program in Ingham County and encourages
landowners who own land that should be preserved to apply for this program.
Williamstown Township will support three Resolutions approving PDR Landowner’s
#79 for Spencer Estates, #80 for Michael Gruber and #81 for Paul Powell, Karen
Powell and Raymond Powell.
DISCUSSION—Supervisor Martin shared there is a May 1 deadline for submission of
the Township Resolutions. The resolutions will be evaluated on a point system.
Once approved the landowners cannot subdivide the land or build houses on it.
The County would not have authority to change land use of this property once
its established use is active farmland preservation.
MOVED by Trreasurer Eyster to approve the Township Resolution Approving PDR
Landowners Application Resolutions #79, #80, and #81 for Spencer Estates;
Michael Gruber; and Paul Powell, Karen Powell and Raymond Powell, respectively.
SECONDED by Trustee Hayes
   ROLL CALL VOTE: Ayes 7 Janet Eyster   Frans Wilbrink    Nays: 0   Motion
passed.
                      Ernie Gaffner   Rick Williams
                       Robert Hayes Martin Wright
            Mickey Martin
Roads 2009 –10 budget—Supervisor Martin shared a memo from the Road Committee.
The Road Committee met with representatives from the ICRC. The Township has
budgeted $30,000 and the ICRC will match this for a total of $60,000. The
recommendation for expenditure is: Baan Gan Aka Subdivison ($40,315); Oakleaf
Hills Subdivision ($11,000) leaving a balance of $8,865.
DISCUSSION—The Township board discussed the $8,865 fund balance and felt the
remaining funds should go towards Williamston Road. The Williamstown Township
Board will begin discussions to prepare a five- year plan to begin saving for
future road maintenance.
MOVED by Trustee Wright that Williamstown Township complete the road work for
Baan Gan Aka Subdivsion for about $40,315 and additional work on Oakleaf
Subdivision for about $11,000 and further that the remaining balance of the
$60,000, this is $8,685 be used for Williamston Road. $30,000 is from the
Williamstown Township budget for 2009-10 and $30,000 is the match funds from
Ingham County.
SECONDED by Trustee Williams
MOTION PASSED
Roads budgets 2010, 11, 12 & 13—Supervisor Martin shared there will be more
discussion to come in May for future road maintenance budgets.
Accounts paid & Payable approval—Treasurer Eyster shared Accounts Payable
Checks Paid totaled $2,864.54 and Accounts Payable Checks to approve is
$12,455.53.
DISCUSSION: Trustee Wilbrink asked for an explanation of check No. 17923 Frank
Schmidt and Sons—Treasurer Eyster reported this fee was for payment of the
trees purchased for Williamstown Township Park and Trustee Wright asked for an
explanation of Check No. 17927 Pichey Cleaning—Treasurer Eyster reported this
fee was for carpet cleaning.
MOVED by Treasurer Eyster to approve Accounts Payable Checks Paid 17896-17904
for $2,864.54 with void check 17898 and Accounts Payable Checks to Approve
17905-17930 for $12,455.53.
SECONDED by Trustee Hayes
MOTION PASSED
Revenue & Expenditure report (added w/motion)—Supervisor Martin shared this
report was tabled at the April 7, 2009, meeting so that the Township Board had
more time to review the report. The report is now back on the docket for
action.
DISCUSSION: None
MOVED by Treasurer Eyster to approve the Revenue and Expenditure Report ending
3/31/09.
SECONDED by Trustee Williams
MOTION PASSED
Public Comment for agenda & non-agenda items
Al LeBlanc, 4720 Jadestone, expressed appreciation for the board’s forward
thinking on the maintenance of township roads.
Trustee Wright shared the Detour Signs for Williamston Road were finally put up
today (Tuesday, April 28). The ICRC target date for completion of this project
is end of June, 2009.
Supervisor Martin encouraged Trustee Wilbrink to attend the Gun Club meetings.
Trustee Wilbrink shared he would like the Township Board to begin discussion to
work on public safety issues.
Supervisor Martin encourages all Williamstown Township Board members to attend
the County Chapter Meetings. Please contact Supervisor Martin for a schedule of
meetings.
Supervisor Martin shared the next meeting of the Williamstown Township Board
will be held on Tuesday, May 12, 2009, due to the election on Tuesday, May 5,
2009.
MOTION by Trustee Hayes, supported by Supervisor Martin to adjourn 6:20 p.m.
___________________________
Ernie Gaffner,
Township Clerk
Williamstown Township
May 12, 2009
BOARD OF TRUSTEES MEETING
May 12, 2009
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:03 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan.
Clerk Ernie Gaffner called the meeting to order and advised the need to elect a
chair for the meeting, as Supervisor Martin was absent.
MOVED by Trustee Wright to appoint Janet Eyster as Acting Chair.
SECONDED by Trustee Williams
MOTION PASSED
TREASURER EYSTER reviewed the agenda and requested a roll call.
PRESENT BY ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Martin Wright, Trustee Bob Hayes, Trustee Rick Williams,
Trustee Frans Wilbrink Treasurer Janet Eyster, and Clerk Ernie Gaffner
Absent: Supervisor Mickey Martin
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR AGENDA & NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Treasurer Eyster called for public comment at 7:06 p.m.
Treasurer Eyster closed public comment at 7:06 p.m.
Sergeant Steve Sopocy, Ingham County Sheriff’s Office – Sergeant Sopocy shared
Monthly Activity Report for Williamstown Township as of April 2009: Criminal
complaints 16, Blotter calls 8, Traffic accidents 8, Citations written 26, and
Patrol time in township 156.6. Sergeant Sopocy stated there have been a few
larcenies from vehicles and most have been unlocked. Sergeant Sopocy recommends
residents lock their vehicle doors, be cautious on the roads and considerate of
bicyclists, motorcycles and farm machinery.
Acting Chair, Janet Eyster would like Sergeant Sopocy to provide Williamstown
Township with information on vehicle break-ins so the information may be shared
with residents in the Maple Shade / Beeman Road area.
Consent Agenda
A.   Minutes of April 4, April 7 and April 28, 2009 Meeting
B.   The Corrected Treasurer’s Report for March, 2009
C.   Treasurer’s Report for April, 2009
D.   Building Inspector’s Report for April, 2009
E.   Accounts Payable Checks Paid 17931-17940 for $98,137.80
F.   Accounts Payable Checks to Approve 17941 – 17967 for $9,298.07, and
G.   Payroll Paid Checks 40549 – 40585 for $16,850.52 with void check 40549
H.   Revenue and Expenditure Report ending 4/30/09
MOVED by Trustee Hayes to approve the Consent Agenda.
SECONDED by Clerk Gaffner
MOTION PASSED
Planning Commission
Planning Commission representative, Mike Fielek, commented on recent commission
business as outlined in the submitted minutes of the April 21, 2009 meeting.
Mr. Fielek also highlighted discussion of Zoning Amendments, Home Based
Business and Occupations Meeting scheduled for May 19, 2009 and Annual Report.
It was recommended the Williamstown Township Board that action on changes to
the Williamstown Township Zoning be tabled until all recommendations are
completed and brought for action. The board will table action until the June,
2009 meeting.
Unfinished Business
Seven year Road Projects-Budget—Treasurer Eyster shared a graphic on the
projected budget for the next seven years. With the uncertainty of state and
local tax revenues, Treasurer Eyster recommends the Township Board set up a
committee of two board members and herself to take a look at the budget,
gathering information on future road maintenance needs. This committee will
suggest a schedule for road maintenance and possible funding options. Trustee
Williams and Trustee Wright volunteered to work with Treasurer Eyster on this
committee. It was recommended this item be brought back for further discussion
at the June 2009 board meeting.
New Business--None
Reports
Departments & Committes
Election—Clerk Gaffner shared results of the May 5, 2009 school election. There
were 723 ballots cast in the Township, including absentee ballots. The
Williamston School Millage proposal received 350 yes votes and 293 no votes.
The Haslett School Millage proposal received 35 yes votes and 44 no votes.
Energy—Trustee Williams shared 3 contractors were considered for an energy
audit. Some of the items projected costs were absorbenent. Some
recommendations: energy star lighting, skylights, purchase of solar water
heater. Trustee Williams is looking for quick returns at a minimal expense.
Other—Trustee Williams discussed road concerns with Representative, Mark
Meadows. The revenue outlook for Michigan is not good and Representative
Meadows is not optimistic.
Public Comment for agenda & non-agenda items
Ruth Templeton, 1435 Epley Road—shared concerns about the road budget
projections and requested information on state revenue sharing. Treasurer
Eyster scheduled a time for Ms. Templeton to visit the Township office to
discuss her concerns.
Helen LeBlanc, 4727 Jadestone—thanked Treasurer Eyster for looking at the long-
term picture of the Williamstown Township budget.
Parks and Recreation Committee--Wanda Bloomquist, 375 Turner Road, thanked the
committee and volunteers who came out to plant trees at Williamstown Township
Park. Ms. Bloomquist checked on the newly planted trees and stated they are all
looking healthy.
Trustee Williams inquired about the newly planted tree mix? Ms. Bloomquist
ensured Trustee Williams she checked with the vendor and MSU and the trees are
a good mix and there should be no need to worry about disease.
Treasurer Eyster closed public comment at 7:50 p.m.
MOTION by Trustee Hayes supported by Trustee Williams moved to adjourn 7:51
p.m.
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner
Township Clerk
May 27, 2009
BOARD OF TRUSTEES MEETING
May 27, 2009
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 6:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the agenda.
PRESENT BY ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Martin Wright, Trustee Rick Williams, Treasurer Janet Eyster,
and Supervisor Mickey Martin
Absent: Trustee Frans Wilbrink, Trustee Bob Hayes, Clerk Ernie Gaffner
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR AGENDA & NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 6:01 p.m.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 6:02 p.m.
SEVEN YEAR BUDGET PROPOSAL
Supervisor Martin asked Treasurer Eyster to lead the discussion of the impact
of roads maintenance on future budgets. Treasurer Eyster indicated that she
requested Supervisor Martin attend the first meeting of the sub-committee to
provide us with background information on Township road maintenance and
indicate written and human resources that we can use to obtain the information
for the Board. Supervisor Martin reviewed who has responsibility for
maintaining roads, discussed the Pacer (road quality) rating system and the
activities of the Williamstown Township road committee
Treasurer Eyster outlined information for the sub-committee to gather and
present to the Board. These included:
1.   List of Township roads divided into state, county primary and county
2.   Legal basis for road maintenance
3.   Types of road surfaces and life expectancy of the surfaces
4.   Current condition of the county roads.
5.   Sources of funding for road maintenance
The sub-committee decided to develop a thorough report for the board including
a vision statement, listing of Township roads by type and length, rating of
roads using the Pacer rating system, types of road surfacing, costs per mile of
various road surfaces and sources of revenue for road maintenance.
At the next meeting of the subcommittee existing written information will be
discussed by the subcommittee members.
MOTION by Trustee Wright supported by Trustee Williams moved to adjourn 7:00
p.m.
Ernie Gaffner
Township Clerk
June 2, 2009
BOARD OF TRUSTEES MEETING
June 2, 2009
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the meeting agenda.
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
PRESENT BY ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Martin Wright, Trustee Bob Hayes, Trustee Frans Wilbrink
Treasurer Janet Eyster, Clerk Ernie Gaffner and Supervisor Mickey Martin
Absent: Trustee Rick Williams
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR AGENDA & NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:05 p.m.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:05 p.m.
INGHAM COUNTY SHERIFF report Sgt. Sopocy—Sergeant Sopocy shared the May 2009
Activity Report for Williamstown Township. Some information for May had not yet
been submitted to him but his report did include the number of complaints,
traffic accidents, traffic citations and number of patrol hours in the
Township. Sergeant Sopocy highlighted the need for everyone to be extra
cautious this time of year as schools are letting out for the summer, children
are playing, walking, and biking near roadways along with an increase in young
drivers.
Treasurer Eyster asked Sergeant Sopocy for a report detailing those in
Williamstown Township who have spent time in jail, how much time and the crimes
they committed. Sergeant Sopocy will check into this for Treasurer Eyster.
NEW BUSINESS
Pat Lindemann Ingham County Drain Commissioner—Commissioner Lindemann
introduced his Administrative Deputy, Carla Close, shared a breakdown from
2003-2009 on soil erosion control permits. The permits have decreased from 90
in 2003 to only 6 in 2009. Commissioner Lindemann also shared information on
the 2008 Williamstown Township Drain Maintenance and Projected 2009 Drain Work.
Commissioner Lindemann stated that Governor Granholm’s 2009 State message
included her proposal to repeal the 1979 Wetland Protection Act and turn it
over to the federal government for a savings of approximately $2 million.
Commissioner Lindemann recommends Williamstown Township prepare a resolution to
support the 1979 Wetland Protection Act and send it to Governor Granholm and
State Representatives. Commissioner Lindemann explained the value of controlled
ditch burns, the positive impact it has on the environment and the cost savings
to the county.
Supervisor Martin read through the items on the consent agenda consisting of:
   Minutes of 05/12/09 & 5/27/09 Meetings
   Treasurer’s Report for May 2009
   Building Inspector’s Report for May, 2009
   Accounts Payable Paid, checks #17968–17979 for a total of $9,926.46 and
    17998–18005 for a total of $935.00,
Accounts Payable for Approval, checks #17980–17997 for a total of $11,409.82
and check 18006 for $3,225.
Payroll paid checks #40586–40627 with voided check 40626 and EFT19 for a total
of $24,130.06
Revenue and Expenditure Report ending 5/31/2009
Trustee Wilbrink requested the minutes of the 5/27/09 meeting be pulled and
Supervisor Martin requested the minutes of 5/12/09 be pulled from the consent
agenda.
MOTION by Trustee Hayes to approve the consent agenda consisting of:
   Treasurer’s Report for May 2009
   Building Inspector’s Report for May, 2009
   Accounts Payable Paid, checks #17968– 7979 for a total of $9,926.46 and
    17998–18005 for a total of $935.00,
Accounts Payable for Approval, checks #17980–17997 for a total of $11,409.82
and check 18006 for $3,225.
Payroll paid checks #40586–40627 with voided check 40626 and EFT19 for a total
of $24,130.06
Revenue and Expenditure Report ending 5/31/2009
SECONDED by Treasurer Eyster
MOTION PASSED
MOTION by Treasurer Eyster  to approve the minutes of 5/12/2009 and 5/27/2009
SECONDED by Trustee Hayes
DISCUSSION: Supervisor Martin shared that on page 3 of the 5/12/09 minutes
there was a question about Trustee Williams comment on the tree mix. After
discussion it was recommended the comment remain as written. Under the Consent
Agenda, Item E., Accounts Payable Checks Paid should show check numbers 17941-
17967.
Trustee Wilbrink challenged the meeting of May 27, 2009, as he questioned
whether or not the posting of the meeting and agenda met the time requirements
of the Open Meetings Act. The board discussed the timeline of events in setting
the May 27, 2009 meeting and determined there was no violation of the Open
Meetings Act and determined this meeting and minutes were in compliance with
the Open Meetings Act.
MOTION PASSED
PLANNING COMMISSION—Planning Commission representative, Mike Fielek, commented
on recent commission business as outlined in the submitted minutes of the May
19, 2009 meeting. The commission held a Public Hearing for Article 2, reviewed
the Annual Report, Discussed changing to E-packets for future meetings and
reviewed the budget and discussed reductions where possible and combining
workshop material into scheduled meetings. The Board also discussed a
resident’s concern regarding shooting after hours at the Gun Club that resulted
in a call to the police and subsequent action by the Gun Club Officers.
Supervisor Martin appreciates the reductions and cost savings recommended by
the Planning Commission and also reiterated the importance of having a
Williamstown Township Board member attend the Gun Club meetings. Supervisor
Martin recommended Trustee Wilbrink obtain a schedule of meetings and she
recommends he plan to be in attendance to represent the Williamstown Township
Board.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Right of Way Ordinance - Mr. Kurt Guter, chairman of the Communication
Committee, recommended Williamstown Township pass the Right-of-Way (ROW)
Ordinance, an ordinance providing protection of the health, safety, and well-
being of its’ citizens and to ensure the structural integrity of its’ roads and
right-of-ways. The ROW Ordinance will assist the Township in keeping those
properties within its boundaries in a state of good repair and free from
unnecessary encumbrances.
MOTION by Treasurer Eyster: the Williamstown Township Board adopt Right-of-Way
Ordinance #46, with a revision to Article 12, requiring a an $100 application
fee be added
SECONDED by Supervisor Martin
   ROLL CALL Vote: Ayes 6    Janet Eyster   Mickey Martin    Nays:0   Motion
passed.
                      Ernie Gaffner   Frans Wilbrink
                       Robert Hayes Martin Wright
            
NEW BUSINESS
Crusher Dust & Playground Mulch—Wanda Bloomquist from Parks and Recreation
provided a quote for 10 yards of ball diamond crusher dust and three yards of
playground mulch for approximately $1,046 from Hammond Farms East. It was
recommended Ms. Bloomquist check with 100 Acre Woods prior to securing the
vendor for this purchase.
MOVED by Trustee Wilbrink: that Parks and Recreation may spend up to $1,100.00
for Crusher Dust and Playground Mulch
SECONDED by Trustee Eyster
MOTION PASSED
Heart of Michigan Trails proposal—Wanda Bloomquist shared a packet of
information on becoming a partner in the Heart of Michigan Trails and Greenways
Partnership. The packet includes the by-laws, list of current members and a
sample resolution. Trails provides places for cyclist, hikers, walkers, runners
in-line skaters, and physically challenged individuals to exercise and
experience many natural and cultural wonders of the tri-county area’s urban,
suburban, and rural environments. A tri county master plan is being developed
and the connections will be noted within MDOT. This alliance would keep our
community abreast of what is happening in the area and provide dialogue with
other communities on how they have developed their trails. There is no cost
involved and Ms. Bloomquist would be the representative for Williamstown
Township. It was recommended the resolution be placed on the July 7, 2009
consent agenda.
REPORTS
Departments & Committees
Energy Update—Supervisor Martin shared a report on behalf of Trustee Williams.
Trustee Williams is looking at lighting: estimates and payback times are
forthcoming. The township hopes to cut electric bills in half. Trustee Williams
is also looking at “wind spires” that would generate 1200 watts of electricity
(50 ft high). Supervisor Martin would like to see a proposal brought back in
stages of transition, the first stage reflecting what can be done right now and
the costs associated with the first stage of transition. This item will be
brought back in July for further discussion.
Roads-Treasurer Eyster stated that the Township Road Committee met. The goal of
the first meeting was to gather as much information as possible and put
together a comprehensive report that will include vision, current conditions of
all roads, longevity costs, and funding of each road. There is much more work
to be done.
Treasurer Eyster - shared she is looking at the current budget. It is known
that the state is going to cut $8,000 in first 6 months of the fiscal year, but
not known what will be cut in the second. Trustee Eyster assumes the funding
for Williamstown Township will be down $25-35,000. The Township is looking at
ways to trim now without too much damage and what they can invest in now that
will save dollars in the long-term. The Township will have to find a way to
operate on less than what they have in the past; changes will be noticed and
people will be affected.
Electronic Board packet—Clerk Gaffner shared he is working with two companies:
one of the companies dollar amount is too much, but the other company is
working with the township and has come down more than 50% from their original
figure. Clerk Gaffner hopes to have a proposal to consider at the July 2009,
meeting.
PDR (Personal Development Rights)—Supervisor Martin shared the Township faired
very well with their PDR proposals. There was one in Williamstown Township that
was selected. The appraisals will have to be done and applications filed with
federal government for matching funds, which will hold up this process for one-
year. Landowners are pleased. This should sustain our agricultural community.
Supervisor Martin will bring this back for more discussion in August 2009.
Sheriff Patrols—Supervisor Martin shared this topic is very important and the
Township must stay involved and proactive. Supervisor Martin does not feel
people in the township understand what it will costs for public safety if this
vital service is not provided by the county. County Commissioners are listening
and Supervisor Martin believes more public input is needed. Supervisor Martin
suggested the Township send out a large postcard mailing to all residents in
the township calling for a Town Hall Meeting to be held Wednesday, June 17,
2009 at 7 p.m. The Township needs active people in the community to help
influence those County Commissioners from Lansing and other municipalities
having their own police protection. Supervisor Martin suggested that mailing
costs of approximately $492.00 and printing costs of $200.00 would be necessary
for a Township wide mailing. It was recommended the cost of this proposal be
allowed up to $1,000.00 and the funds should be taken from the Newsletter
Budget.
Maintenance Code—Supervisor Martin shared she is still working on the
Maintenance Code Ordinance for abandoned homes, homes unfinished, un-mowed
lawns etc. This will be brought back for further discussion at a later board
meeting.
Summit Cemetery—Supervisor Martin shared columbarium plaques have been
displayed, depicting the history of Williamston, an explanation of how the
cemetery was moved and a picture of the old steel bridge across the Red Cedar
River. Grasses and flowers are beginning to grow. A dedication ceremony is
being planned. More information will be available later this summer.
MOTION by Trustee Martin: move into Closed Session for purposes of discussing
purchase of land 9:05 p.m.
SECONDED by Treasurer Eyster
   ROLL CALL Vote: Ayes 6    Janet Eyster   Mickey Martin    Nays:0   Motion
passed
                      Ernie Gaffner   Frans Wilbrink
                                     Robert Hayes Martin Wright
9:14 p.m. Open Session Reconvened
Moved By Treasurer Eyster
That Tom and Nancy Hamlin be allowed to purchase from Williamstown Township
parcel 33-03-03-26-201-026, which is 0.078 acres m/l (approximately 17’ by
200’) for $500.00 plus legal fees and any other Township expenses. A deed will
be prepared by the Township lawyer. The parcel must be combined with parcel
number 33-03-03-26-20-025 owned by Tom and Nancy Hamlin.
SECONDED by Trustee Wright
MOTION Passed
Public Comment for Agenda & Non-Agenda Items
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 9:14 p.m.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 9:14 p.m.
MOTION by Trustee Hayes to adjourn 9:15 p.m.
   MEETING ADJOURNED by Supervisor Martin at 9:15 p.m.
________________
Ernie Gaffner
Township Clerk
July 7, 2009
BOARD OF TRUSTEES MEETING
July 7, 2009
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the meeting agenda.
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
PRESENT BY ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Bob Hayes, Trustee Frans Wilbrink, Trustee Rick Williams
Treasurer Janet Eyster, Clerk Ernie Gaffner and Supervisor Mickey Martin
Absent: Trustee Martin Wright
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR AGENDA & NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:03 p.m.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:03 p.m.
INGHAM COUNTY SHERIFF REPORT Sgt. O’Neill—Sergeant O’Neill shared the June 2009
Activity Report for Williamstown Township. Some information included the number
of complaints, traffic accidents, traffic citations and number of patrol hours
in the Township. Sergeant O’Neill reminded all those in attendance that on July
16th there is a meeting of the Ingham County Commissioner’s Law Enforcement
Committee to discuss possible changes to the present Ingham County Sheriff’s
Department road patrol program
CONSENT AGENDA
Consent Agenda—Supervisor Martin read through the items on the Consent Agenda
consisting of:
         Minutes of June 2, 2009 and closed session Reports
Treasurer’s Report
         Building Inspector
         Accounts Payable – Paid
         Payroll – Paid
         Accounts Payable – Approval
         Revenue/Expenditure
         Resolution – Trail ways
Trustee Hayes requested the minutes of June 2, 2009 be pulled and Trustee
Wilbrink requested Resolution—Trail ways be pulled.
MOTION by Clerk Gaffner to approve the consent agenda consisting of :
   Closed Session
Treasurer’s report for June, 2009
   Building Inspector’s Report for June, 2009
   Accounts Payable Checks Paid 18007-18045 for a total of $30,359.11
   Accounts Paid Checks 40628-40658 for a total of $17,856.90
   Accounts Payable Checks to approve 18046-18071 for a total of $5,021.47
   Revenue and Expenditure Report ending 6/30/09
SECONDED by Trustee Williams
MOTION PASSED
MOTION by Treasurer Eyster to move minutes of 06/02/09 meeting, as amended.
Discussion: Trustee Hayes shared page 3, under Unfinished Business, minutes
state “Motion by Treasurer Eyster: the ..” — there is need for a grammatical
change and remove “the.” It is recommended other motions be reviewed for
similar grammatical change. Supervisor Martin also stated that in the same
motion, reference to a specific amount of a $100 application fee be removed as
a specific fee has not been determined.
SECONDED by Trustee Williams
MOTION PASSED
MOTION by Supervisor Martin to approve Resolution #82-“Heart of Michigan Trails
and Greenways Partnership”.
SECONDED by Treasurer Eyster
MOTION PASSED
Planning Commission—Planning Commission representative, Michael Fielek,
commented on recent commission business as outlined in the submitted minutes of
June 16, 2009. Discussed and tabled final deliberation on Article 2, Received
presentation on the Green District and suggested the Board support a resolution
urging the state to retain regulation of the wetlands. Mr. Fielek shared the
Planning Commission would like the Township Board to support Resolution
#83—“Resolution Opposing the Repeal of Michigan’s Wetland Protection Act”.
Supervisor Martin encouraged the Planning Commission to also consider passing a
resolution to support “Resolution Opposing the Repeal of Michigan’s Wetland
Protection Act”. Mr. Fielek will take Supervisor Martin’s recommendation back
to the Planning Commission for action.
Unfinished Business
Wetlands Resolution-- Wetlands provide Michigan communities with storm water
filtration, groundwater recharge, erosion control, flood control and fish &
wildlife habitat among other things. Williamstown Township Board of Trustees
herby urges the Michigan Legislature, should it choose to move forward with a
repeal of Part 303, to maintain the authority granted under Section 30307(4)
that enables local units of government, like Williamstown Township, to enact
and enforce local wetland regulations.
MOTION by Treasurer Eyster, that the Williamstown Township Board adopt
Resolution #83—“Resolution Opposing the Repeal of Michigan’s Wetland Protection
Act”.
SECONDED by Trustee Williams
   ROLL CALL Vote: Ayes 6    Janet Eyster   Mickey Martin    Nays:0   Motion
passed.
                      Ernie Gaffner   Frans Wilbrink
                       Robert Hayes Rick Williams
NEW BUSINESS
Green Resolution--The Township of Williamstown wants to emphasize the benefits
of energy efficiency and conservation.
Discussion—Members of the township board felt there was not enough manpower to
support “Michigan Green’s Communities Challenge”. The board would support the
resolution if volunteers were in place to help support this commitment. The
board is not in the position to support Resolution #84—“Michigan Green
Communities Challenge”. The board will work
toward energy goals and implement energy efficient items at Williamstown
Township. It was recommended Supervisor Martin place information about the
“Michigan Green’s Communities Challenge” in the next newsletter along with
adding information to the website asking for volunteers to support this
initiative. Trustee Williams will prepare information for the website.
REPORTS
Departments & Committees
Ingham County Sheriff’s Department- Supervisor Martin shared a meeting will be
held Tuesday, July 8, 2009, to provide surrounding communities from
Williamstown Township, White Oak, Bunker Hill and Stockbridge Township with an
up-to-date discussion on the state-of-the police/sheriff’s patrol.
Commissioners meeting—Treasurer Eyster attended a Commissioners meeting on June
23, 2009, and learned that the commissioners don’t feel townships are paying
their fare share for road patrol. Treasurer Eyster took the information
gathered from surrounding townships outlining Ingham County Sheriff’s time in
the townships to the Law Enforcement Meeting, June 25, 2009. Treasurer Eyster
feels even with a millage increase law enforcement services are not guaranteed.
Treasurer Eyster will seek a copy of the law in order to understand the states
responsibility to maintain primary law enforcement for general townships.
Supervisor Martin stated there will be a meeting of the Ingham County
Commissioner’s Law Enforcement Committee on Thursday, July 16, 2009 from 7-9:00
p.m. It is anticipated that a decision will be reached by this committee to be
presented to the total board of commissioners, regarding recommended budget
cuts to the Ingham County Sheriff’s Department requiring a decrease in road
patrol or a recommended county Millage increase to sustain the road patrol
comparable to the level provided by the previous budget.
Clerk Gaffner would like to know how much funding one mill would provide.
Treasurer Eyster will follow up with this request.
Trustee Hayes would like the township to begin discussion of a contingency plan
for the safety and welfare of Williamstown Township residents.
Gun Club—No report
Insurance Cost Update—Supervisor Martin shared Clerk Gaffner will save the
township over $4,000 in insurance coverage premiums.
Energy Update—Trustee Williams shared cost information for an energy audit from
three energy audit vendors. It was recommended this item return for action at
the August 4, 2009, meeting.
Treasurer Eyster would like additional information on the Honeywell “wind
generator” as far as the sound and how far it travels. Trustee Williams will
investigate and report back at the August 4, 2009, meeting.
Road Improvements-Treasurer Martin shared Williamston Road is now open. She
also shared the Ingham County Road Commission smoothed the gravel surface at
Williamstown Township Park.
Township Legal fees—Supervisor Martin shared non-compliance site-plan letters
have been written with a 10-day response deadline. The ordinance must be
enforced so legal fees may be forthcoming. It was recommended an update be
provided at the August 4, 2009, meeting.
Williamstown Township Board Meeting E-Packet—Supervisor Martin asked the
Township Board about their preferences in receiving their board meeting packet,
either by E-Packet on the Internet or by CD from the clerk’s office. These
choices replace the need to prepare printed copies of the material at a
reduction in cost to the Township. The majority was satisfied with the E-Packet
while one board member requested continuing with a paper copy. Clerk Gaffner
will work on a resolution for this request and see if a CD copy of the packet
will be sufficient for this board member.
Williamstown Township Tax bills—Supervisor Martin shared resident tax bills
have been mailed.
Principles of Government document—Supervisor Martin shared Clerk Gaffner
obtained this document from the Michigan Township Association. The principles
represent the integrity of the board and what the board is working towards.
Supervisor Martin would like to adopt the “Principles of Government” and
display them in the township office. Board members present were in full support
of this request. It was recommended this item return for action at the August
4, 2009, board meeting.
Public Comment for Agenda & Non-Agenda Items
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 8:37 p.m.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 8:37 p.m.
MOTION by Trustee Hayes to adjourn 8:38 p.m.
   MEETING ADJOURNED by Supervisor Martin at 8:38 p.m.
________________
Ernie Gaffner
Township Clerk
August 4, 2009
BOARD OF TRUSTEES MEETING
August 4, 2009
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the meeting agenda.
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
PRESENT BY ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Bob Hayes, Trustee Martin Wright, Trustee Frans Wilbrink,
Trustee Rick Williams, Treasurer Janet Eyster, Clerk Ernie Gaffner and
Supervisor Mickey Martin
Absent: None
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR AGENDA & NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:02 p.m.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:02 p.m.
INGHAM COUNTY SHERIFF report Sgt. Jason Ferguson—Sergeant Ferguson shared the
July 2009 Activity Report for Williamstown Township. Some information included
the number of complaints, traffic accidents, traffic citations and number of
patrol hours in the Township. Sergeant Ferguson reminded everyone to look out
for any suspicious activity or vehicles in the area.
CONSENT AGENDA
Consent Agenda—Supervisor Martin read through the items on the Consent Agenda
consisting of:
   Minutes of July 7, 2009
            Treasurer’s Report
            Building Inspector Report
            Accounts Payable – Paid
            Payroll – Paid
            Accounts Payable – Approval
            Revenue/Expenditure
Accounts Payable Checks Paid were pulled from the consent agenda.
MOTION by Treasurer Eyster to approve the consent agenda consisting of :
   Minutes of 07/07/2009
Treasurer’s report for July, 2009
   Building Inspector’s Report for July, 2009
Payroll Paid Checks 40659 – 40694 and Electronic Transfer of Funds) EFT20,
EFT21 and EFT22 for a total of $31,144.90.
   Accounts Payable Checks to approve 18103 - 18126 for a total of $16,100.51
   Revenue and Expenditure Report ending 7/31/09
SECONDED by Trustee Williams
MOTION PASSED
MOTION by Trustee Wright to move Accounts Payable Checks Paid 18072-18085 and
checks 18087 – 18102 for a total of $118,875.57 with check #18086 listed as
void.SECONDED by Trustee Williams 
Discussion: Trustee Wilbrink shared concerns about payment of bills prior to
township board approval, as this practice compromises board policy. It was
recommended Clerk Gaffner contact McKenna Associates, Abraham & Gaffney, and
Murphy, Brenton & Spagnuolo regarding billing cycle and Township payment dates.
MOTION PASSED
Unfinished Business
Principles of Governance—Supervisor Martin shared she is ready to sign the
Principles of Governance to maintain the highest standards and traditions of
Michigan Townships, these principles will guide our stewardship, deliberations,
and constituent services as we commit to safeguard our community’s health,
safety, and general welfare. The Williamstown Township Board all agreed to sign
the pledge to our township, our state and our country.
Resolution #84—Supervisor Martin shared information on the Michigan Green
Communities Challenge Grant. This grant emphasizes the benefits of energy,
efficiency and conservation. Supervisor Martin invited Wanda Bloomquist to
discuss the grant workshop she attended on Energy Efficiency Conservation Block
Grant (EECBG). Ms. Bloomquist shared in order for Williamstown Township to
position itself to receive the EECBG, the board would have to adopt Resolution
#84. The adoption of Resolution #84 would acknowledge the benefits of moving in
the direction of protecting our natural resources, which the Township has
already begun, taking steps toward reaching EECBG goals.
MOTION by Treasurer Eyster, that the Williamstown Township Board adopts
Resolution #84—“Michigan Green Communities Challenge”.
SECONDED by Trustee Hayes
   ROLL CALL Vote: Ayes 7    Janet Eyster   Mickey Martin    Nays:0   Motion
passed.
                      Ernie Gaffner   Frans Wilbrink
                       Robert Hayes Rick Williams
                  Martin Wright
Trailways Grant—Wanda Bloomquist shared she met with grant reviewers and
Michigan Department of Transportation (MDOT). The issue with the current
trailways grant is that sidewalks are not considered trails. MDOT recommended
Williamstown Township wait until 2010 when MDOT is scheduled to pave the
shoulders of Grand River Road west of Zimmer to Meridian Road. The Trailways
Grant, providing for an 8' paved shoulder, would tie into this project well.
Other positive outcomes of working with MDOT are that MDOT would oversee and do
all the construction and engineering for the project. To increase the
possibility of receiving a Trailways Grant, MDOT recommends townships support
35% of the funding. Williamstown Township has until August 31, 2009, to make
the needed changes to the grant application.  Township Board
members recommended the Township proceed with the grant application.
NEW BUSINESS
October minutes 2008—Mr. Gaffner shared action was necessary for approval of
the October 7, 2008 minutes as the minutes are still recorded in draft form.
After review page 3 of the minutes, accounts payable for approval, the checks
total $8,834.96 was changed to $88,333.30 (the check to the post office and
Ingham County Road Commission was not on the original list). Clerk Gaffner
shared if any other board member has corrections to this set of minutes please
let him know. Clerk Gaffner will complete the Minutes from October 2008 in
final form.
Reports
Departments & Committees
Supervisor Martin provided an overview of the following:
·   The Township will be working closely with the Planning Commission on
reviewing township projects in order to reduce third party expenses.
·   The columbarium is outstanding!
·   The Township will introduce a garage sale opportunity to coincide with the
monthly recycling event. The first opportunity will be offered September 12,
2009, at the pavilion outside the township offices from 9-3:00 p.m. This
opportunity will be placed on the Township website, emailed to residents, and
advertised with Williamston Chamber and as a News Release in Enterprise.
·   The Township Hall meeting was a success, a great congregation for neighbors
meeting neighbors!
·   The District MTA Fall Regional Meeting will be held Monday, October 5,
2009, Radisson Hotel, Lansing beginning at 8:00 a.m. Township board members
should let Michelle (Supervisor Martin’s Assistant) know if they will attend by
September 14, 2009.
·   Lansing Community College, Financial Strategies meeting Monday September
21, 2009 from 8-4:00 p.m.
·   Capital Revenue Sharing—State Budget – public hearing—Wednesday, August 12,
2009 at 10:00 a.m. at the State Capitol room 426.
·   Mark Miller, Building Inspector for Williamstown Township will be leaving
as building inspector of the township effective September 1, 2009. Supervisor
Martin is searching for a replacement.
·   Sheriff’s Road Patrol—Human Resources Building, Jolly/Cedar, August 19th,
6:00 p.m. Discussion will be based on exact language for a millage proposal.
This language will be set by August 25, 2009.
MOTION by Trustee Hayes to allow the township to get an estimate of cost from
township attorney, to investigate a potential lawsuit against the State of
Michigan Ingham County Board of Commissioners for lack of safety services in
Williamstown Township.
SECONDED by Eyster
MOTION PASSED
Trustee Wilbrink shared NIESA has resources to set up its own Police Department
if needed.
Trustee Williams—Energy Alternative—shared he is still collecting bids for
solar and wind energy costs. He is very happy to hear about the possibility of
a $50,000 Energy Efficiency Conservation Block Grant.
Public Comment for Agenda & Non-Agenda Items
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 8:35 p.m.
Helen LeBlanc, 4727 Jadestone, expressed concern regarding the attorney
presently used by the Township and a possible conflict of interest by the
Township Clerk.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 8:37 p.m.
MOTION by Trustee Hayes to adjourn 8:38 p.m.
   MEETING ADJOURNED by Supervisor Martin at 8:38 p.m.
________________
Ernie Gaffner, Township Clerk
Williamstown Township
September 1, 2009
BOARD OF TRUSTEES MEETING
September 1, 2009
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the meeting agenda.
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
PRESENT BY ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Bob Hayes, Trustee Martin Wright, Trustee Frans Wilbrink,
Trustee Rick Williams, Treasurer Janet Eyster, Clerk Ernie Gaffner and
Supervisor Mickey Martin
Absent: None
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR AGENDA & NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:05 p.m.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:05 p.m.
INGHAM COUNTY SHERIFF report Sgt. Steve Sopocy—Sergeant Sopocy shared the
August 2009 Activity Report for Williamstown Township. Some information
included the number of complaints, traffic accidents, traffic citations and
number of patrol hours in the Township. There was also discussion of sheriff
cut backs. Sergeant Sopocy reminded everyone to look out for any suspicious
activity or vehicles in the area.
CONSENT AGENDA
Consent Agenda—Supervisor Martin read through the items on the Consent Agenda
consisting of:
            Minutes of August 4, 2009
                       Treasurer’s Report
            Building Inspector Report
            Accounts Payable – Paid
            Payroll – Paid
            Accounts Payable – Approval
            Revenue/Expenditure
Requested that minutes of August 4, 2009 be pulled.
MOTION by Clerk Gaffner to approve the consent agenda consisting of :
   Treasurer’s report for August, 2009
   Building Inspector’s Report for August, 2009
Accounts Payable Checks Paid 18127 and 18129-18153 for a total of $106,866.66
with check #18128 listed as void.
Payroll Paid Checks 40695 – 40728 for a total of $18,305.78.
   Accounts Payable Checks to approve 18154 - 18165 for a total of $4,087.23
   Revenue and Expenditure Report ending 8/31/09
SECONDED by Treasurer Eyster
MOTION PASSED
MOTION by Trustee Hayes to approve the minutes of 8/4/09 as amended.
Amendment: Trustee Hayes shared on Page 3, under Reports, Motion, should read:
Board of County Commissioners not State of Michigan.
SECONDED by Treasurer Eyster
MOTION PASSED 
Planning Commission
Planning Commission—Planning Commission representative, Michael Fielek,
commented on recent commission business as outlined in the submitted minutes of
August 18, 2009. The Planning Commission heard a presentation from Scott Miller
on brick use. Deliberated Article 2: unobstructed sight distance to 9’, home
based business and roof mount antennae. Adopted a resolution to repeal the
Michigan Wetland Protection Act, moved to create a resolution commending Mark
Miller, and canceled the Planning Commission, December, 2009 meeting in order
to save money.
Supervisor Martin stated there will be a joint meeting between the Williamstown
Township Board and the Planning Commission on Tuesday, September 15, 2009, at
6:30 p.m. at the Williamstown Township Hall. Tri-County Regional Planning
Commission will provide a presentation.
Unfinished Business
-None
New Business
Audit Report—Supervisor Martin shared this item will be postponed until the
meeting in October, 2009.
Beeman Rd/Petition—Supervisor Martin shared a petition submitted by residents
of Maple Shade Subdivision, Beeman Road and Sherwood Road. This petition is in
reference to 4494 Beeman Road (the blue house located on Sherwood Road and
Beeman Road on the SE corner). The complaint is that this home has been in
violation of Williamstown Township “Blight Ordinance” for over two years, is
uninhabited, a health hazard and is unsightly. This affects all those living in
the area and those residents who live within 500 feet would like to be notified
of any Township action, in response to their petition. It was recommended by
the Township Board that Supervisor Martin ask the Township attorney to review
this situation and see if the “Blight Ordinance” can be used to take action on
the property owners of 4494 Beeman Road, if their property is not brought up to
a habitable status. It was recommended this item return for further discussion
at the October, 2009, meeting.
Park Improvements—Ms. Bloomquist shared a proposal from the Parks and
Recreation Committee to put in place parking dividers to better organize the
parking lot at the Township park on Grand River. The Parks and Recreation
Committee would like to add a handicap area (in the South lot, along the South
and East side) that allows parking for the elderly & handicap (i.e.
grandparents to park and stay within their vehicle to watch the sporting event)
and mark this area with the handicap signs as well. It was suggested that
dividing posts be added as well. These would run East and West and consist of 4
X 6 inch posts located 8’ on center with 1" rope from post to post. This allows
maintenance and snow removal with little obstruction. It was recommended parks
and recreation stay consistent with the 4 x 6 posts. Approximate costs for the
4 x 6 posts is $1146.00 Plus $350.00 Rental of post hole digger or bobcat.
BOARD DISCUSSION
On several occasions the Township has rented an auger and will most likely need
one in the future. The board discussed whether or not an auger for the Township
tractor should be purchased in lieu of continuing the practice of renting and
auger.
MOTION by Trustee Wright that the Williamstown Township Board approve the Parks
& Recreation Committee’s request to install a parking area that includes a
handicap parking area at the Soccer/Baseball parking area of the Township park
on Grand River and include the purchase of a 3- point auger with a total cost
not to exceed $2500.00.
SECONDED by Trustee Williams
MOTION PASSED
Supervisor Martin thanked the Park and Recreation Department for the layout of
the proposal.
Asphalt for Cemetery- Supervisor Martin shared a quote from One Way Asphalt
Paving and Excavating, Inc. The quote included cost for Area 1 ($3,690) and
Area 2 ($3,290).
Discussion: There was concern that the current sub-base may not be sufficient.
Supervisor Martin will relay this concern to One-Way Paving and Excavating,
Inc. to make sure the current sub-base is sufficient. The board agreed that
2.5” of 1100 wearing course asphalt was sufficient for this area, so long as
the sub-base is sufficient.
MOTION by Trustee Wright that the Williamstown Township Board approve the
proposal by One-Way Asphalt Paving to repair and surface with asphalt the area
described in their 7/21/09 proposal for Summit Cemetery at a cost of $3,690.
SECONDED by Treasurer Eyster
MOTION PASSED
Mossholder Consent Agreement—Supervisor Martin shared a letter from Blake
Mossholder stating that Vertical Solution Company is occupying Suite A of his
building located at 1440 E. Grand River, for warehousing and distribution of
their commercial elevator components. Mr. Mossholder stated that Vertical
Solutions is an excellent and proper use for this property zoned I-1 Light
Industrial District. Mr. Mossholder brought a court order dated June 17, 2009,
by Judge Giddings. Mr. Mossholder requested the consent judgment of 12/18/2006
be modified to include the Vertical Solutions business as one of the permitted
uses for the property under the current I-1 zoning.
Discussion: A few Township board members had questions regarding Mr.
Mossholder’s compliance with all areas of the consent judgment but agreed to
limit discussion to the area occupied by Vertical Solutions. Mr. Mossholder
asked Township to not contact his tenants. Trustee Wright recommended the
following: the Township board should move on the issue pertaining to the
occupancy of Vertical Solutions and address other areas of Mr. Mossholder’s
compliance with the consent judgment of 12/18/2006 at a later board meeting.
MOTION by Treasurer Eyster that Suite A, as identified in the consent judgment
be approved for the allowable uses under the current I-1 Light Industrial
Zoning to include automobile sales offices or Vertical Solutions.
SECONDED by Trustee Wilbrink
MOTION PASSED
Reports
Departments & Committees
Ms. Wanda Bloomquist shared that the Trailways Grant is in for review today for
final recommendations, requesting funds to assist in providing a path for
people to go between the City of Williamston and the Meridian Mall. MDOT has
estimated a cost of $450,000 to add an 8 ft addition on the north and south
side of Grand River road from Meridian to Zimmer. The Townships cost will be
approximately 35% of the total cost. MDOT will formally submit the application
for the state’s review. Ms. Bloomquist will keep the Township board posted on
the progress.
Discussion:  There were mixed emotions among board members regarding the
Trailways Grant and the 35% fund match. With MDOT being a partner it would be
within the townships means to fund the project, without MDOT the township would
not be able to fund the project. The proposal was supported by treasurer
Eyster, who indicated this opportunity will not be available for another 20
years. Trustee Hayes expressed concern about the expense, knowing the Township
will face future budget issues, including that of providing public safety.
Trustee Wilbrink supported seeking the grant. Clerk Gaffner believes this is a
safety issue for non-motorized transportation and needs to be addressed by the
board. It was the consensus of the board that these and other items will
require prioritization.
Trustee Williams shared he will have two separate bids to consider for lighting
and possible conversion from electrical to wind power: Hartland Electric and
Tony Zura will provide bids.
Trustee Wilbrink shared NIESA will meet Thursday, September 3, 2009, at 7pm to
discuss their budget.
Supervisor Martin shared the following:
1.   Williamstown Township has a new building inspector, Bob Delaney. Mr.
Delaney comes to the township with much experience including code enforcement.
His regular office hours will be from 5-7pm on Wednesday evenings.
2.   Supervisor Martin is checking prices on the cost of electrical and
plumbing permits handled by AGS mechanical. Using a third party vendor would
give residents speedier inspections.
3.   Supervisor Martin is checking with Legal counsel ($1000 cap), on the legal
requirements of the County Board of Commissioners to fund safety services for
Williamstown Township residents.
4.   Supervisor Martin shared Article 2 will be brought back for further
discussion at the October, 2009, Township board meeting.
Trustee Hayes clarified that his son, Robert M. Hayes Esquire, is employed by
the attorney handling Township legal matters but his son’s employment has
nothing to do with him as a trustee and is not a conflict of interest.
Supervisor Martin confirmed an attorney’s opinion to support Trustee Hayes
statement. Clerk Gaffner will research the opinion given in recent years by the
Township attorney, related to the “conflict of interest” issue.
Public Comment for Agenda & Non-Agenda Items
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 9:20 p.m.
Rod Imhoff, 2380 Wilgus Road, shared a concern with the board’s motion to
approve asphalt paving at the Summit Cemetery, he stated that crushed asphalt
is much cheaper with no yearly maintenance cost.
Ruth Templeton, 1435 Epley Road, shared comments in reference to Mossholder
Consent Agreement, township permits and right-of-way issues.
Wanda Bloomquist, 375 Turner, after hearing the Sheriffs report, in light of
what is happening, the township may want to consider neighborhood watch to
members of the community.
Roger Philip, 5350 Barton Road, shared he has concerns about a conflict of
interest.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 9:24 p.m.
Review
Adjourn
MOTION by Trustee Hayes to adjourn 9:25 p.m.
   MEETING ADJOURNED by Supervisor Martin at 9:25 p.m.
________________
Ernie Gaffner
Township Clerk
September 15th, 2009
Joint Planning Commission and Board Meeting
Tuesday 6:30 September 15th, 2009
Williamstown Township
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees and Planning Commission Members
convened at 6:30 p.m. at the Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer
Road, Williamston, Michigan.
Introduction Harmony Gmazel
Supervisor Martin introduced Williamstown Township Planning Assistant, Wanda
Bloomquist, who in turn introduced Harmony Gmazel, Land Use Planner for Tri-
County Regional Planning Commission. Planning Assistant Bloomquist shared Ms.
Gmazel will present information for a Tri-County Urban Service Management Study
and a Resolution of Support for the Tri-County Regional Urban/Rural Service
District/Boundary Committee and the Pursuit of the 2009 LIAA Partnerships for
Change: Sustainable Communities Grant.
Presentation Tri-County
Harmony Gmazel provided information on a Tri-County Urban Service Management
Study. The goal is to establish visions and goals, and setting new policy to
achieve those goals. Looking at process, district and boundary lines,
collaboration among members, sustaining a binding trust, empowerment created by
constructive involvement of many communities.
New growth in the region will be planned for mature corridors which connect
regional centers where transit ridership potential is highest. The majority of
new development is expected to be focused in areas where public water and sewer
systems are available and it is anticipated there will be more investment in
quality of life/livability factors, such as sidewalks, landscaping and
preservation of the tree canopy.
Harmony Gmazel provided information on the Resolution of Support for the Tri-
County Regional Urban/Rural Service District/Boundary Committee and the Pursuit
of the 2009 LIAA Partnerships for Change: Sustainable Communities Grant. This
grant would save taxpayers between 1.6 and 4.8 billion dollars in road
improvement costs, save agricultural land and open space, reduce air
pollutants, improve health, improve the economic competitiveness, including
urban development opportunities and increase global economy.
Questions and Answers
There were several questions that were fielded by Ms. Gmazel. There was a
feeling of support for this initiative among the Planning Commission and
Williamstown Township Board Members who were present.
   MEETING ADJOURNED by Supervisor Martin at 7:32 p.m.
________________
Ernie Gaffner
Township Clerk
October 6, 2009
BOARD OF TRUSTEES MEETING
October 6, 2009
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 8:30 a.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the agenda
consisting of one item; Resolution #85
PRESENT BY ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Martin Wright, Trustee Bob Hayes, Treasurer Janet Eyster,
Clerk Ernie Gaffner and Supervisor Mickey Martin
Absent: Trustee Rick Williams and Trustee Frans Wilbrink
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
DISCUSSION lead by Supervisor Martin of considering Resolution #85 – Resolution
of Support for the Tri-County Regional Urban/Rural Service District/Boundary
Committee
and the Pursuit of the 2009 LIAA Partnerships for Change Sustainable
Communities Grant. It was agreed that the information provided by Harmony
Gmazel, Land Use Planner for Tri-County Regional Planning Commission at the
September 15, 2009 joint meeting with the Planning Commission was consistent
with Township ideology and it was in the best interest to support Resolution
#85.
MOVED BY Trustee Wright to adopt Resolution #85 – “Resolution of Support for
the Tri-County Regional Urban/Rural Service District/Boundary Committee
and the Pursuit of the 2009 LIAA Partnerships for Change Sustainable
Communities Grant.”
SECONDED by Treasurer Eyster
Roll Call Vote: Yeas: Trustee Martin Wright, Supervisor Mickey Martin,
Treasurer
       Janet Eyster, Trustee Bob Hayes and Clerk Ernie Gaffner
Nays: 0
Absent: Trustee Frans Wilbrink and Trustee Rick Williams
MOTION PASSED
MOTION by Trustee Hayes, supported by Supervisor Martin to adjourn 8:43 a.m.
___________________________
Ernie Gaffner,
Township Clerk
October 20, 2009
BOARD OF TRUSTEES MEETING
October 20, 2009
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 5:30 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the meeting agenda.
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
PRESENT BY ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Bob Hayes, Trustee Martin Wright, Trustee Frans Wilbrink,
Treasurer Janet Eyster, Clerk Ernie Gaffner and Supervisor Mickey Martin
Absent: Trustee Rick Williams
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR AGENDA & NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 5:34 p.m.
Wendell Proudfoot, 5380 Barton Road, shared he feels the Board is doing a great
job and appreciates all the Board does for the township.
Supervisor Martin thanked Wanda Bloomquist for the work completed at
Williamstown Township Park. All the posts are in along with 1” heavy duty boat
rope.
Ron Imhoff, 2083 Wilgus Road, would like the Township to honor Rutgar Hoag for
his 20 years of public service. Supervisor Martin shared we will talk about
this item during appointments.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 5:40 p.m.
Grant
Supervisor Martin shared Treasurer Eyster worked tirelessly on the $50,000
Energy Conservation Grant. The Township will have an energy audit completed and
plans to include recommendations from the energy audit in the proposal of the
Energy Conservation Grant. Other items to include in the proposal is reduced
electrical consumption inside township building and exterior parking lot,
reduction in heating water using point of source unit. The Township will hire
consultants to assist with changes to the Township Zoning and Master Plan. The
objective is to show the Township is taking care of themselves while promoting
energy conservation in the Township. The $50,000 grant is designed to reduce
fossil fuel emissions, reduce total energy use, improve energy efficiency in
the transportation, building, and other appropriate sectors; and create and
retain jobs. Supervisor Martin and Treasurer Eyster are designated authorize to
execute such assurances, certifications and other documentation as may be
required in the EECBG Program application by the US Department of Energy. If
Township board members have any ideas for inclusion in the proposal, contact
Treasurer Eyster.
MOTION by Trustee Martin to move that the Williamstown Township Board approve
adoption of Resolution #86, Authorizing Submission of the Energy Efficiency &
Conservation Block.
SECONDED by Eyster
      ROLL CALL Vote: Ayes 6 Janet Eyster, Mickey Martin, Ernie Gaffner, Frans
Wilbrink
                                 Robert Hayes    Martin Wright
             Nays:0   
Motion passed.
Planning Commission Appointments
Supervisor Martin shared the three year terms for Rutgar Hoag, Ron Cook, and
Michael Fielek have expired. Michael Fielek and Ron Cook stated they would like
to continue to serve. Dali Giese has applied to become a member.
MOTION by Supervisor Martin, to move that the Williamstown Township Board
approve the appointment of Michael Fielek, Ron Cook and Dali Giese to the
Williamstown Township Planning Commission.
SECONDED by Trustee Wright
MOTION PASSED
Equipment Purchase—Supervisor Martin shared information that Wanda Bloomquist
provided on Equipment Purchase. The document camera would be used to review
site plans and zoning ordinances on a projector screen for all to view. The
document camera allows you to write and make changes to document as it is
discussed. The items for consideration are: Epson 83+ Powerlite Projector, 2200
Lumens (approx $799); Buhl Industries Square Format Projector Screen model WS-
W70 ($139); and Avermedia Aversion 300 AF Document Camera ($644).
MOTION by Trustee Wilbrink to move that the Williamstown Township Board approve
the purchase of an Epson 83+ Powerlite Projector, 2200 Lumens (approx $799);
Avermedia Aversion 300 AF Document Camera ($644) and Buhl Industries Square
Format Manual Projector Screen model WS-W70 ($139).
SECONDED BY Trustee Wright
MOTION PASSED
Article 1--Omnibus Zoning Amendments—Zeb Acuff of McKenna Associates, Inc.
provided the Planning Commission with the proposed changes to the Omnibus
Zoning Amendments.
·   Page 8.02
   o   Kennels—Supervisor Martin would like to see non-commercial dogs for
personal use-suggest strike out “E”. Talking about 3 dogs—prefer not to have a
blanket statement—this item needs to be clearer 3 dogs or 3 cats.
   o   Item “B” needs to include/mention the word litter—no more that 6 animals
under the age of 6 months (litter of pups or batch of kittens).
   o   Section 1.03, Page 2 of 4—Kennels prohibited in subdivision—Commercial
Kennels—boarding and breeding to match what they define.
   o   Page 1-2—G Massage Parlor or establishment—No definition for Massage
Therapist, so this definition needs to be added
   o   Page 1-4 Buildings Permanent definition—Supervisor Martin would like to
have building permanently fixed—people requesting and buying buildings with
roof and metal sides/posts. These buildings are sold as portable buildings. For
assessing purposes these are considered permanent so Supervisor Martin would
like to see this item as anchored or permitted to exist for a definite period
of time. Greater than six months would be permanent.
   o   Page 1-9 Exception—this might get changed when we get to Article II.
More to come
   o   Page 1-10 and 1-11 Homebased business and home occupation—definitions
need to be consistent with that in Article II. Supervisor Martin would like to
change definition to match the definition in Article II.
   o   Page 1-16 Supervisor Martin shared we have a definition for nursing
home, but we need a definition for assisted living and dependent living—these
are facilities different than a nursing home
   o   Page 1-22 Wetland ordinance—Supervisor Martin recommended this be
changed to match the definition in our wetland ordinance that just passed.
(Hydric soils have to be included in this before the DEQ will recognize as
legitimate so Supervisor appreciates this being added to the definition.)
Supervisor Martin shared the Township will work on these recommended changes
with the Township consultants and bring a revised document back to the November
meeting.
Article II of Zoning Ordinance
Supervisor Martin shared a May 27, 2009 red-lined version of Article II of the
Township Zoning Ordinance from McKenna & Associates Planning Consultants for
review:
   o   Page 2-4-Setbacks for accessory buildings—Large lot residential
districts—It was recommended to list districts here or take it out. Next
sentence RR or RE? Change 2500 sq ft to 1500 sq ft. Item iii—stake survey—add
preapproved for inspection by building inspector—building inspector must do an
inspection prior to issuing permit. Will then determine if stake survey needed.
   o   Page 2-8 Standards for home occupations--#2 any person not a resident
(resident occupant to be involved in home based business). Would like to see
immediate family or immediate relative allowed/added as an allowable member to
the family business. Also will need to define immediate relative.
   o   Home based business—Supervisor Martin would like this left in tact—Don’t
exceed regulations (one full time equivalent, non-resident, non-family
employee)
   o   Renters—should be home owner only, no more than one sign—eliminate
number of signs – No signs allowed without a permit—Supervisor Martin feels
only one sign per household should be allowed.
   o   Occupants—don’t have to own? Rentals? Concern is that renters do not
have as much invested in area as homeowner. It is felt if occupants are
following rules it is okay.
   o   Page 2-12—On obstructive site distance—Cannot put wall or structure in
set back—feels this whole section needs to be taken out, it contradicts areas
of the whole ordinance. STRIKE OUT
   o   Plantings—cannot be enforced. Private property—Planning Commission would
like to keep this as it is a safety precaution. There was disagreement with
this item. Township will pick up topic at next meeting.
Supervisor Martin shared the Township will work on these recommended changes
with the Township consultants and bring a revised document back to the November
meeting.
Public Comment for Agenda & Non-Agenda Items
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:16 p.m.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:16 p.m.
Review
Adjourn
MOTION by Supervisor Martin to adjourn 7:17 p.m.
   MEETING ADJOURNED by Supervisor Martin at 7:17 p.m.
________________
Ernie Gaffner
Township Clerk
November 10, 2009
BOARD OF TRUSTEES MEETING
November 10, 2009
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the meeting agenda.
New Business
MOTION by Trustee Wilbrink to add to the agenda, discussion of passing a
resolution in support of a Gaming License for a local 501C3 (not for profit)
corporation.
SECONDED by Clerk Gaffner
MOTION APPROVED
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
PRESENT BY ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Bob Hayes, Trustee Martin Wright, Trustee Frans Wilbrink,
Treasurer Janet Eyster, Clerk Ernie Gaffner and Supervisor Mickey Martin
Absent: Treasurer Eyster and Trustee Rick Williams
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR AGENDA & NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:02 p.m.
Al LeBlanc, 4727 Jadestone, commented on the Township financial policy.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:03 p.m.
INGHAM COUNTY SHERIFF report Sgt. Steve Sopocy—Sergeant Sopocy dropped off, at
the township, an October 2009 Activity Report for Williamstown Township. Some
information included the number of complaints, traffic accidents, traffic
citations and number of patrol hours in the Township.
CONSENT AGENDA
Consent Agenda—Supervisor Martin read through the items on the Consent Agenda
consisting of:
            Minutes of October 6 and October 20, 2009
Reports         Treasurer’s Report, October 2009
            Building Inspector, October 2009
            Accounts Payable – Paid
            Payroll – Paid
            Accounts Payable – Approval
            Revenue/Expenditure
MOTION by Clerk Gaffner to approve the consent agenda consisting of:
   Minutes of October 6 and October 20, 2009
Treasurer’s report for October 2009
   Building Inspector’s Report for October 2009
Accounts Payable Checks Paid 18215-18216 &18218-18251 for a total of $15,988.05
with check #18217 listed as void.
Payroll Paid Checks 40760-40788 for a total of $17,627.20.
   Accounts Payable Checks to approve 18252-18281 for a total of $11,886.66
   Revenue and Expenditure Report ending 10/31/09
SECONDED by Trustee Hayes
MOTION PASSED
Planning Commission-- Planning Commission representative, Michael Fielek,
commented on recent commission business as outlined in the submitted minutes of
October 20, 2009. Chairman Fielek shared Dali Giese is an excellent addition to
the Planning Commission. Topics under discussion included review of the zoning
ordinance articles 6 and 7 and comments were received on article 1 and 2.
Continue to discuss Grand River Green Zone, reviewed recommendations for brick
industry and how changes would fit into the zoning ordinance. An Educational
Open House will be held at MSU’s Cyclotron and Bio Building. Contact Chairman
Fielek for additional information on the Educational Open House.
Unfinished Business
AGS Inspection Agreement—Supervisor Martin shared, for a second time,
information to enter into an agreement with Associated Government Services,
Inc. (AGS) that will allow the township to provide electrical mechanical and
plumbing inspections in-house. There are several items that need to be done
before an approval is granted.
Pass a resolution—designating building inspection officials #87(see attachment)
Pass an ordinance-- #47 A Construction Codes Ordinance (see attachment)
Application – give Mickey authority to fill out and send in
Agreement that Supervisor Martin will sign
Board of Construction Appeals—will need a board member that is certified in
plumbing, electrical and mechanical.
Fee Schedule needs to be passed
Trustee Hayes would like the agreement reviewed by the Township attorneys
before consideration is approved.
MOTION by Trustee Wright to approve entering into an agreement with Associated
Government Services, Inc. (AGS) as presented for electrical, and plumbing
mechanical, after review of agreement with township attorney and to adopt the
fee schedule presented plus a ten (10%) percent increase to cover township
costs.
SECONDED by Trustee Hayes
MOTION APPROVED
MOTION by Trustee Wright moved that the Williamstown Township Board approve
adoption of Construction Codes Ordinance #47 under the provisions of the
Stille-DeRossett-Hale Single State Construction Code Act, 1972 PA 230.
SECONDED by Clerk Gaffner
   ROLL CALL Vote: Ayes 5    Ernie Gaffner   Frans Wilbrink    Nays: 0   Motion
approved.
                      Robert Hayes   Martin Wright
                       Mickey Martin
RESOLUTION #87
MOTION by Trustee Wright to approve a resolution to designate the Building,
Electrical, Mechanical and Plumbing Officials of Williamstown Township, in
compliance with adopted ordinance #47.
SECONDED by Clerk Gaffner
   ROLL CALL Vote: Ayes 5    Ernie Gaffner   Frans Wilbrink    Nays: 0   Motion
approved.
                      Robert Hayes   Martin Wright
                 Mickey Martin             
Budget 2010-11—Supervisor Martin shared the Township is over budget for 2010-11
and seeks input from township board members. Supervisor Martin would like all
the board members to go through each line item and make sure the numbers
allotted are adequate. Any changes board members feel need to be made should be
in writing and back in her hands by Friday, November 13, 2009. This will allow
for discussion at the December 1, 2009, board meeting.
Discussion: Trustee Wilbrink feels the election numbers are low. Ernie will
follow up with this concern. Trustee Hayes is concerned about Road Patrol for
the Township. Supervisor Martin ensured Township Board members that the Road
Patrol will be maintained until January of 2011. Supervisor Martin plans to
maintain the $30,000 in the budget for public works/road improvements. The
Township will wait to hear if funds for the Grand River expansion will be
awarded before plans for a match are allocated in the budget. Maintenance of
drains allocation will remain at $10,000.
Supervisor Martin shared board members should be prepared to discuss this
further at the December 1, 2009, board meeting.
Resolution for Gaming License (501C3)—Supervisor Martin shared Williamstown
Township will need to pass Resolution #88 so that the Williamston Suns baseball
team can obtain a gaming license from the State of Michigan. The use of the
license would be allowed twice per year. The Gaming License is valid for two 3-
day sessions only. The Township is in favor of this activity but would like
those participants to keep their tournaments local; this will help support our
local economy.
Derek Gauss, baseball team sponsor, shared a Texas Holdem tournament would
allow the Williamston Suns to defray costs for tournament fees, uniforms,
equipment, umpire fees, and fields. The monies would go toward expenditures for
a youth baseball team.
MOTION by Trustee Wright to approve Resolution #88, as requested by the
Williamston Suns of Williamston, County of Ingham, asking that they be
recognized as a nonprofit organization operating in the community for the
purpose of obtaining a charitable gaming license.
SECONDED by Clerk Gaffner
   ROLL CALL Vote: Ayes 5    Ernie Gaffner   Frans Wilbrink    Nays: 0   
                      Robert Hayes   Martin Wright
                 Mickey Martin
Motion approved.- copy of resolution attached
ZBA Appointment—Supervisor Martin recommends Mark Miller be appointed to the
Zoning Board of Appeals.
MOTION by Trustee Hayes to approve that Williamstown Township Board approve the
appointment of Mark Miller to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
SECONDED by Clerk Gaffner
MOTION APPROVED
Reports
Departments & Committees
Clerk Gaffner shared the Williamstown Township Newsletter highlights data on
the November election and encourages the township board and members of the
township to read this publication.
Treasurer Eyster shared the Energy Conservation Grant was submitted and the
township is awaiting approval.
Supervisor Martin along with Clerk Gaffner and Treasurer Eyster attended the
Road Commission Chapter Meeting. She was impressed with cost saving measures by
the Road Commission. They will do more work in-house, rather than contract out.
Overtime will be eliminated. During snow storms they will focus on primary
roads then local roads. Their day will end at 4pm. They will cut down on the
amount of salt used/mix with sand, will not fill vacancies as attrition.
Supervisor Martin shared she attended a Meridian Township Meeting with
Treasurer Eyster—there was a lot of encouragement and talk about the Grand
River corridor and mass transit system.
Supervisor Martin shared the Township Board will meet next week, Tuesday,
November 17 to finish discussion of Articles 1 and 2. Township Board members
should plan to convene at 5:30 p.m.
Supervisor Martin shared that the new director of CADL (Capital Area District
Library), Lance Warner, would like to meet with the board at a workshop
meeting, sometime next year.
Public Comment for Agenda & Non-Agenda Items
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 8:02 p.m.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 8:02 p.m.
Review
Supervisor Martin provided the board with a review of tonight’s meeting.
Adjourn
MOTION by Trustee Wright to adjourn 8:05 p.m.
   MEETING ADJOURNED by Supervisor Martin at 8:05 p.m.
________________
Ernie Gaffner
Township Clerk
CONSTRUCTION CODES ORDINANCE
STATE CODE
Ordinance Number #47
An ordinance to designate an enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility
of the WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP located in INGHAM County, under the provisions of
the Stille-DeRossett-HaIe Single State Construction Code Act, 1972 PA 230.
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP ordains:
Section 1. AGENCY DESIGNATED. Pursuant to the provisions of the Michigan
Building, Electrical, Mechanical and Plumbing Codes, in accordance with Section
8b(6) of 1972 PA 230, the Building, Electrical, Mechanical, and Plumbing Code
Officials of the WILLLAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP are hereby designated as the enforcing
agency to discharge the responsibility of the WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP under 1972
PA 230, State of Michigan.
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP assumes responsibility for the administration and
enforcement of said Act throughout its corporate limits.
Section 2. REPEALS. All ordinances inconsistent with the provisions of this
ordinance are hereby repealed.
Section 3. PUBLICATION. This ordinance shall be effective after legal
publication and in accordance with provisions of the Act governing same.
Adopted this 10th day of November, 2009.
This ordinance duly adopted on November 10, 2009 at a regular meeting of the
TOWNSHIP and will become effective January 1, 2010.
Date: November 10, 2009.
Signed: ________________________________________ Ernie Gaffner - Township Clerk
Attested: _________________________________________ Mickey Martin – Township
Supervisor
LOCAL GOVERNING BODY RESOLUTION FOR CHARITABLE GAMING LICENSES
(Required by MCL.432.103(K)(ii))
At a regular meeting of the Williamstown Township Board called to order by
Supervisor Mickey Martin on November 10, 2009 at 7:00 p.m. the following
resolution was offered:
Moved by Trustee Martin Wright and supported by Clerk Ernie Gaffner
that the request from Williamston Suns of Williamston, County of Ingham, asking
that they be recognized as a nonprofit organization operating in the community
for
the purpose of obtaining charitable gaming licenses, be considered for
approval.   
           
                                                                             APPROVAL                           DISAPPROVAL
   Yeas: 5      Yeas:
   Nays: 0    Nays:
   Absent: 2    Absent:
I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true and complete copy of Williamstown
Township resolution #88 offered and adopted by Williamstown Township at a
regular meeting held on November 10, 2009.
SIGNED: ____________________________________
Ernie Gaffner, Williamstown Township Clerk
4990 N. Zimmer Road
Williamston, MI 48895
                                                                     
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP BOARD OF TRUSTEES
RESOLUTION #88
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP BOARD OF TRUSTEES
RESOLUTION #87
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP
A resolution to designate the Building, Electrical, Mechanical and Plumbing
Officials of the WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP, Michigan;
WHEREAS, the WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP adopted Ordinance No. 47
to designate an enforcing agency to discharge the responsibilities of
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP under the provisions of the State Construction Code Act,
1972 PA 230; and
WHEREAS, the WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP has designated the Code Officials as the
enforcing agency to discharge the responsibilities of the WTLLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP
under 1972 PA 230; and
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED AS FOLLOWS:
That Robert Delaney (building official) Bert Gale (electrical official) and
Henry Howard (mechanical & plumbing official) are designated the Code Officials
for the WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP charged with the duty of ensuring the issuance of
all permits, overseeing all inspections, and keeping a record of all activities
as part of the permanent records of the WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP and discharging
the responsibilities of the enforcing agency for the WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP
under the provisions of the Michigan Construction Codes in accordance with 1972
PA 230.
Moved by Trustee Wright
Supported by Clerk Gaffner
ADOPTED: Yeas: Trustee Martin Wright, Supervisor Mickey Martin,
Trustee Bob Hayes, Trustee Frans Wilbrink and Clerk Ernie Gaffner
Nays: 0
Absent: Treasurer Janet Eyster and Trustee Rick Williams
CLERKS CERTIFICATION: I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true and
complete copy of a Resolution adopted by the Williamstown Township Board at
its’ regular meeting held on 11/10/2009, the original of which is part of the
Township Board’s minutes.
                              
Ernest W. Gaffner, Township Clerk
November 17, 2009
BOARD OF TRUSTEES MEETING
November 17, 2009
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 5:30 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the meeting agenda.
PRESENT BY ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Bob Hayes, Trustee Martin Wright, Trustee Frans Wilbrink,
Treasurer Janet Eyster, Clerk Ernie Gaffner and Supervisor Mickey Martin
Absent: Trustee Rick Williams
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR AGENDA & NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 5:30 p.m.
Al LeBlanc, 4727 Jadestone, expressed his concerns regarding proposed changes
to the Financial Administration Policy.
Helen LeBlanc, 4727 Jadestone, shared the same feelings as Mr. LeBlanc, that
the supervisor should not give permission to allow the deputy treasurer and
deputy clerk to sign checks.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 5:35 p.m.
Financial Policy—Treasurer Eyster
Section 1, Item 1.3—Imprest Cash--Treasurer Eyster shared 2 types of cash
drawers: imprest cash change fund ($200) other counter fund ($20.). Treasurer
Eyster is recommending the counter fund be raised to ($30.) and the trigger for
replenishing be set at ($15.).
Section 1, 1.6 (b) Property Tax Receipts – Treasurer Eyster shared a paragraph
has been added: the Township has arranged with Independent Bank (Williamston
Branch only), to accept tax payments. If someone comes to the Township office
and finds it closed, they can go down to Independent Bank and pay their tax
bill. There is no cost to the township. Independent Bank will deposit the
payment directly into the Township’s tax account with the original bill—this
original bill along with a receipt will then be given to the Township. Trustee
Wright recommended the Township place a sign on Township doors to this affect.
Treasurer Eyster also noted this option will be placed on resident tax bills,
the Township website, the Township newsletter, and as a phone message.
Section 3, Item 3.5—Authorized Check Signers—Treasurer Eyster suggested a
revision to this policy—#3. Permitting the signing of a check by both the
appointed Deputy Treasurer and Deputy Clerk, when neither the elected Treasurer
nor Clerk are available, if they receive oral or written e-mail permission from
the Treasurer, Clerk or Supervisor.
Discussion: Several Township Board members shared comments to the revision in
Section 3, 3.5.3. There were pros and cons voiced, but the majority feels some
flexibility in emergency situations is warranted and this is therefore
acceptable.
Section 6, Item 6.2—Login and Access Requests—Supervisor Treasurer Eyster
shared the current software does not stop or disable the account after three
attempts to sign in, therefore, it is recommended this paragraph be removed/
stricken from this section.
MOTION by Trustee Wright that the Williamstown Township Board approve adoption
of the revisions to the Williamstown Township Financial Policy showing the
revision date of November 17, 2009.
SECONDED by Trustee Hayes
MOTION APPROVED
Article II of Zoning Ordinance
Supervisor Martin shared a May 27, 2009 red-lined version of Article II of the
Township Zoning Ordinance from McKenna & Associates Planning Consultants for
review:
o   Page 2-4-Article 2 Setbacks , Item b— Side Yard Setbacks in Large Lot
Residential Districts—Supervisor Martin is not sure what is meant by this? It
was recommended to list districts here or take districts out. Change 2400 sq ft
to 1500 sq ft. Item iii— Stake Survey —add accessory building—inspection must
be preapproved by building inspector prior to adding the structure—the building
inspector will then determine if a stake survey is needed.
o   Page 2-8, Section 2.06 Home   Occupations and Home Based Business —Section
C.2 Standards  for Home Occupations —Supervisor Martin would like to see
immediate family or immediate relative allowed/added as an allowable member to
the family business. Will need to define immediate relative.
o   Page 2-8, Section 2.06 Home Occupations and Home Based Business —Section
D.1— Standards for Home-Based Businesses --Supervisor Martin would like the
red-lined strike to be left in tact—Don’t exceed regulations (one full time
equivalent, non-resident, non-family employee)
o   D.2--Renters—should be home owner only, no more than one sign—eliminate
number of signs – No signs allowed without a permit—Supervisor Martin feels
only one sign per household should be allowed.
o   D.2--Occupants—don’t have to own? Rentals? Concern is that renters do not
have as much invested as a homeowner. The board consensus is of the mind set if
occupants are following rules they have the same rights as a homeowner.
o   Page 2-12—Section 2.09 Yard and Bulk Regulations —Item 4. Unobstructed
Sight Distance --Cannot put wall or structure in set back—Supervisor Martin
feels this whole section needs to be taken out as it contradicts areas of the
whole ordinance. STRIKE OUT (this section will be left in Subdivision Control
Ordinance)
o   Plantings—Supervisor Martin shared this cannot be enforced--private
property—no judge will allow us to cut down plantings. Planning Commission
would like to keep this as it is a safety precaution. There was disagreement
with this item. Township will pick up topic at next meeting.
o   Page 2-13, Article 2, Table 2.1—looked for definition of court yard,
interior side yard and street side yard. It was recommended the following
definitions be added: court yard, interior side yard, air conditioning
equipment shelter, laundry drying equipment, clothes line, paved terraces, open
porches, encroachment and LED.
o   2-16, Section 2.10 Streets, Roads and Other Means of Access —D.1 Minimum
Driveway Setbacks --10 ft unless specified otherwise… need to add PUDs
o   2-17 D.6 Vertical Clearance —driveways and roads for commercial use needed
for emergency and fire dept access shall maintain a minimum vertical clearance
of 5 feet rather than 13.5 feet.
o   2-19 Section 2.11 Grading Regulations , Section B, Grading Plan , Item 1.
Grading Plan-….or may be submitted as a separate plan. (Strike this) and add:
grading plans shall be prepared and planned by a land surveyor or civil
engineer. It is recommended this is done ahead by self or in conjunction with a
site plan. It was also recommended an electronic version of grading plan be
submitted with written grading plan.
o   2-19 Section 2.11 Grading Regulations , Section C. Grading Standards ,
Section 2 . Runoff Onto Adjacent Properties —Supervisor Martin shared Run off
on adjacent property should not exceed the current 10% run off with no increase
on neighbor. STRIKE THIS; DO NOT WANT TO HAVE TO REQUIRE A BUILDIG INSPECTOR.
o   Page 2-20 Section 2.12 Lighting , A. Intent —Trustee Wilbrink, would like
added to the last sentence in the paragraph -- Use of energy efficient lighting
(LED).
o   2-28 Section 2.14 Junkyards and Landfills,--Supervisor Martin would like to
strike the added language in blue. This language is included with Private
Property and falls under the Blight Ordinance. It is recommended more research
be done on this topic.
o   2-32 Section 2.16 Exceptions , B. Exceptions to Height Standards
—Supervisor Martin shared there is a whole section dedicated to Height
Standards and wants to make sure this is consistent with those sections for
clarity (i.e., add windmill and list towers)
o   2-34 Section 2.18 Performance Guarantee —B. General Requirements
—Supervisor Martin would like to add in B.1 something about insurance bond,
needs to say cannot have expiration date.
o   2-35 Section 2.19— Trash Removal and Collection —A.3 Screening, the last
sentence—Supervisor Martin would like the last sentence Stricken/Removed.
Supervisor Martin shared the Township will work on these recommended changes
with the Township consultants and bring a revised document back to the December
2009 meeting.
Public Comment for Agenda & Non-Agenda Items
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 6:35 p.m.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 6:35 p.m.
Adjourn
MOTION by Trustee Wright to adjourn 6:35 p.m.
   MEETING ADJOURNED by Supervisor Martin at 6:35 p.m.
________________
Ernie Gaffner
Township Clerk
December 1, 2009
BOARD OF TRUSTEES MEETING
December 1, 2009
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the meeting agenda.
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
PRESENT BY ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Bob Hayes, Trustee Martin Wright, Trustee Frans Wilbrink,
Treasurer Janet Eyster, Clerk Ernie Gaffner and Supervisor Mickey Martin
Absent: Trustee Rick Williams
MOTION by Clerk Gaffner to add Budget Amendment, as an agenda item, before the
Consent Agenda.
SECONDED by Trustee Wright
MOTION APPROVED
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR AGENDA & NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:05 p.m.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:05 p.m.
INGHAM COUNTY SHERIFF report Sgt. Steve Sopocy—Sergeant Sopocy shared a
November 2009 Activity Report for Williamstown Township. Some information
included the number of complaints, traffic accidents, traffic citations and
number of patrol hours in the Township. Sergeant Sopocy reminded everyone,
during this time of year, to be a little more cautious while we drive and pay
close attention to what is going on in our neighborhoods.
Supervisor Martin shared Officer Rutherford will be coming to Williamstown
Township in January 2010 to talk about Neighborhood Watch. Supervisor Martin is
working to get neighborhood representation at this meeting.
Budget Amendment—Supervisor Martin shared Trustee Wilbrink was not added to the
Life Insurance Policy along with the six other board members, creating a
shortage of funds in the insurance budget. In order to correct this, the
township board must approve a budget amendment for the 2009-2010 budget in the
amount of $377.
MOTION by Janet Eyster to move that Williamstown Township Board approve the
2009-2010 budget amendment amount for line item 101-851-714 (Life Insurance) by
adding $377 from contingency fund 101-890-965.
SECONDED by Trustee Wright
MOTION APPROVED
CONSENT AGENDA
Consent Agenda—Supervisor Martin read through the items on the Consent Agenda
consisting of:
            Minutes of November 10 and November 17, 2009
Reports         Treasurer’s Report, November 2009
         Building Inspector, November 2009
         Accounts Payable – Paid
         Payroll – Paid
         Accounts Payable – Approval
         Revenue/Expenditure
It was recommended the minutes of November 10, 2009 and November 17, 2009 be
pulled.
MOTION by Clerk Gaffner to approve the consent agenda consisting of:
   Treasurer’s report for November 2009
Accounts Payable Checks Paid 18282-18292 for a total of $93,588.82
Payroll Paid Checks 40789-40795, 40798, 40800-40811, 40826-40839 with voided
checks 40796, 40797, 40799, 40812-40825 and EFT 29, EFT 30 with EFT 27 and EFT
28 void, for a total of $27,614.64.
   Accounts Payable Checks for Approval 18293-18300 for a total of $1,441.00
   Revenue and Expenditure Report ending 11/30/09
SECONDED by Trustee Wright
MOTION APPROVED
MOTION by Clerk Gaffner to move that the Williamstown Township Board approve
the addition of EFT 31 and EFT 32 to the payroll paid in October 2009 in the
amount of $5,093.09.
SECONDED by Trustee Hayes
MOTION APPROVED
Planning Commission-- Planning Commission representative, Michael Fielek,
commented on recent commission business as outlined in the submitted minutes of
November 17, 2009: CATA Transportation Services available to the Williamston
Community. CATA and their input for mass transit services for our Senior Center
Project. The PC worked on Articles 6 & 7 and will schedule a Public Hearing for
Articles 3-7 at their next meeting December 15, 2009. Elected officers.
Received a special land use permit for an apartment on Beeman Road.
Unfinished Business
Budget 2010-11—Supervisor Martin and the board reviewed each line item in the
budget and discussed possible reductions which include:
DEPARTMENT FUND NAME               2010 PROPOSED BUDGET 2010 PROPOSED DECREASE
000        General Fund            $580,851.00
101        Township Board          $84,155.30
171        Supervisor              $44,940.82           $2,000
191        Elections               $8,070.80
209        Assessor                $49,366.50           $2,000
215        Clerk                   $46,870.82           $2,000
247        Board Review            $2,795.05
253        Treasurer               $50,438.82           $2,000
265        Building & Grounds      $81,890.70           $2,000
276        Cemetery                $65,353.61
371        Building Inspection     $19,301.39           $1,225
400        Planning Commission     $66,010.00           $2,000
411        Zoning Administration   $2,901.00            -0-
420        Zoning Board of Appeals $2,410.75            -0-
425        Cable Commission        $3,700.00            $2,000
441        Public Works            $54,234.38           -0-
                                                        Recreation $5,000
                                                        Historical Society
751        Recreation              $42,745.30           $1,000
                                                        Parklands $14,100
                                                        Senior Citizen $5,000
851        Other expenses          $1,000.00
890        Contingency             $20,000.00
TOTALS                             $1,227,036.24
 
Other budget considerations were AFLAC insurance for seven (7) board members.
Supervisor Martin will look up striping agreement between the Township and
Ingham County Road Commission. This will help with funding in the Public Works
budget.
Lap Tops—Clerk Gaffner shared a proposal to purchase seven (7) laptop computers
for the seven (7) elected board members. Clerk Gaffner included numerous
justifications for this purchase. Clerk Gaffner provided information on a Dell
Computer vs. Acer Computer. Clerk Gaffner recommended the purchase of the Acer
Computer. The recommendation would be to approve the purchase up to $3,300 for
seven (7) laptops, including Microsoft Office 2007.
Discussion: It was recommended the Township make sure the computers being
purchased are Government acceptable. A township policy on computers will need
to be developed and additional insurance considered.  
MOTION by Trustee Hayes to approve the purchase of seven (7) laptop computers
for township board elected officials and up to a total cost $3300, with
research into insurance and computer policy to follow.
SECONDED by Trustee Wright
MOTION APPROVED
Reports
Departments & Committees
Trustee Wilbrink shared the Williamston Fire Department is selling Christmas
Trees.
Police Protection—Supervisor Martin shared she attended a meeting on November
24 to continue discussion around police protection. They heard comments on the
upcoming budget shortfalls and additional cuts. The supervisors will meet in
January 2010 to determine how to proceed with police protection.
Fine Art Tour for the township—Supervisor Martin shared Gretchen Fielek is in
charge of this endeavor. The Township Boosters are preparing for an Art Weekend
to help promote Williamstown Township as a nice place to live. There is no cost
to the township and the township will open up their facility for those artists
who do not have a studio in their home, but want to show their art. Maps and
tour guides will be available for those interested. A percentage of all
proceeds from the Art Weekend will be designated for township playground
equipment.
Historical Society—Trustee Wilbrink shared the Historical Society is planning a
Spring Home Tour—Trustee Wilbrink would like the Township to consider ways to
help promote this event.
Neighborhood Watch—Supervisor Martin shared, as discussed earlier with Sergeant
Sopocy, she is working on bringing Officer Rutherford to Williamstown Township
to discuss the Neighborhood Watch program with residents. Supervisor Martin is
hoping to set this up for sometime in January.
Cemetery—Supervisor Martin encouraged board members to check out the new
asphalt driveway and workshop that was added in order to create a comfortable
place for those who work at the grounds all year long. This will also make a
comfortable place to discuss plot options with visitors.
Legal issues—Supervisor Martin shared she is working with the Township Attorney
to resolve township complaints – residents not completing site plans and
violating ordinances.
Beeman Road Property—Supervisor Martin shared a meeting is scheduled with the
property owner on Beeman Road (corner of Sherwood and Beeman) to discuss
property violations.
Tax Payments—Supervisor Treasurer Eyster shared tax payments were mailed today.
Trustee Wilbrink recommended the township update their website to include
information that tax payments will be accepted at Independent Bank.
Public Comment for Agenda & Non-Agenda Items
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 10:15 p.m.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 10:15 p.m.
Review
Supervisor Martin provided the board with a review of tonight’s meeting.
Adjourn
MOTION by Trustee Hayes to adjourn 10:17 p.m.
   MEETING ADJOURNED by Supervisor Martin at 10:17 p.m.
________________
Ernie Gaffner
Township Clerk
2010 Meeting Minutes
January 12, 2010
BOARD OF TRUSTEES MEETING
January 12, 2010
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the meeting agenda.
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
PRESENT BY ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Bob Hayes, Trustee Martin Wright, Trustee Frans Wilbrink,
Treasurer Janet Eyster, Trustee Rick Williams, Clerk Ernie Gaffner and
Supervisor Mickey Martin
Absent: None
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR AGENDA & NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:05 p.m.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:05 p.m.
INGHAM COUNTY SHERIFF report Sgt. Steve Sopocy—Sergeant Sopocy shared a
December 2009 Activity Report for ————Williamstown— ——Township——. Some
information included the number of complaints, traffic accidents, traffic
citations and number of patrol hours in the Township. Sergeant Sopocy commended
the township for calling in suspicious activity. Safety tip to drive carefully
as road conditions can change very quickly.
Supervisor Martin will forward Sergeant Sopocy a copy of the Township Board
meeting calendar for 2010.
CONSENT AGENDA
Consent Agenda—Supervisor Martin read through the items on the Consent Agenda
consisting of:
            Minutes of November 10 and November 17, 2009 and December 1, 2009
Reports         Treasurer’s Report, December 2009
         Building Inspector, December 2009
         Accounts Payable – Paid
         Payroll – Paid
         Accounts Payable – Approval
         Revenue/Expenditure
It was recommended the minutes of November 17, 2009 and December 1, 2009 be
pulled.
MOTION by Trustee Hayes to approve the consent agenda consisting of:
Minutes of November 10, 2009
The Treasurer’s Report for December 2009
Building Inspectors Report
Accounts Payable Checks Paid 18301 –18335 for a total of $18,853.20
Payroll Paid Checks 40840–40855 and 40864-40882 with voided checks 40856-40863
for a total of $17,544.42
Accounts Payable Checks for Approval 18336–18354 for a total of $20,500.40   
Revenue and Expenditure Report ending 12/31/09
SECONDED by Clerk Gaffner   
MOTION APPROVED
Discussion: November 10, 2009 minutes – amend page 2--Section 1, 1.6 (b)
Property Tax Receipts – Treasurer Eyster shared a paragraph has been added:
“the Township has arranged with Independent Bank (Williamston Branch only –
corner of Grand River and Zimmer Road) to accept tax payments.” December 17,
2009 minutes – amend page 3, should read Treasurer Eyster, not Supervisor
Eyster.
MOTION by Trustee Wilbrink to approve minutes of November 17, 2009 and December
1, 2009, as amended.
SECONDED by Trustee Hayes
MOTION APPROVED
PLANNING COMMISSION
Minutes 12/15/09- Planning Commission representative, Michael Fielek, commented
on recent commission business as outlined in the submitted minutes of December
15, 2009.
Competition MSU—Ms. Bloomquist shared an outline of an estimate of cost for the
Grand River Green Zone Competition. This project was written as part of the
Energy Grant and Treasurer Eyster feels this is a great way to showcase what is
happening in the township.
MOTION by Treasurer Eyster that the Williamstown Township Board approve
entering the Grand River Green Zone Competition at a cost not to exceed $2,400
of Township funds.
SECONDED by Trustee Williams
MOTION APPROVED
Note: TRI COUNTY PLANNING—The first phase of the Greening Mid Michigan project
is the Potential Conservation Area (PCA) report, completed in 2008 by the
Michigan Natural Features Inventory. Phase II of this project has just been
completed. The newest report, “Significant Natural Features in the Tri-County
Region: Providing Ecological Information for a Green Infrastructure Plan,” is
intended to serve as a resource for community planning and water resource
protection. This report describes natural communities, rare plant and animal
diversity, and includes an Aquatic Biodiversity Assessment for the tri-county
region. Supervisor Martin encourages board members to attend a Charette,
Thursday, February 15 to hear the overall vision on what is going on with the
Green Infrastructure Plan.
SUP 4180 Beeman—Supervisor Martin shared a special use permit for an accessory
apartment subject to a 32 ft. variance, 800 maximum sq. ft., and occupancy
limit of three (3). Information from the Planning Commission is that the
residence is in compliance and a motion to approve the special use permit is in
order. Treasurer Eyster would like “Owner Occupied” added to the language of
the motion.
MOTION by Trustee Wright that the Williamstown Township Board approve the
special use permit for an accessory apartment at 4180 Beeman Road as
recommended by the Planning Commission with a maximum of three occupants, so
long as the primary dwelling is owner occupied.
SECONDED by Trustee Wilbrink
MOTION APPROVED
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Zoning Amendments Article 1 & 2—Supervisor Martin shared Article 1 & 2 have
been revised to reflect the comments made at the November 2009 meeting. In
order to make these amendments part of our zoning ordinance a motion will need
to be made.
MOTION by Trustee Wright that the Williamstown Township Board approve the
amendments to the Township Zoning Ordinance Articles 1 & 2.
SECONDED by Trustee Hayes
MOTION APPROVED
Note: Clerk Gaffner will publish the amendments to Articles 1 & 2 in the
newspaper.
Budget 2010-11—Supervisor Martin reviewed each line item in the budget.
Supervisor Martin explained the unemployment rate has increased from 6.4% to
7.1% so this line item will need to be increased. The Senior Center will
receive funding approval for one year only. The Striping Contract runs every
other year through 2015. The Township Board will relook at the funding for
Roads in February after the Road Commission has addressed their funding
decisions. Additional funding considerations should include: Roads, Police
Protection and Senior Center.
MOTION by Trustee Wright that the Williamstown Township Board hold a Public
Hearing on the proposed 2010-2011 Township Budget, to be held on February 9th
at 6:30 p.m. with the regular board meeting to follow.
SECONDED by Treasurer Eyster
MOTION APPROVED
4494 Beeman Road—Wanda Bloomquist shared she and Supervisor Martin have been
working with DeNike’s to come up with a timeline for the clean up of 4494
Beeman Road. Mr. DeNike provided a copy of a 6-month timeline. The Ingham
County Health Department has been notified and the DeNike’s are still waiting
for permits to be issued. The Township cannot issue repair and reroof permits
until the Health Department permits are in place.
MOTION by Treasurer Eyster that the Williamstown Township Board approve the
time lines submitted by Rochelle DeNike for bringing the 4494 Beeman Road
property into compliance with Williamstown Township ordinance.
SECONDED by Trustee Williams
MOTION APPROVED
NEW BUSINESS
Poverty Exemption Guidelines—Supervisor Martin shared every year the Township
must adopt a “Poverty Guidelines Resolution.” It is recommended that the
Township adopt the Federal Poverty Guidelines for 2010 with an increase of 50%
in all sections and to limit assets to one licensed vehicle for each resident,
with a maximum of two, and to one principle residence with asset value
determined by the following method: true cash value as stated in an approved
assessment role $250,000 for up to 100 % exemption with a decrease of 20% for
every increase of $50,000 in value.
MOTION by Trustee Hayes for the Williamstown Township Board to approve
Resolution #89, adopting the 2010 guidelines for poverty exemption, pertaining
to property taxes.
SECONDED by Trustee Wright
MOTION APPROVED
Building Inspector—Supervisor Martin shared Building Inspector Bob Delaney
resigned due to health reasons. Tim O’Neal has been acting as Williamstown
Township’s interim Building Inspector. Supervisor Martin along with Wanda
Bloomquist and others have interviewed Bob Kehoe. Supervisor Martin feels Mr.
Kehoe’s qualifications meet the townships needs and she will recommend to the
board to approve hiring of Mr. Kehoe for a three month trial. Mr. Kehoe is
aware of the township’s fee schedule and he has ideas for helping save money
and streamlining. The Township Board agreed to allow Supervisor Martin to move
forward with this recommendation.
Port-a-John—Supervisor Martin shared the Port-a-John at Williamstown Township
Park was burned to the ground along with the 4 x 4’s used to support it’s
foundation. This loss is not covered by insurance there is a $500 deductible
and the replacement cost is $550. The board will not make a decision on this
matter tonight. The township will look into the vendor’s insurance policy,
Parks and Recreation will consider some alternative solutions and the Township
board will report back on this item at the next Township Board Meeting.
Meals-On-Wheels Program—Supervisor Martin shared Tri-County Office on Aging is
asking Williamstown Township to designate $470 for the Tri-County Aging
Consortium Meals on Wheels Program (MOW). The requested amount is based on the
prorated share of the total meals during October 1, 2008 to July 1, 2009.
During that period 1,157 meals were served within Williamstown Township to 8
older adults. Trustee Wright shared the township has budgeted $700 for this
type of activity.
MOTION by Trustee Wright that the Williamstown Township Board approve $470 to
be paid out of the upcoming 2011 budget to the Tri-County Aging Consortium
Meals-On-Wheels program, per their request.
SECONDED by Trustee Hayes
MOTION APPROVED
Reports
Departments & Committees
Tri-County Meeting—Urban Service Boundary Sustainable Communities—“How do you
stop urban sprawl—keep cities rebuilding and intact?” Supervisor Martin shared
this is a very active committee: (0) Ingham, (2) Eaton, (3) Clinton, County
commissioners are participating. Supervisor Martin would like to see more
Ingham Commissioners become involved in this endeavor.
Spring Art Tour—Supervisor Martin shared plans are coming along with 14
artists. Five scheduled to display their items at the Township Hall, two at
————Branch— ——School—— and others opening up studios in their residence. Post
cards are being designed to showcase ————Williamstown— ——Township—— as a
“————Great Place—— to Live” in order to attract new residents to the township.
This event is scheduled to take place May 7 and 8.
Historical Committee-- Supervisor Martin shared Branch School’s remodeling
project is still underway, but will be ready for the Spring Tour.
Neighborhood watch—Supervisor Martin shared there has been no progression.
Police Protection--Supervisor Martin shared there will be a meeting on
Thursday, January 14, 2010.
Law suits—Supervisor Martin shared the Township Attorney is working on an
insurance issue and 3 residential issues.
MTA Conference – Supervisor Martin shared Treasurer Eyster, Wanda Bloomquist
and herself will be attending the MTA Conference.
Road Project—Treasurer Eyster will be moving forward with this endeavor.
Public Comment for Agenda & Non-Agenda Items
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 9:26 p.m.
Helen LeBlanc, 4720 Jadestone—shared a comment about the Board Packet. The
general public only receives a copy of the Consent Agenda. Ms. LeBlanc feels a
whole packet of information should be available to the general public.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 9:27 p.m.
Review
Supervisor Martin provided the board with a review of tonight’s meeting.
Publish Zoning, Publish Public Hearing Notice, Resolution, Port-a John follow
up by Ernie, Meals on Wheels-Mickey will follow up.
MOTION by Trustee Hayes to adjourn 9:30 p.m.
   MEETING ADJOURNED by Supervisor Martin at 9:30 p.m.
________________
Ernie Gaffner, Township Clerk
February 09, 2010
BOARD OF TRUSTEES MEETING
February 09, 2010
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 7:15 pm at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order, reviewed the agenda and explained
procedures for public comment.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Trustee Wright, Trustee Hayes, Trustee Williams,
Treasurer Eyster and Supervisor Martin.
Absent: Clerk Gaffner
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR AGENDA & NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:19 p.m. There was none.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:20 p.m.
SHERIFF’S REPORT
Report was presented by Sgt. Sopocy providing the following stats:
§   Criminal Complaints: 9
§   Blotter Calls: 8
§   Traffic Accidents: 7
§   Citations: 15
§   Patrol time: 165.7 hours
2 Breaking and Entering- Home Invasions: Both occurred on Germany Rd. and are
being investigated. Officers are meeting with surrounding area Law Enforcement
to share information. More break-ins have been occurring.
Ingham County will be losing 1 patrol on Secondary Rds.(down to 3 from 4).
CONSENT AGENDA
§   Treasurer’s Report
§   Building Inspector Report
§   Accounts Payable Checks Paid
§   Payroll Paid Checks & EFTS
§   Accounts Payable Checks For Approval
§   Revenue /Expenditure Report
Motion by Treasurer Eyster to approve the consent agenda consisting of:
§   Treasurer’s Report for January,2010
§   Building Inspector Report
§   Accounts Payable Checks Paid 18355-18382 for a total of $11,491.93
§   Payroll Paid Checks 40883-40904 & EFTS 33-37 for a total of $26,289.72
§   Accounts Payable Checks for Approval 18383-18411 for a total of $47,606.24
with voided checks 18384 & 18398.
§   Revenue /Expenditure Report ending 1/31/10
Seconded by Trustee Hayes.
Carried unanimously.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
TE Grant Resolution
Supervisor Martin reviewed the Grant Award. Total Cost of paving both shoulders
along AM-43 from Meridian Rd to Zimmer Rd. with an additional 8 ft. shoulders
marked for non-motorized transportation would cost $450,000. The Township share
is 35% or $157,500. MDOT will cover the balance. This will be done in
conjunction with resurfacing work scheduled for 2010. Match will come out of
fund balance. This would address safety issues for bike riders through the
Township and to the park. Meeting is scheduled with MDOT for the 17th. Planning
Asst. Bloomquist will be attending.
Discussion ensued regarding:
§   Spending fund balance when the Township will be losing road patrol in 2011.
§   Opportunity that will not be available again for some time.
§   Addresses safety issues for pedestrian and bike traffic since nothing else
is available
Motion by Trustee Wright that the Williamstown Township Board approve the TE
Grant Resolution #90 approving funding match for the Grant for paved shoulders
along Grand River between Meridian and Zimmer Rds.
Seconded by Trustee Williams.
Ayes: Treasurer Eyster, Trustee Williams, Trustee Wilbrink, Trustee Wright,
Supervisor Martin.
Nays: Trustee Hayes
Motion Carried
Energy Grant Resolution
Treasurer Eyster reviewed the Grant Award. Application was a joint effort with
Wheatfield, Locke and Leroy Townships. Award is for $75,384. $50,000 will go to
Williamstown Township with the balance shared between the other three
Townships. The grant will be used to retrofit the Township Hall to reduce
energy consumption, provide workshops and a light bulb exchange for residents,
reduce cost at the cemetery by providing a composting toilet and to provide
planning fees for the GR Green Zone and the amendments to the Master Plan for a
Trails and Greenway Plan along with providing expansion of bus use for the
residents at the Township Park.
Discussion ensued regarding:
§   Payback of retrofits would be approx. 4 years
§   How wages were addressed in the grant
§   Savings to Township for work that was already scheduled for this year
§   Permanent restroom facilities at the Township-saves rental fee.
Motion by Trustee Williams that the Township Board approve Resolution #91
authorizing acceptance of the Energy Efficiency and Conservation Block Grant.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes.
Ayes: Treasurer Eyster, Supervisor Martin, Trustee Hayes, Trustee Wilbrink,
Trustee Williams and Trustee Wright
Nays: none
Motion Carried.
Police Authority Resolution
Supervisor Martin explained the Resolution of Intent #92. This will show the
intent and funding of $1000.00 from the Township to work with the other 13
Townships participating to explore the multitude of options available to
provide police protection that is currently being provided by the Ingham County
Sheriff’s Department that will cease beginning in 2011. The options include:
creating an authority between townships, contracting with neighboring
municipalities that currently have their own service or continuing with the
Sheriff’s Dept.
Discussion ensued regarding:
§   Provides better bargaining power working as a collective group
§   Contract would specify services
§   Allows townships to collectively pay for attorney services
§   All boards are reviewing the resolution
§   County Comptroller supportive of Townships
§   $1,000 to go with agreement letter
Motion by Trustee Wright for the Williamstown Township Board to approve
Resolution #92 of intent to establish joint police authority.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes.
Ayes: Treasurer Eyster, Trustee Hayes, Supervisor Martin, Trustee Williams,
Trustee Wright
Nays: Trustee Wilbrink
Motion Carried.
Engagement for Services-Legal, Police Authority
Discussion ensued regarding:
§   language in contract
§   potential conflict of interest
§   Attorney only works with Townships
Motion by Treasurer Eyster that the Williamstown Township Board approve the
engagement letter for Legal Services related to the Police Authority.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes
Motion Carried.
NEW BUSINESS
Eagle Scout project-Ryan McGuire
Ryan explained his proposal for his Eagle Scout Project of 3 bike racks to be
used at the Township Park and the Township Hall. Currently there is not a means
for parking and securing bikes at these locations. This would be a good
addition for those that use their bikes to get to the parks. They would be made
of wolmanized wood, treated in the spring and would be chained to prevent
removal. Location would be determined by maintenance. This would be a savings
to the Township in lieu of purchasing racks. Completion would be anticipated in
late April or May.
Discussion ensued regarding:
§   Maintenance
§   Cost of material vs. PVC
§   Will blend with materials already in use at the Park
§   Impressed with presentation of project by applicant
Motion by Trustee Hayes that the Williamstown Township Board approve the Eagle
Scout project by Ryan McGuire.
Seconded by Trustee Williams.
Motion Carried.
Ryan McGuire will now work through the Park & Rec Committee to complete his
project.
Road financing policy
Treasurer Eyster gave a synopsis of information she gained from the MTA
conference. The ICRC is responsible for constructing, resurfacing and
maintaining the roads. By setting aside funds available to match the ICRC shows
our intent to the commission of providing funds for our roads and keep us
prepared for road work needed within the Township.
Discussion ensued regarding:
§   Funding for road work is currently from State and Federal
§   Suggesting $30,000 to set aside yearly
§   Still would need approval of board to spend monies set aside
Motion by Trustee Wright that the Williamstown Township Board approve the Road
Financing Policy to provide matching funds for county local road construction
and/or resurfacing in Williamstown Township.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes.
Motion Carried.
Fund Balance Minimum Policy
Supervisor Martin and Treasurer Eyster explained the reasoning behind the
policy of setting aside an emergency fund. Auditors recommend $60,000-$70,000.
If a minimum is set at $200,000 this would keep the Township from the need to
borrow until tax payments were received.
Discussion ensued regarding:
§   Suggested raising the amount to $300,000
§   Auditors suggestion seemed inadequate
Motion by Trustee Hayes the Williamstown Township Board approve the Fund
Balance Minimum Policy to maintain a minimum fund balance on March 31st of each
year.
Seconded by Trustee Williams.
Motion Carried.
Departments and Committees
§   Home completely destroyed on Haslett Rd. Resident made it out safe. At this
time is not in need of help.
§   Art Tour: 17 artists participating to date. Will be working in conjunction
with the City’s Art Walk. Being held May 7th and 8th. Music will be at Branch
School. Proceeds will go towards Playground Equipment at the Township Hall. One
of the Township residents works with a Play Equipment company and will work
with the Township regarding fundraising and construction. Parks and Rec will
work on design and location.
§   February 24th is IC-MTA meeting at Leroy Twp. at 6:00. Potluck. Opportunity
to see their new building.
§   February 18th: Visioning for Tri-County Regional Future Green
Infrastructure Plan. To date RSVP: Mickey Martin, Wanda Bloomquist, Dan
Dimitroff, Bill Bailey, and Rex LaMore. Hands on workshop to include areas of
geographic importance within the Township to be included.
§   Next meeting: March 2nd, 2010 at 7:00 pm.
Open floor for Public Comment at 8:52
Rod Imhoff-2380 Wilgus Rd. Re: ICRC Maintenance.
Karl Bartels- 9665 Deer Trail. Re: Grants
Closed Public Comment at 8:57
Supervisor Martin reviewed the meeting.
Motion by TrusteeHayes to adjourn the meeting at 9:00 pm.
Seconded by Trustee Williams.
Meeting adjourned.
____________________________
Mickey Martin
Township Supervisor
Public Hearing for 2010-11 Proposed Budget
February 09, 2010
6:30 pm
Present by Roll Call: Treasurer Eyster, Supervisor Martin, Trustees Hayes,
Wilbrink, Williams and Wright.
Absent: Clerk Gaffner
Supervisor explained the Public Hearing Policy and Procedures.
Treasurer Eyster went over the budget. Budget was revised to include the income
and expenditures of the EECBG Grant Award and the savings we would incur due to
the grant. Explained the set aside for Township roads and the policy being
developed by the Road Committee.
§   Discussion ensued regarding set asides in previous years.
Supervisor Martin explained the policy recommended by MTA for an emergency fund
and the recommended amounts.
Treasurer Eyster explained the budget report and the addition of a Dept.
dealing with the Energy Grant and the breakdown of the Dept.
§   Discussion ensued regarding accounting for other Townships participating in
the grant award.
§   Added grant funds as revenue and explained changes to salaries as a result
of grant.
Presentation will be made at March meeting regarding the long range road plan.
Treasurer Eyster explained that the board has decreased expenditures by over
$100,000. Budget was thoroughly reviewed and all departments should be staying
within budget. The fund equity should not be used for recurring items.
Supervisor opened public comment at 7:05
   Ruth Templeton- 1435 Epley: Question of expenditures for planning and
financial management fees.
   Rod Imhoff- 2380 Wilgus: Question of Assessor cost, unemployment ,Social
Security allocations and increase to Dept. 265.
Public Hearing closed at 7:10.
Motion by Hayes to close Public Hearing.
Seconded by Williams.
Motion Carried.
Williamstown Township Board will deliberate and finalize the budget at the
meeting scheduled for March 2, 2010 at 7:00
Williamstown Township
March 2, 2010
BOARD OF TRUSTEES MEETING
March 2, 2010
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the meeting agenda.
Motion by Trustee Frans Wilbrink to add agenda item on Pending Litigation to be
discussed in “closed session”. The recording secretary will be dismissed for
“closed session”.
Seconded by Clerk Gaffner
Motion Approved
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
PRESENT BY ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Martin Wright, Trustee Frans Wilbrink, Treasurer Janet Eyster,
Trustee Rick Williams, Clerk Ernie Gaffner and Supervisor Mickey Martin
Absent: Trustee Bob Hayes,
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR AGENDA & NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:05 p.m.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:05 p.m.
INGHAM COUNTY SHERIFF report Sgt. Steve Sopocy—Sergeant Sopocy shared a
February 2010 Activity Report for Williamstown Township. Some information
included the number of complaints, traffic accidents, traffic citations and
number of patrol hours in the Township. Sergeant Sopocy stated the Detective
Bureau is working on the recent Breaking and Entering / Home Invasions and
criminal sexual conduct complaints. Safety tip to drive carefully as road
conditions can change very quickly.
CONSENT AGENDA
Consent Agenda—Supervisor Martin read through the items on the Consent Agenda
consisting of:
       Minutes of 01-12 & 02-09-10 Budget & Regular Meeting
      Reports:   Treasurer’s Report
            Building Inspector Report
            Accounts Payable – Paid
            Payroll – Paid
            Accounts Payable - Approval
            Revenue/Expenditure
Motion by Clerk Gaffner that the consent agenda consisting of:
A.   Approve minutes of 1-12-2010 and 2-09-2010
B.   The Treasurer’s Report for February 2010Building Inspectors Report
C.   Building Inspectors Report
D.   Accounts Payable, Checks Paid 18412 –18425 for a total of $5,847.01
E.   Payroll Paid, Checks 40905–40935 and EFT 38 for a total of $18,976.17
F.   Accounts Payable for Approval, Checks 18426–18438 for a total of $4,214.44
G.   Revenue and Expenditure Report ending 02/28/2010
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Motion Approved
PLANNING COMMISSION
Minutes 12/15/09- Planning Commission representative, Michael Fielek, commented
on recent commission business as outlined in the submitted minutes of February
16, 2010. Some of the highlights outlined by Chairman Fielek include: A report
from Bill Conklin, Ingham County Road Commission,
shared information on future road improvements for the Zimmer Rd/M-43
Intersection. PC recommends supporting the moving truck rental business and
portable storage container business at 1099 E. Grand River as complimentary and
auxiliary use subject to special land use under Section 2.08. PC held a Public
Hearing on Amendments to the Zoning Ordinance - Article 3-Article 7. It was
also noted that the Energy Efficient Conservation Building Grant (EECBG) was
received and shared with Locke, Leroy, Wheatfield and Williamstown Townships.
Also received was the Transportation Enhancement Grant for paving the north and
south shoulders of M-43.
Similar Use Recommendation for 1099 E Grand River-- Modification to Approved
Site Plan Dan Wallace/Wallace Storage Units include: the rental of the moving
trucks/vans and the storage of portable storage containers.
Motion by Trustee Wilbrink that the Williamstown Township Board approve the
Planning Commission’s recommendation supporting the moving truck rental
business located at 1099 E. Grand River be considered a complimentary and
monitored minor auxiliary use to special land use under Section 2.08.  Seconded
by Trustee Williams
Motion Approved
Motion by Trustee Wilbrink that the Williamstown Township Board approve the
Planning Commission’s recommendation supporting the portable storage container
business located at 1099 E. Grand River be considered a complimentary and
auxiliary use subject to special land use under Section 2.08. Seconded by
Trustee Williams
Motion Approved
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
2010-2011 Budget Deliberation—Supervisor Martin provided explanations to
questions that came in from Township Residents. Supervisor Martin clarified
questions proposed by Trustee Wilbrink in his efforts to reduce line item
budgets even further.
It was unanimous…Township Board members felt budget reductions were adequate.
The budget is taken seriously by Township personnel and personnel continue to
reduce expenses in their respective budgets throughout the year. Even with an
approved budget elected Township officials will work to further reduce expenses
during the budget year. In order for the Township to maintain a balanced budget
for the 2010-11 budget year they will need to use $26,000 of fund equity which
is reasonable considering the state of the economy.
Motion by Clerk Gaffner to approve the 2010-2011 budget as presented
Seconded by Treasurer Eyster
   Roll Call Vote: Ayes 5    Janet Eyster   Rick Williams    Nays: 1   Frans
Wilbrink
                      Ernie Gaffner   Martin Wright
                       Mickey Martin
   Motion approved.
4494 Beeman Road— Supervisor Martin shared a Purchase Agreement between Thomas
H. Hamlin and Nancy R.Hamlin for property more commonly known as Vacant Land
Beeman Road, Williamstown Township, Ingham County, Michigan. The agreement is
subject to landscaping, if any, zoning ordinances, building and use
restrictions, and easements, of record, and the Hamlins agree to pay the sum of
$500.00. This purchase agreement has been reviewed by Township Attorney and if
approved would be closed by April 1. Additional provisions are for the
purchaser to pay reasonable fees and expenses up to $750. The Township will
need a quick claim deed drawn up and the property will be sold “as is”.
Motion by Trustee Wilbrink that the Williamstown Township Board approve the
Purchase Agreement between purchasers Thomas & Nancy Hamlin and seller
Williamstown Township for the vacant land on Beeman Road adjacent to the
purchaser’s Beeman Road property.
Seconded by Treasurer Eyster
Motion Approved
NEW BUSINESS
Budget Amendments—Supervisor Martin reviewed the budget amendments to the 2009-
10 budget and recommended action be taken in order to make amendments.
Motion by Trustee Wright to amend the 2009-2010 budget 101-751-703 (wages) $400
from 101-751-881 (parks & recreation)
Seconded by Treasurer Eyster
Motion approved
Motion by Trustee Wright to amend the 2009-2010 budget 101-400-705 (planning
assistant wages) $1000 from 101-400-705.001 (planning assistant wages
reimbursable)
Seconded by Treasurer Eyster
Motion approved
Motion by Clerk Gaffner to approve amendments to the 2009-2010 budget, listed
below as items A-G using monies received through the Energy Grant.
A. to amend 101-830-702.171 (grant salary supervisor) $1362 from 101-171-702
(supervisor salary)
B. to amend 101-830-702.215 (grant salary clerk) $175 from 101-215-702 (clerk
salary)
C. to amend 101-830-702.253 (grant salary treasurer) $535 from 101-253-702
(treasurer salary)
D. to amend 101-400-702.400 (grant planning commissioners wage) $1726 from 101-
400-702 (planning commissioner wages)
E. to amend 101-830-703.441 (grant wages recycle) $164 from 101-441-703(wages
recycle)
F. to amend 101-830-704.400 (grant wages pc rec secty) $83 from 101-400-704
(wages pc rec secretary)
G. to amend 101-830-705.400 (grant wages pc assistant) $1500 from 101-400-
705.001(wages pc assistant reimbursable)
Seconded by Trustee Wright
Motion Approved
Motion by Supervisor Martin to amend the 2009-2010 budget, using contingency
funds, as listed below.
101-830-703.000 CLERICAL SUPPORT                               1,000
101-830-711.000 SOCIAL SECURITY                                290
101-830-711.030 MEDICARE                                       98
101-830-712.000 UNEMPLOYMENT                                   336
101-830-713.000 PENSION PLAN EXPENSE                           128
101-830-714.000 HEALTH INSURANCE                               120
101-830-728.000 SUPPLIES                                       200
101-830-812.001 CONSULTING ENERGY AUDITS WILLIAMSTOWN          1,600
101-830-812.002 CONSULTING ENERGY AUDITS WHEATFIELD            1,600
101-830-812.003 CONSULTING ENERGY AUDITS LEROY                 1,600
101-830-812.004 CONSULTING ENERGY AUDITS LOCKE                 1,600
101-830-812.400 CONSULTING PLANNING COMMISSION                 2,000
101-830-865.000 MILEAGE                                        50
                From Contingency 101-890-965.000 total $10,622
 
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Motion Approved
Reports
Public Comment for agenda & non-agenda items
Rod Imhoff, 2380 Wilgus Road, shared concerns of township assessments and
elected officials. Supervisor Martin recommended Mr. Imhoff make an appointment
with her to discuss his concerns.
Karl Bartels, 9665 Deer Trail—shared he was encouraged to hear the discussion
questioning budget items and appreciates Supervisor Martin’s follow up to
township resident budget concerns.
Departments & Committees
Clerk Gaffner shared he talked with the provider of the leased port-a-john and
he is to receive copies of two agreements to be considered for replacing the
destroyed port-a-john at the Grand River Park. He hopes to have a new port-a-
john installed at the park for spring activities.
Discussion: Trustee Wilbrink would like a port-a-john placed at the park by
Wednesday, March 3, 2010. He encourages the Township to seek more bids and
feels not having a port-a-john at the park is a disservice to the Township.
Supervisor Martin shared there would be no way to secure the port-a-john until
the ground thaws and would like to wait for a contract.
MTA Meeting last Wednesday, February 24, 2010 was attended by Trustee Hayes.
Supervisor Martin will have Trustee Hayes report on this at the next Township
Board meeting.
Greening of Michigan—this meeting was attended by Supervisor Martin and Wanda
Bloomquist, Rex LaMore and Dali Giese from the Planning Commission and two
parks members. Supervisor Martin felt the Township was well represented. Tri-
County Regional Planning Commission (TCRPC) is working to keep corridors,
trails and walkways open. Williamstown Township is working to develope Township
trails and greenways.
Police Protection—Supervisor Martin has been meeting with other township
representatives, discussing police protection alternatives and establish a
cooperative agreement between the 13 “out county” townships. 11 of the 13
Townships have signed a letter of intent. There are plans to meet again this
week. The townships are working on proposals and she hopes to bring back
proposals for review at the Township Board meeting in April.
Board of Review—Supervisor Martin shared an organizational meeting was held the
first week of March. Board of Review is scheduled for March 8 and March 9.
Public Comment for Agenda & Non-Agenda Items
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 9:27 p.m.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 9:27 p.m.
Review - Supervisor Martin provided the board with a review of tonight’s
meeting.
Motion by Trustee Wright to go into “Closed Session” in order to discuss
pending litigation.
Seconded by Supervisor Martin
   Roll Call Vote: Ayes 6    Janet Eyster   Frans Wilbrink    Nays: 0   
                      Ernie Gaffner   Rick Williams
                 Mickey Martin Martin Wright
The meeting moved into “closed session” 9:30 p.m.
Board back in public session at 9:47 p.m.
   MEETING ADJOURNED by Supervisor Martin at 9:48 p.m.
________________
Ernie Gaffner, Township Clerk
April 6, 2010
BOARD OF TRUSTEES MEETING
April 6, 2010
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the meeting agenda.
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
PRESENT BY ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Bob Hayes, Trustee Martin Wright, Trustee Frans Wilbrink,
Treasurer Janet Eyster, Clerk Ernie Gaffner and Supervisor Mickey Martin
Absent: Trustee Rick Williams
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR AGENDA & NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:05 p.m.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:05 p.m.
INGHAM COUNTY SHERIFF report Sgt. Steve Sopocy—Sergeant Sopocy shared a March
2010 Activity Report for Williamstown Township. Some information included the
number of complaints, traffic accidents, traffic citations and number of patrol
hours in the Township. Detective monthly highlights include investigations into
the recent rash of Breaking and Entering/Home Invasions. Safety/Crime be
cautious of slow moving farm equipment please allow them the time and space
they need to safely maneuver the roadways.
Supervisor Martin inquired about the government mandated statewide smoking ban
and Michigan Medical Marijuana Act.
CONSENT AGENDA
Consent Agenda—Supervisor Martin read through the items on the Consent Agenda
consisting of:
            Minutes of March 2, 2010
Reports         Treasurer’s Report, March 2010
            Accounts Payable – Paid
            Payroll – Paid
            Accounts Payable – Approval
            Revenue/Expenditure
It was recommended the minutes of March 2, 2010, Treasurer’s Report, and
Revenue and Expenditure report be pulled.
Motion by Treasurer Eyster to move the consent agenda consisting of:
A.   Accounts Payable Checks Paid 18439–18457 and 18459-18496 for a total of
$225,521.01 with check #18458 listed as void.
B.   Payroll Paid Checks 40936–40968 for a total of $17,180.05
C.   Accounts Payable Checks to Approve 18497–18503 for a total of $2,458.17   
D.   Pending Litigation Report
Seconded by Clerk Gaffner.
Motion approved.
Trustee Wilbrink pulled the March 2, 2010 minutes. Trustee Wilbrink had made a
couple of motions in reference to the budget that were not included in the
minutes. Supervisor Martin shared according to Robert’s Rules of Business
motions that are not supported are not required to be part of the minutes.
Supervisor Martin pulled the Treasurer’s Report and Revenue and Expenditure
Report in order to point out that only 74.86% of the budget has been spent to
this date and commended the township for being fiscally responsible through
these tough economic times. Trustee Hayes complimented the Township for the
fine job they are doing to keep costs down.
Motion by Clerk Gaffner to approve the minutes for March 2, 2010, Treasurer’s
Report Revenue and Expenditure report.
Supported by Treasurer Eyster.
Motion approved.
Planning Commission-- Planning Commission representative, Michael Fielek,
commented on recent commission business as outlined in the submitted minutes of
March 16, 2010.
·   Held a Public Hearing— Conditional Rezoning Parcel 45 E. Grand River Road,
Williamston, Michigan (50 Acres)
·   Pine Knoll Estates provided a summary of conditions
·   Planning Commission could not deliberate at the March 16 meeting, but will
at next meeting and bring a recommendation at the May Township Board meeting.
·   Revision to zoning ordinance, proposed by consultants, Section
2.02—Planning Commission discussed at length. Motion for a Public Hearing, but
denied. Chairman Fielek asked board to consider a different approach or
additional research on subject
·   Heard presentation on Green Zone Competition   
Unfinished Business
Police Services—Supervisor Martin shared 12 of the 13 Townships intend to
participate in the review of police service alternatives for the Townships and
other similarly situated townships and municipalities in Ingham County, and
ultimately to procure and provide such joint police services through the
information of a joint municipal authority. Looking at either a millage or
special assessment and the Townships are leaning toward a special assessment
that would go on the August ballot. Trustee Wilbrink requested more information
concerning specific costs used in promulgating the special assessment required
to provide police protection for the 13 out county townships and villages.
Board recommendations were to have a Public Informational Meeting prior to the
May 4th Regular Township meeting. Treasurer Eyster will work on a rubric
outlining the operational and administrative costs to provide joint police
services.
New Business
Zoning Ordinance amendment Medical Marijuana—Supervisor Martin shared Trustee
Hayes and Chairman Fielek attended a seminar on the New Medical Marijuana Law
presented by the Michigan Municipal League. A “qualifying patient” can possess
up to 2.5 ounces of usable marijuana, they can keep up to 12 marijuana plants
in an “enclosed, locked facility” if a primary caregiver is not assigned. If
primary caregiver is assigned they can assist up to five qualifying patients.
This means they can possess up to 2.5 ounces of usable marijuana for each
qualifying patient and keep up to 12 marijuana plants for each qualifying
patient.
Now that this Act is in effect, municipalities are considering or have adopted
ordinances regulating how marijuana is used and distributed within their
respective boundaries. The critical question is whether local governments have
the authority to regulate medical marijuana through police power ordinances or
through zoning.
Supervisor Martin recommended that the Planning Commission prepare a proposal
on adopting an ordinance that would regulate how marijuana is used and
distributed within the township. Chairman Fielek will work on this
recommendation.
ITC—Supervisor Martin shared ITC will be replacing wood poles with metal poles
and running power lines late 2010, early 2011. The metal poles have a better
longevity. The height of the poles (200 ft) was questioned, as to whether or
not they may interfere with Mayden’s Airport on Zimmer Road and the ½ mile
landing pattern.
Parks and Recreation fees—Wanda Bloomquist shared discussion to charge fees for
use of Township fields has been ongoing for over a year and a half. The
proposal is that all groups will be charged the same fee across the board. The
Township Parks & Recreation Committee is proposing a $25 fee for a three hour
block/reservation fee and $10 fee for a two hour block for practices. Groups
would need to reserve times for these events and reservations would be visible
at the Township Park for all to see.
Motion by Treasurer Eyster that the Township Board approve the Parks &
Recreation Committee’s recommendation to set fees for the use of Township
grounds for organized recreational games and practices at $25 for 3 hour
scheduled game time and $10 for 2 hour scheduled practice time.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes.
Motion Approved
Reports
Departments & Committees
Ingham County Township Association (part of the Michigan Township Association)
will meet on April 28, 2010 at the Ingham County Sheriff’s Office at 6:30 p.m.
Dinner provided. Supervisor Martin encourages board members to attend and get
reservations into Michelle by April 22nd.
Board of Review—Supervisor Martin shared the Board of Review is now completed
and it went well.
Historical Article—Supervisor Martin shared the Enterprise featured a great
article on the restoration of the 147-year-old historic one-room Branch School
building.
Supervisor Martin will be attending classes next week.
Art Tour—Supervisor Martin shared plans for the Art Tour are moving forward
thanks to Gretchen Fielek and Wanda Bloomquist. The Art Tour is scheduled for
May 7 & 8. Friday is open from 5:30-9:00 pm and Saturday is open from 10:00-5:
00pm. There are16 artists. Tickets are $5. Visit the Township website link for
more information. Proceeds will go to building a play structure at the Township
Hall.
Clerk Gaffner shared the Port-a-John has been installed at Williamstown
Township Park, as of April 2, 2010.
Public Comment for Agenda & Non-Agenda Items
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 9:15 p.m.
Donna Tocarchick, 9605 Deer Trail, commended Treasurer Eyster on the budget
breakdown and savings.
Board answered a few general questions concerning Medical Marijuana, Police
Services and a possible special assessment.
Karl Bartels, 9665 Deer Trail—would like to see the township reimbursed for
money paid to the county for police services that we will no longer receive.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 9:25 p.m.
Review
Supervisor Martin provided the board with a review of tonight’s meeting.
Adjourn
MOTION by Trustee Hayes to adjourn 9:26 p.m.
   MEETING ADJOURNED by Supervisor Martin at 9:26 p.m.
________________
Ernie Gaffner
Township Clerk
May 4, 2010
BOARD OF TRUSTEES MEETING
May 4, 2010
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the meeting agenda.
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
PRESENT BY ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Bob Hayes, Trustee Martin Wright, Trustee Frans Wilbrink,
Trustee Williams, Treasurer Janet Eyster, Clerk Ernie Gaffner and Supervisor
Mickey Martin
Absent: None
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR AGENDA & NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:01 p.m.
Al LeBlanc, 4720 Jadestone Drive, asked if the Township planned to use a
projector during board meetings and if the building report format had changed.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:05 p.m.
INGHAM COUNTY SHERIFF report Sgt. Steve Sopocy—Sergeant Sopocy shared April
2010 Activity Report for ————Williamstown— ——Township——. Some information
included the number of complaints, traffic accidents, traffic citations and
number of patrol hours in the Township. Detective monthly highlights include a
subject that has been arrested near Dewitt, they feel this subject is
responsible for many, if not all, the home invasions in the Williamston area.
Residents are encouraged to report suspicious activity and be cautious of
people walking, jogging, bike riding, motorcycles in order to have a safe
summer for everyone.
Supervisor Martin shared the first Neighborhood Watch meeting is scheduled for
June 3rd. The Neighborhood Watch will be open to all areas in order to
encourage more involvement. Sergeant Sopocy recommended email addresses be
shared in order to provide watches across township borders so that crime
information can be interlinked and get everyone communicating.
CONSENT AGENDA
Consent Agenda—Supervisor Martin read through the items on the Consent Agenda
consisting of:
            Minutes of April 6, 2010
Reports         Treasurer’s Report, April 2010
Building Inspector’s Report
Accounts Payable Checks Paid 18504–18524 for a total of $40,091.26
Payroll Paid Checks 40969–41007, EFT 39 and EFT 40 for a total of $30,935.54
Accounts Payable Checks to Approve 18525–18546 for a total of $8,367.04   
Revenue and Expenditure Report ending 4/30/10
Pending Litigation Report
It was recommended the minutes of April 6, 2010, be pulled.
Motion by Clerk Gaffner to move the consent agenda consisting of:
A.   The Treasurer’s Report for April 2010
B.   Building Inspector’s Report
C.   Accounts Payable Checks Paid 18504–18524 for a total of $40,091.26
D.   Payroll Paid Checks 40969–41007, EFT 39 and EFT 40 for a total of
$30,935.54
E.   Accounts Payable Checks to Approve 18525–18546 for a total of $8,367.04   
F.   Revenue and Expenditure Report ending 4/30/10
G.   Pending Litigation Report
Seconded by Treasurer Eyster. Motion approved.
Trustee Wilbrink pulled the minutes of April 6, 2010, in order to add a comment
he made during discussion of the proposed budget for Police Services.
It was recommended by Supervisor Martin that the Eagle Scout Project be moved
up on the agenda.
Eagle Scout Project—Drew Payton, Life Scout, presented information to the Board
regarding a Red Cedar Run/Walk proposal. Life Scout Payton made the same
proposal to the Williamston City Council and they approved the closure of
streets within the city which are a part of the proposed three mile course. The
request was for the Township to close the roads in the Township which are part
of the 3 mile course. The roads requiring closure would be Vanneter Road,
Meadowdale and North Putnam. This closure would be for a two hour block of
time. The event will be held on June 26 with funds raised going to the Habitat
for Humanity. Life Scout Payton is hoping the event will foster health and
fitness, create a wholesome family event, and draw more people downtown to
support the Red Cedar Jubilee.
Motion by Trustee Wright to approve Township support of the Red Cedar/Walk
Proposal scheduled for June 26 beginning at 8:30 a.m.
Seconded by Trustee Williams. Motion Approved.
Supervisor Martin suggested the Township Clerk assist Drew Payton in obtaining
permission for any necessary road closure from the Ingham County Road
Commission.
Planning Commission-- Planning Commission representative, Michael Fielek,
commented on recent commission business as outlined in the submitted minutes of
April 20, 2010.
·   Deliberation: Conditional Rezoning--Steve and Melinda Roznowski property
#33-03-03-29-11-001, 45 East Grand River Ave
·   Medical Marijuana—Proposal A and B for Marijuana—Planning Commission
recommended Planning Consultant Doozan bring a recommendation for options A and
B to discuss at the next meeting
·   Annual Report—The Planning Commission presented an Annual Report dated
April 2009-March 2010, expressed satisfaction with the results and recommended
the Township Board accept their report.
·   Energy Efficiency and Conservation Block Grant (EECBG)—is available at
www.grgreenzone.org.
·   Bids on Energy Audits and retrofits—bids are expected to come in this week.
Contact Wanda Bloomquist with questions.
·   Carcass clean up concern—Mickey shared this problem is being looked at.
Unfinished Business
Police Service—Resolution--Supervisor Martin shared a timeline of events. At
present, 11 townships and the Village of Dansville have passed the resolution.
Ingham County is terminating police protection by the county sheriff to the
Township after December 31, 2010. The Townships are preparing to form a Police
Board to provide police protection to the governmental agencies affected.
Williamstown Township will need to raise funds by special assessment in order
to finance the cost of police protection under 1951 PA 33, as amended. The
special assessment would be placed on the November ballot and include $150 cap
per household and $250 for a commercial unit. After a successful passage of the
proposal, two hearings would be held (1) Public Hearing—so citizens could voice
their support or concerns and (2) Public Hearing—so citizens can voice any
concerns relative to the assessment.
Concern was raised around having a cap with a possible annual increase.
Treasurer Eyster indicated to the board that the annual increase was in lieu of
a cost of living increase. Another concern was fees collected in the township,
who gets the fees? Supervisor Martin shared many of the logistics are being
finalized by the Township Attorney.
Commissioner Randy Schafer shared he has been fighting the Police Service issue
since 1978 and commends Supervisor Martin for encouraging 13 townships to come
together to pass this resolution. Commissioner Schafer will continue to support
the townships, write letters, campaign, whatever it takes to promote and
support this endeavor.
Motion by Treasurer Eyster to move the Williamstown Township Board approve
Resolution #93, placing a special assessment proposal for a Police Board on the
November 2010 ballot.
Seconded by Trustee Wright.
   Roll Call Vote: Ayes 7    Janet Eyster    Mickey Martin   Nays:0   Motion
Approved                      Ernie Gaffner    Frans Wilbrink
                       Bob Hayes Rick Williams
                      Martin Wright
New Business
Smoking Ban—Supervisor Martin shared as of May 1, 2010 indoor smoking is
prohibited in almost all workplaces and public places. Williamstown Township
plans to post signs inside the building and near the entrances of the building
indicating smoking is prohibited within 30 feet of the entrances. The township
will designate an area that is 30 feet from the building and will provide an
appropriate receptacle for the disposal of cigarette butts. Board policy #5 has
been prepared for this mandate.
Motion by Trustee Wright that the Williamstown Township Board adopt Township
Board policy #5.
Seconded by Treasurer Eyster. Motion approved.
Reports
Departments & Committees
Energy Grant, Treasurer Eyster shared the grant provides funding to make energy
efficient updating to the Township Hall, provide workshops for Township
residents, conduct a light bulb exchange for residents, provide consulting fees
for planning and promote use of public transportation within the township. The
Township sought bids for ordinance changes and received three bids for the
energy audit renovations from Birmingham, Ohio, and Southfield. The bids ranged
from $6500 up to $15,000. The Township accepted lowest bid and learned they are
also working with Eaton County. Proposals on Energy Audits for each township
should be available mid June. Treasurer Eyster will attend a session on
Geothermal Heat Pumps at the University Club. Let Treasurer Eyster know if you
are interested in attending.
Eagle Scout Meeting, Supervisor Martin commended Trustee Wright for his
attendance at this meeting.
Art Tour is this weekend May 7 & 8 (5:30-9:00 pm and Sat 10 to 5pm). 16 Artists
are participating. Tickets are $5 – Proceeds will go toward the purchase of a
play structure at the Township Hall. Maps for the tour were distributed.
Township “Yard Sale” the second Saturday of the month beginning May through
October from 9:00 a.m. – 3:00 p.m. during recycling at the Williamstown
Township Hall. For more information contact Township volunteer, Carolyn Schein,
at 655-1339.
Letter from Senior Center—Supervisor Martin shared a thank you letter received
from the Senior Center for the $5000 check for the 2010-11 budget year. The
funds will be used to improve areas for seniors. The Seniors invited board
members to lunch on Tuesday’s, Wednesday’s or Thursday’s.
Statistics on Census Count—Supervisor Martin shared Williamstown Township came
in first place, in Ingham County, for returning their census data.
Invite from LeRoy Township Board—Supervisor Martin shared LeRoy Township sent
an invitation to attend an Open House, Saturday, May 15, 2010, 2-5 p.m.
Public Comment for Agenda & Non-Agenda Items
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 8:40 p.m.
George Eyster, 1475 Epley Road, Thanks the board for passing the resolution for
public safety.
Supervisor Martin, thanked George Eyster, Fred Campbell, Tom Johnson and Gloria
VanDusen for their work in restoring the Branch School Building.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 8:41 p.m.
Review
Supervisor Martin provided the board with a review of tonight’s meeting.
Adjourn
MOTION by Trustee Hayes to adjourn 8:44 p.m.
   MEETING ADJOURNED by Supervisor Martin at 8:44 p.m.
________________
Ernie Gaffner
Township Clerk
June 1, 2010
BOARD OF TRUSTEES MEETING
June 1, 2010
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the meeting agenda.
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
PRESENT BY ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Bob Hayes, Trustee Martin Wright, Trustee Frans Wilbrink,
Trustee Rick Williams, Treasurer Janet Eyster, Clerk Ernie Gaffner and
Supervisor Mickey Martin
Absent: None
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR AGENDA & NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:03 p.m.
Donna Tocarchick, 9605 Deer Trail, recommended the Township include Township
Budget information on their website.
Al LeBlanc, 4720 Jadestone Drive, shared comments on the Fine Art Sale Studio
Tour and the Townships collaborative movement for police protection.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:05 p.m.
INGHAM COUNTY SHERIFF report Sgt. Steve Sopocy—Sergeant Sopocy shared May 2010
Activity Report for Williamstown Township.
Sergeant Sopocy stated that when calling from a cell phone a person may reach a
911 operator for a district outside the area the person was calling from and
should ask specifically to be transferred to the county or jurisdiction of
choice. These instances can easily occur as cell towers across jurisdictional
lines may be the tower receiving and transmitting an individual’s call and not
ring into the area from which the call is made. Making a 911 call using a
“landline” has a greater chance of reaching the correct 911 operator.
Neighborhood Watch Meeting—Supervisor Martin shared the Neighborhood Watch
meeting will be held Thursday, June 3, 2010 beginning at 6:30 p.m. Sergeant
Sopocy will not be in attendance, but the meeting should be well attended by
other members of the Sheriff’s Department.
CONSENT AGENDA
Consent Agenda—Supervisor Martin read through the items.
Motion by Trustee Williams to move the consent agenda consisting of:
Minutes of April 6, 2010 and May 4, 2010
      Treasurer’s Report, May 2010   
Accounts Payable Checks Paid – checks 18547–18572 with checks 18561, 18563,
18566 and 18571 voided, for a total of $13,680.72
Payroll Paid Checks 41008–41043and EFTs 41-45 for a total of $19,648.78
      Accounts Payable Checks to Approve 18573–18596 for a total of
$6,920.19   
Revenue and Expenditure Report ending 5/31/10
Pending Litigation Report
Seconded by Trustee Wright. Motion approved.
Planning Commission-- Planning Commission representative, Michael Fielek,
commented on recent commission business as outlined in the submitted minutes of
May 18, 2010.
Medical Marijuana Law—The Planning Commission spent time discussing a zoning
strategy for accommodating this law. Discussion of limiting hours of operation
and number of cars allowed in driveway at one time; considering whether to
handle each request by public hearing or administratively; considering special
use permit or Home Based Business. The Planning Commission will prepare a
recommendation at their June meeting.
Discussed Article 8 and will resume discussion at the June meeting.
Commissioner Fielek encouraged the Township Board members to contact him with
any questions or changes they might have to Article 8.
The Planning Commissioners raised a question on the assessment amount on
apartment buildings for police protection?
Supervisor Martin shared Apartment Buildings would be assessed a fee per unit
for police protection.
Unfinished Business
Resolution for MDOT Grant for Grand River--Supervisor Martin shared MDOT will
construct eight feet of additional paved width of shoulders for non-motorized
use along the eastbound and westbound sides of Highway M-43 (Grand River Ave)
from Zimmer Road to North Meridian Road, including signing and pavement
marking; together with necessary related work, located within the limits of the
township.
Discussion: It was recommended North Meridian Road be added to the description
for clarification purposes. The additional eight feet on both sides of the road
is required, due to the fact there is not enough room for separation between
vehicle traffic and a separate two way bike path.
Motion by Trustee Wright, that the Williamstown Township Board approve
Resolution #94, accepting the MDOT contract offer to participate in the State’s
MDOT Contract #10-5261, for construction of eight additional feet on both east
and westbound sides of M-43 (Grand River Avenue) from Zimmer Road to North
Meridian Road.
Seconded by Trustee Williams.
   Roll Call Vote: Ayes 7    Janet Eyster   Rick Williams    Nays: 0    
                      Ernie Gaffner   Martin Wright
                       Mickey Martin Frans Wilbrink
               Robert Hayes
   Motion approved.
New Business
--None
Reports
Departments & Committees
Parks and Recreation—Wanda Bloomquist shared fees are now being collected for
field usage. Jim McGrath is assisting the Parks and Recreation with identifying
invasive species so they can be pulled; volunteer work is being done on the
baseball and softball diamonds and Wanda is working with the Soccer Club
members to begin improvements to the soccer fields. Improvements include
protective fencing for the softball field and bike rack. Plans are in place for
an Ultimate Frisbee Tournament and Softball Tournament to attract people to the
park during the week of Red Cedar Jubilee. There will also be an event entitled
Geo Cashing (GPS Unit, Coordinates) hunt throughout the park.
Fine Art Sale Proceeds—Supervisor Martin shared about 300 tickets were sold and
over $1600 dollars was raised during this event. The dollars raised will go
towards playground equipment in Williamston Township. A model will be on
display once it is determined what the structure will look like so that
residents can see where their dollars are to be spent.
Garage Sale Event—Supervisor Martin shared this event was a great success! This
event is tied to the Energy Grant and numbers for people who sold items and
miles not driven will be reported.
Energy Audit—Treasurer Eyster shared the energy audit was completed and results
should be available by the July meeting. Supervisor Martin commended Treasurer
Eyster and Trustee Williams on their work with this grant.
Supervisor Martin shared an annual meeting with the City is required as part of
the annexation of the DPW building. Supervisor Martin recommends this meeting
be held at 6PM prior to the regular Township Board meeting in July. The meeting
date was agreed upon by the board
Wellhead Protection Grant Workshop with City of Williamston—Supervisor Martin
attended a meeting with the City of Williamston concerning the city water
supply and plans to eliminate dead ends to water lines. By looping all water
lines, the water quality would be more consistent for each consumer
July Tax Notices—Supervisor Martin shared information on the Police Protection
special assessment will be enclosed with the summer tax notices. These tax
notices are scheduled to be mailed July 1, 2010.
Ground Water Heat Pump—Treasurer Eyster shared information she received at a
presentation focused on vertical and horizontal closed loop ground water heat
pump systems. This type of system pays for itself quickly and has a life span
of 50 years. Treasurer Eyster shared a vertical closed loop would not be
required because of the large land area owned by the Township and if an open
system is used, a rain garden could be developed with the over flow to a
wetland area.
Leroy Township Fire Station—Trustee Wilbrink shared the bid for the addition of
a bay area came in at $700,000. Plans are to move forward with this bid. Phase
II of the plan includes remodeling of the old Leroy Township hall.
Building Inspector—Supervisor Martin shared that the most recent building
inspector hired by the Township resigned. Mr. Tim O’Neal of Leroy Township will
be Acting Building Inspector until further notice.
Public Comment for Agenda & Non-Agenda Items
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 8:20 p.m.
Donna Tocarchick, 9605 Deer Trail —made comments on medical marihuana, Article
8, Bike Path, Garage Sale and township website.
Clerk Gaffner reminded the board that public comments are limited to 3 minutes
per speaker.
Rod Imhoff, 2380 Wilgus Road, inquired about when the screen and projector
would be used in Township meetings. He stated he had also attended a meeting
presented by Applegate, regarding alternative heating sources like the “pump
and dump” system that would provide a cost savings to DTE Customers.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 8:28 p.m.
Review
Supervisor Martin provided the board with a review of tonight’s meeting.
Adjourn
MOTION by Trustee Hayes to adjourn 8:32 p.m.
MEETING ADJOURNED by Supervisor Martin at 8:32 p.m.
________________
Ernie Gaffner
Township Clerk
July 6, 2010
BOARD OF TRUSTEES MEETING
July 6, 2010
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the meeting agenda.
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
PRESENT BY ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Bob Hayes, Trustee Martin Wright, Trustee Frans Wilbrink,
Trustee Williams, Treasurer Janet Eyster, Clerk Ernie Gaffner and Supervisor
Mickey Martin
Absent: None
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR AGENDA & NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:03 p.m.
Mike Fielek, 797 Sherwood, commends the Township Board for initiating their
annual meeting with the city and other groups at 6:00 p.m.
Helen LeBlanc, 4727 Jadestone, shared questions regarding the monetary
contribution policy to be discussed later by the board.
Sue Stiffler, 5620 Shoeman Rd, had questions about the Township lawsuit filed
against the Stiffler family for not having a fence on one side of their pool
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:05 p.m.
INGHAM COUNTY SHERIFF report Sgt. Matthew Flint #5219 ---moved to later in
agenda.
CONSENT AGENDA
Consent Agenda—Supervisor Martin read through the items on the Consent Agenda
consisting of:
      Minutes of June 1, 2010
Reports   Treasurer’s Report, June 2010
Accounts payable checks paid18597 through 18627 for a total of $161,222.53
Accounts payable checks to approve 18628 though 18649 for a total of $5,930.73
Payroll Checks paid 41044 through 41072 and EFT’s 46, 47, 48, and 49 for a
total of $21,768.24
Revenue and expenditure report ending 6/30/10
Pending Litigation
Building inspectors report
Trustee Williams requested the Treasurer’s Report, June 2010 be pulled.
Motion by Treasurer Eyster to move the consent agenda consisting of:
Minutes of June 1, 2010 Williamstown Township board meeting      
Accounts payable checks paid18597 through 18627 for a total of
$161,222.53      Accounts payable checks to approve 18628 though 18649 for a
total of $5,930.73
Payroll Checks paid 41044 through 41072 and EFT’s 46, 47, 48, and 49 for a
total of $21,768.24
Revenue and expenditure report ending 6/30/10
Building inspectors report
Seconded by Clerk Gaffner.
Motion approved.
Discussion: Trustee Williams asked for clarification on the Treasurer’s Report
about the significant reduction in Township Cash. Treasurer Eyster provided an
explanation as the reduction was due to a payment to the Michigan Department of
Transportation for the Grand River project.
Motion by Trustee Wright, to move Treasurers Report, June 2010.
Seconded by Trustee Williams.
Motion approved.
Planning Commission-- Planning Commission representative, Michael Fielek,
commented on recent commission business as outlined in the submitted minutes of
June 15, 2010.
·   Medical Marihuana—Class A Home Occupation
·   Public Hearing scheduled for July 20, 2010 on revised draft amendments on
Medical Marihuana—as class A Home Occupation.
·   Public Hearing—July 20, 2010, Housekeeping amendments to the Wetlands
ordinance
·   Reviewed subcommittees for Trails and Greenways and Grand River Zoning
Ordinance
Supervisor Martin inquired about MDOT’s inquiry on round-a-bouts. Supervisor
Martin has information to share if MDOT decides to take a second look at round-
a-bouts in the township. It was recommended the Planning Commission keep the
Township Board abreast of movement on this topic.
New Business
Monetary Contributions policy #006—Treasurer Eyster is developing a policy for
the Township to be able to accept earmarked contributions.
After much discussion it was recommended the agreement state “once the project
is completed, the contributor could reallocate remaining funds be moved into
general funds to help support other projects.” Treasurer Eyster will research
language and bring back for action at the August 2010 meeting.
Road Improvements 2010—Supervisor Martin shared The Road Committee has met with
representatives from the ICRC and has asked the Township to consider their
recommendation to resurface Beeman Road at a total cost of $120,000.
The ICRC has agreed to treat the crack-filling and base repair as maintenance
at their cost adding $20,000 to their $30,000 from the secondary county roads
program, for a total of $50,000 if done this year. They would also include
minor shoulder and ditch improvements in their costs. The breakdown would be
$70,000 from the Township and $50,000 from the ICRC roads program.
The Road Committee recommends the Township Board approve the repair and
resurface of
Beeman Rd. The recommendation does require the Township to allocate $40,000 out
of the general fund, to be added to the $30,000 already set aside for road
projects. The committee also stated this recommendation would include the year
2011 Township funds allocated for road improvements.
Treasurer Eyster shared the Road Committee is also moving forward in creating a
five (5) year plan for repair and funding of all Township roads. They are in
the process of rating all of the roads with a simplified system to compare with
the County’s Pacer ratings also being conducted this summer.
Motion by Trustee Wright to move that the Williamstown Township board accept
the recommendation of the Township Road Committee to repair and resurface
Beeman Road this summer at an estimated cost of $120,000. Ingham County Road
Commission will contribute $30,000 matching funds and $20,000 maintenance
funds. Williamstown Township will contribute the $30,000 matching funds for
2010 and the $30,000 matching funds for 2011, plus an additional approximately
$10,000.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes.
Motion approved.  
INGHAM COUNTY SHERIFF report Sgt. Matthew Flint #5219 —Sergeant Matthew Flint
#5219 shared June 2010 Activity Report for Williamstown Township. Some
information included the number of complaints, traffic accidents, traffic
citations and number of patrol hours in the Township. The Detective Bureau
continues to work with Clinton County on suspects involved in the home
invasions. They encourage residents to keep doors and windows locked when no
one is home.
Bidding Policy #007—Treasurer Eyster shared the Township does not have a policy
for this process. A copy of a proposed draft has been provided for Township
Board to review. It was recommended all bids be in writing unless board
approves otherwise.
Motion by Trustee Hayes when the Williamstown Township Board approves a project
requiring bids, the Board authorizes the Township Supervisor to solicit bids
for a project from two or more vendors, as specified by the Board. The bids
will be obtained in writing unless verbal bids are approved by the Board.
Seconded by Trustee Williams.
Motion approved.
Reports
Departments & Committees
Primary Election August 3—Supervisor Martin shared requests for absentee
ballots can be picked up at the Township Hall until the Monday before Election
Day.
Note: Due to the August 3, 2010, election, the next Township Board meeting will
be held the 10th of August.
Grants—Supervisor Eyster shared the 2nd Garage Sale/Recycling event will be
held Saturday, July 10. The 3rd Garage Sale/Recycling event in August will
feature a light bulb exchange—bring one incandescent light bulb to exchange and
receive one for free.
Energy Audit – Treasurer Eyster shared the energy audit will provide measures
to be done to the township building’s lighting and heating in order to save
energy. There is a good chunk of money in the energy grant to fund
recommendations from the Energy Audit. All Board members will receive a copy of
the energy audit once it is received.
Police Protection—Supervisor Martin shared the Townships are moving forward.
There are 12 townships on board along with the Village of Dansville. Each
agency is preparing a resolution for the November ballot. Summer tax bills
included a notice to residents on the police protection initiative.
MTA Chapter Meeting, July 28 in Stockbridge. Supervisor Martin would like
Township Board members to let Michele know if you will attend.
Annual Township Financial Audit—Supervisor Martin reminded the Board the audit
will take place this month (July).
Bus Stop with energy grant, Supervisor Martin met with MDOT and they like the
idea of having a Bus Stop at Williamstown Township Park. Contractors that will
do road work for MDOT in the process of making a contract with them to use park
as a staging area. (Park-n-Ride)—Supervisor Martin shared “yes Park-n-Ride” is
an idea and will be considered. One bus shelter in park area for picking up
people going toward Lansing and a drop off area on the other side of road, but
not a shelter for those coming back from Lansing. Bus shelter will be paid for
with grant funds. MDOT and CATA excited about this opportunity.
N.I.E.S.A. construction—Trustee Wilbrink shared construction is underway at
Leroy Hall for their facelift addition.
Public Comment for Agenda & Non-Agenda Items
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 8:05 p.m.
Billy Jo O ‘Berry, Candidate for 30th Circuit Court in Ingham County—provided
an overview of her background and encouraged everyone to get out and vote in
the August 3rd Primary!
Sue Stiffler, 5620 Shoeman Road, expressed concern about the website and
inquired about Township building inspector.
Rod Imhoff, 2380 Wilgus Road, inquired about the Bus Stop maintenance at the
Park and the questioned having the drop off for the bus stop across the road.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 8:12 p.m.
MOTION—closed session
Motion by Treasurer Eyster to move into closed session.
Roll Call Vote: Ayes: 7    Supervisor Martin   Treasurer Eyster       
                      Clerk Gaffner      Trustee Wright
               Trustee Hayes      Trustee Wilbrink
               Trustee Williams
    Motion Approved     
The meeting moved into closed session at 8:14 p.m.
Board came back into open session at 8:56 p.m.
Adjourn
MOTION by Trustee Hayes to adjourn 8:57 p.m.
   MEETING ADJOURNED by Supervisor Martin at 8:57 p.m.
________________
Ernie Gaffner
Township Clerk
August 10, 2010
BOARD OF TRUSTEES MEETING
August 10, 2010
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the meeting agenda.
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
PRESENT BY ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Martin Wright, Trustee Frans Wilbrink, Treasurer Janet Eyster,
Clerk Ernie Gaffner and Supervisor Mickey Martin
Absent: Trustee Bob Hayes and Trustee Rick Williams
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR AGENDA & NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:05 p.m.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:05 p.m.
INGHAM COUNTY SHERIFF report Sgt. Steve Sopocy #5235— was unable to join the
meeting personally, but provided the Township Board with a July 2010 Activity
Report for Williamstown Township. Some information included the number of
complaints, traffic accidents, traffic citations and number of patrol hours in
the Township. Sheriff’s tips included: watch what goes into trash, shred
anything with personal information, don’t put bills in personal mailbox drop
them off at US Postal Service, check your credit report.
CONSENT AGENDA
Consent Agenda—Supervisor Martin read through the items on the Consent Agenda
consisting of:
      Minutes of June 1, 2010
Reports   Minutes of July 6, 2010 Williamstown Township board meeting
Treasurer’s Report, July 2010
Accounts payable checks paid
Accounts payable checks to approve
Payroll Checks paid
Revenue and expenditure report ending 7/31/2010
Pending Litigation
Building inspectors report
It was recommended the minutes of July 6, 2010 be pulled.
Motion by Treasurer Eyster to move the consent agenda consisting of:
1.   Treasurer’s Report, July 2010
2.   Accounts payable checks paid 18650 through 18672 for a total of $22,837.72
3.   Accounts payable checks to approve 18673 through 18701 for a total of
$7,272.81
4.   Payroll Checks paid 41073 through 41118 and EFT’s 50 through 54 for a
total of $29,406.24
5.   Revenue and expenditure report ending 7/31/2010
6.   Pending Litigation
7.   Building inspectors report
Seconded by Clerk Gaffner. Motion approved.
Discussion: Trustee Wilbrink moved to pull the Minutes of July 6, 2010. Trustee
Wilbrink shared on Page 4, under Niesa Construction the word facelift should be
changed to addition.
Motion by Trustee Wilbrink to approve the minutes of July 6, 2010.
Supported by Clerk Gaffner. Motion approved.
Planning Commission-- Planning Commission representative, Michael Fielek,
commented on recent commission business as outlined in the submitted minutes of
July 20, 2010.
·   Medical Marihuana Public Hearing—Chairman Michael Fielek shared a public
hearing was held on July 20, 2010. The Planning Commissioners were looking at
placing this activity under “Class A Home Occupation”. Township residents made
it clear they did not want this type of occupation allowed in the township near
churches or schools.
Supervisor Martin plans to follow up with the concerns raised. She will contact
legal counsel, other Township Supervisors, and the MTA in order to research the
idea of placing a moratorium on this issue while the Planning Commission works
to establish a sound ordinance for this type of occupation. It was recommended
this item be part of each agenda until further notice.
·   Wetlands Public Hearing—Chairman Michael Fielek shared a public hearing was
held on July 20, 2010. The Planning Commissioners were pleased with the
suggestions that came forward and are working with McKenna and Associates, Inc.
to finalize the Well Protection Ordinance and will have the documentation ready
for Township Board approval at their September meeting.
·   Article 8 of Zoning Ordinance—Chairman Michael Fielek shared copies of
Articles 3-7 with Township Board members. Chairman Fielek also recommended
Articles 3-7 be approved by the board.
Motion by Trustee Wright to move that the Williamstown Township Board accept
the recommendation of the Planning Commission and adopt the suggested revisions
to the Township Zoning Ordinance, articles #3, #4, #5, #6 and #7 with changes.
Seconded by Treasurer Eyster. Motion approved. 
Unfinished Business
Monetary Contributions—Treasurer Eyster would like to see a mechanism in place
for restricted and non-restricted contributions. This mechanism would allow the
Board to make decisions on restricted and non-restricted contributions of
$1,000 or more; unrestricted contributions less than $1,000, the Supervisor or
Treasurer would be able to accept without Township Board approval. This
mechanism would also allow an elected official to talk with donors about
remaining dollars that linger in accounts after a 5-year period.
Motion by Trustee Wright to move the adoption of Accepting Monetary
Contributions policy #006.
Seconded by Supervisor Martin. Motion approved.
New Business
Acceptance of Contribution—Treasurer Eyster shared the Capital Region Community
Foundation—Donor Advisor Dr. Joan Wright granted Williamstown Township a
restricted donation of $450 in order to purchase a Teacher’s Desk for Branch
School—District 4.
Motion by Trustee Wilbrink to move that the Williamstown Township Board accept
the restricted donation of $450.00 from The Wilbur and Ruth Wright Charitable
Fund of the Capital Region Community with Donor Advisor Dr. Joan Wright. The
donation’s purpose is to purchase a Teacher’s Desk for Branch School. Further,
the Supervisor is directed to establish a restricted expenditure account 101-
751-882.001 and add $450.00 to it and reduce the contingency fund 101-890-
965.000 by $450.00.
Seconded by Treasurer Eyster. Motion approved.
Reports
Departments & Committees
Primary Election August 3—Clerk Gaffner shared 666 voters turned out at
Precinct 2, 764 at Princinct 1. This was a 45% voter turnout.
Energy Audit – Treasurer Esyter shared the light bulb exchange is scheduled for
this weekend (Aug 14). The Township is working with Home Depot and Detroit
Edison for this event. There will be many types of bulbs on display.
The Energy Audit has arrived. The heating plan still needs to be reviewed. Once
this energy audit is complete the Township will receive an addendum. Treasurer
Eyster will send out an email to Township board members once the addendum is
available. The Township must provide items of acceptance by September 7. A
special meeting beginning at 5:30 p.m. for August 24, 2010, is being proposed
to select items from the energy grant. Supervisor Martin will confirm this date
via email.
Recycling—Supervisor Martin shared the Recycling Event will be held this
weekend (Aug 14).
Rain Gardens—Planning Commissioner Bloomquist shared the 1st Thursday series is
set to begin Thursday, August 12 on Rain Gardens; next month (September)
Composting, and last part of series (October) Wind-n-Solar. This is supported
by the grant. All sessions will be held at the Township Hall at 7pm.
Parks—Park-n-Ride—Planning Commissioner Bloomquist shared the curb and gutter
has been installed for this service.
Volunteer project day at park—Planning Commissioner Bloomquist shared the
volunteer project day at Williamstown Township Park will be held the last day
of September.
Police Protection—Supervisor Martin shared the majority of the Townships are on
board with Police Protection. Plans to hold a Townhall meeting in September and
October are underway to inform local residents of the goal of townships to
provide police protection.
Make a Wish Foundation Bike-A-Thon—Supervisor Martin shared the Make a Wish
Foundation Bike-A-Thon granted 200 wishes with the money they raised with over
300 bikers that participated. The Township received a thank you note for the
use of township facility for break stop.
Public Comment for agenda & non-agenda items**
Supervisor Martin opened public comment at 8:20 p.m.
Rod Imhoff, 2380 Wilgus Rd.--Commissioner Imhoff commented on the ordinance
revision for the barbed-wire fence put back at 18 inches. If Township is
considering a geo-thermal system they should check with Great Lakes State and
Applegate. Inquired about the 5-year road plan.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 8:27 p.m.
Motion by Treasurer Eyster to move into close session for purposes of
discussing pending litigation.
Supported by Trustee Wright.
Roll Call Vote: Ayes: 5    Supervisor Martin   Treasurer Eyster    Motion
Approved   
                      Clerk Gaffner      Trustee Wright
               Trustee Wilbrink
The meeting moved into closed session at 8:30 p.m.
The meeting returned to open session at 9:11 p.m.
Adjourn
MOTION by Clerk Gaffner to adjourn.
   MEETING ADJOURNED by Supervisor Martin at 9:12 p.m.
________________
Ernie Gaffner
Township Clerk
August 31, 2010
BOARD OF TRUSTEES MEETING
August 31, 2010
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 8:15 a.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the meeting agenda.
PRESENT BY ROLL CALL
Present: Treasurer Janet Eyster, Clerk Ernie Gaffner, Supervisor Mickey Martin,
Trustee Bob Hayes and Trustee Rick Williams
Absent: Trustee Martin Wright and Trustee Frans Wilbrink
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR AGENDA & NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 8:16 a.m.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 8:16 a.m.
AGENDA
Discussion of the Michigan Department of Energy, Labor and Economic Growth
(DELEG) Grant and the completed Energy Audit by ENERGYCHECK™.
Treasurer Eyster explained the process to be taken by the Township in utilizing
the Energy Grant. The Township Board will need to take three votes:
1.   Based on the Energy Audit, what areas should ENERGYCHECK™ draft bid
specifications.
2.   Approve the bid specifications.
3.   Approve bids to be accepted for completion of energy saving projects.
The grant funding will be utilized in three areas; 1) Weatherizing; 2)
Lighting; 3) Heating.
Due to the complexity of oversight relative to the energy grant funds,
ENERGYCHECK™ will assist Treasurer Eyster in the management of the funds and
required reporting.
The three additional townships sharing the energy grant, Locke, Leroy and
Wheatfield have received their energy audits and are following this same
process.
Supervisor Martin stated that the Township is presently waiting for additional
information to install a shelter at the Park-N-Ride location on Grand River.
The shelter will be paid for with some of the Energy Grant funds.
Treasurer Eyster provided information on various Geo-Thermal scenarios for
heating the Township office building. In Michigan’s climate, information
supplied by ENERGYCHECK™ indicates that using a ground water system is much
more efficient than an air to air system.
Motion by Trustee Hayes to have specifications drafted by ENERGYCHECK™ for an
open ground water heating system.
Supported by Trustee Williams. Motion approved.
MOTION by Trustee Williams to adjourn.
   MEETING ADJOURNED by Supervisor Martin at 9:30 a.m.
________________
Ernie Gaffner
Township Clerk
September 7, 2010
BOARD OF TRUSTEES MEETING
September 7, 2010
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the meeting agenda.
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
PRESENT BY ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Bob Hayes, Rick Williams, Martin Wright, Trustee Frans
Wilbrink, Treasurer Janet Eyster and Supervisor Mickey Martin
Absent: Clerk Ernie Gaffner
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR AGENDA & NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:05 p.m.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:05 p.m.
INGHAM COUNTY SHERIFF report Sgt. Steve Sopocy #5235— Sgt. Sopocy shared he
will take a commanding position at the Detective Bureau as of September 25,
2010. Sgt. Dan Sump will be Sgt. Sopocy’s replacement on all of his
assignments. Sgt. Sump comes highly recommended with 15 plus years experience.
Sgt. Sopocy provided the Township Board with an August 2010 Activity Report for
Williamstown Township. Some information included the number of complaints,
traffic accidents, traffic citations and number of patrol hours in the
Township. Detective monthly highlights have been larcenies and malicious
destruction of personal property. Safety tip is to be cautious while driving as
school is in session and remind children, “don’t talk to strangers”.
Supervisor Martin—Reported informed Sgt. Sopocy that the site distance at Barry
and Shoeman Roads is hazardous. Sherwood and Zimmer Roads is also hazardous.
Supervisor will meet with ICRC this Friday, September 10, 2010 and will bring
this to their attention.
CONSENT AGENDA
Consent Agenda—Supervisor Martin read through the items on the Consent Agenda
consisting of:
      Minutes of August 10 and 31, 2010 Meeting
Reports   Treasurer’s Report, August 2010
Accounts payable checks paid
Accounts payable checks to approve
Payroll Checks paid
Revenue and expenditure report ending 8/31/2010
Pending Litigation
Building inspectors report
Motion by Treasurer Eyster to move the consent agenda consisting of:
1.   Minutes of 8/10/2010 and 8/31/2010—Williamstown Township Board meetings;
2.   Treasurer’s Report, August 2010;
3.   Accounts payable checks paid 18702 through 18731 for a total of
$25,538.77;
4.   Accounts payable checks to approve 18732 through 18746 for a total of
$6,629.96;
5.   Payroll Checks paid 41119 through 41138 and 41140 through 41161 and EFT 55
for a total of $17,637.97 with check 41139 being void;
6.   Revenue and expenditure report ending 8/31/2010;
7.   Pending Litigation; and
8.   Building inspectors report
Seconded by Trustee Williams. Motion approved.
Planning Commission-- Planning Commission representative, Michael Fielek,
commented on recent commission business as outlined in the submitted minutes of
August 17, 2010.
Wetland Ordinance—changes are included and recommended for board adoption.
McKenna and Associates, Inc. included a Memo dated August 19, 2010 that
included several recommended changes to the Wetland Ordinance. The majority of
the changes are housekeeping items related to changes in state law,
redundancies and changes to the name Department of Natural Resources has been
renamed Department of Natural Resources and Environment (DNRE).
Motion by Trustee Wright that the Williamstown Township Board accept the
recommendation of the Planning Commission and adopt the REVISED WETLAND
ORDINANCE as presented by the Planning Commission.
Seconded by Treasurer Eyster. Motion approved.
Medical Marijuana Ordinance was also discussed. The Planning Commissioners will
continue to gather information from other communities. Information will be
collected and considered as the Planning Commission works towards establishing
a sound Medical Marijuana Ordinance. The Planning Commissioners felt they
received good comments from their Public Hearing.
The Planning Commission also worked on Article 8.
Unfinished Business
Marijuana Moratorium resolution #95—Supervisor Martin shared a resolution to
establish a six month moratorium while a Medical Marijuana Ordinance is
developed. Tri-Counties and Michigan Municipalities are working on definitions
for dispensaries, grow areas, compassion care clubs, etc. in order to bring
consistency among townships. The Township will move forward after a
recommendation is received.
Trustee Hayes made suggestions for removal of language: Strike new state
legislation passed, but last paragraph has value. Whereas (strike) Senate bill
616, 617, 618 remove. Whereas (strike) Add “temporarily” forbid until such
time… Take state legislation out.
Motion by Treasurer Eyster to move the Williamstown Township Board adopt
Resolution #95, RESOLUTION ESTABLISHING A SIX MONTH MORATORIUM RELATING TO
FACILITIES DISTRIBUTING MEDICAL MARIJUANA, as amended.
Seconded by Trustee Wright.
Roll Call Vote: Ayes:6    Supervisor Martin   Treasurer Eyster    Motion
Approved   
                      Trustee Hayes      Trustee Wright
               Trustee Williams   Trustee Wilbrink
                    
New Business
Fee Schedule—Planning Commissioner Bloomquist shared a new fee schedule is
being presented as this schedule has not been updated since 2003. The increases
were in development and commercial fees. The Township will ask for an amount to
be used as an escrow deposit and return any unused funds at the end of the
process.
Motion by Trustee Hayes to move the Williamstown Township Board approve the
recommended Planning Department changes to the Rezoning, Site Plan Review and
Special Use Permit Escrow fees charged by the Township, to the following fee
schedule:
   Preliminary Plat Review         $2500
   Final Plat Review            $2500
   Condominium               $2500
   Special Land Use & Site Plan Review   $2500
   Revised Site Plan or Major Redesign      $2500
   Modifications or extensions         $2500
   Residential               $500
   Modification or extension         $300
   Commercial Rezoning         $2500
   Residential Rezoning            $500
   Plus additional $50 for each split possible   +
   Conditional Rezoning            $2000
   Residential Variance            $300
   Commercial Variance          $500
   Commercial Wetland Use Permit      $2000
   Residential Wetland Use Permit      $500
Seconded by Trustee Wright. Motion Approved.         
EECBG Grant—Approvals—Treasurer Eyster shared a project is in the works for the
composting toilet addition at the Summit Cemetery. The cemetery committee has
reviewed the project and is comfortable with the composting toilet addition and
have agreed to pay for the cost of materials not to exceed $5,000 with board
approval. Planning Assistant Bloomquist has identified an Eagle Scout that
would be willing to use this idea for an Eagle Scout Project. This is a wood
structure with a cement base to be constructed in the SE corner of the cemetery
and is ADA compliant. This project needs to be finished by December 15, 2010.
Motion by Trustee Wright to move that the Williamstown Township Board approve
the building of a bathroom addition to the Summit Cemetery maintenance building
in compliance with ADA standards and funded by cemetery budget funds, with a
total cost for materials not to exceed $5,000.
Supported by Trustee Williams. Motion Approved.
Planning Commission Appointments—Supervisor Martin shared Planning Commission
appointments for three year term nominees are: Martin Wright, Rex LaMore, and
Jocelyn Brown Timm. Wanda Bloomquist will continue as Planning Assistant.
Motion by Treasurer Eyster to appoint the following nominees: Rex Lamore,
Martin Wright. Jocelyn Brown Timm as Planning Commissioners for a three-year
term beginning October 2010.
Supported by Trustee Hayes. Motion Approved.
The Township Board recessed at 8:20 p.m.
The Township Board returned to regular meeting at 8:22 p.m.
Reports
Departments & Committees
Leroy Township Fire Department—Trustee Wilbrink reminded the Township Board
that The Leroy Township Fire Department will host the Ox Roast, the weekend of
September 24, 2010.
Historic Committee—Trustee Wilbrink shared there will be an Open House held at
the Historic Branch School House, October 2, 2010 from 2-6 p.m. with the
Dedication being held at 3pm.
Columbarium—Supervisor Martin shared Summit Cemetery will hold a dedication of
the Columbarium October 23, 2010 at 11:00 a.m.
Township Pavilion—Supervisor Martin shared the Township Pavilion has been power
washed and restained and looks amazing.
Safe Streets to Schools Grant—Supervisor Martin shared the Safe Streets to
Schools Grant has been awarded in the amount of $233,000. Supervisor Martin
credits Deb Grishke for being very instrumental in an effort to get this grant.
This grant will add sidewalks on Mitchell and Vannetter Roads among other
things.
Recycling— Supervisor Martin shared the Boy Scouts will no longer take papers
at recycling, but New Venture Crew 363 (boy and girl) Venture Club will now
begin taking over this piece. Recycling and Garage Sale will be held this
Saturday, September 11, 2010 from 8:00-3:00 p.m.
Police Protection--Supervisor Martin suggested dates for a Town hall meeting on
police protection and neighborhood watch. The Township Board decided to hold a
meeting on October 6th from 6pm-8pm. If needed, a second meeting will be held
on October 21st from 6pm-8pm.
First “Thursday” of the month series-- Composting is the topic that will be
presented by Gary Hielig from Michigan State University, Thursday, Sept 9, 2010
at the Township Hall at 7:00 p.m. Planning Commissioner Bloomquist encourages
all board members to attend.
Park Volunteer Clean Up – Planning Commissioner Bloomquist reminded Township
Board members that the park volunteer clean-up day is scheduled for September
25, 2010 from 10:00-2:00 p.m.
Bus Shelter--Treasurer Eyster shared the bus shelter has been ordered. CATA was
able to provide a $1,000 discount. The structure is made in Canton, Michigan.
Public Comment for agenda & non-agenda items**
Supervisor Martin opened public comment at 8:47 p.m.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 8:47 p.m.
Adjourn
Motion by Trustee Hayes to adjourn 8:50 p.m.
Roll Call Vote: Ayes:6    Supervisor Martin   Treasurer Eyster    Motion
Approved   
                      Trustee Hayes      Trustee Wright
               Trustee Williams   Trustee Wilbrink
                    
         
                 
   
________________
Ernie Gaffner
Township Clerk
October 5th, 2010
BOARD OF TRUSTEES MEETING
October 5th, 2010
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 pm at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order, reviewed the agenda and explained
procedures for public comment.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Trustee Wright, Trustee Hayes, Trustee Williams,
Treasurer Eyster Clerk Gaffner and Supervisor Martin.
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR AGENDA & NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:03 p.m.
·   Judge Tom Boyd reminded residents that October is domestic violence month.
Provided Citizens guides for residents. Provided the following stats of drunk
driving cases before the court since 2008 for the 1st 6 months of the year.
1.   2008- 207
2.   2009-190
3.   2010-94
Noted that the ICSD began layoffs in 2007.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:06 p.m.
SHERIFF’S REPORT
Report was presented by Sgt. Sump providing the following September stats:
§   Criminal Complaints: 9 YTD: 141
§   Blotter Calls: 10 YTD 118
§   Traffic Accidents: 10 YTD:61
§   Citations: 16 YTD: 115
§   Patrol time: 126.60 hours YTD 1856.50
Detective Bureau is working on following up on larcenies in the area.
Discussion points:
·   Protocol for natural death
·   Road commission involvement with accident prone areas
·   Averages for police protection per/1000 residents
1.   National: 2.3
2.   Midwest: 2.2
3.   Michigan: 1.6
4.   Ingham County: .6
·   How will the above numbers be adjusted with passage of assessment for
Police protection
·   How will number adjust for Ingham County with future layoffs at ICSD
Supervisor Martin introduced Wanda Bloomquist as new recording secretary.
CONSENT AGENDA
§   Minutes of 09 07 10 Meeting
§   Treasurer’s Report
§   Building Inspector Report
§   Accounts Payable Checks Paid
§   Payroll Paid Checks & EFTS
§   Accounts Payable Checks For Approval
§   Revenue /Expenditure Report
§   Pending Litigation
Motion by Trustee Williams to approve the consent agenda consisting of:
§   Minutes of 09 07 10 Meeting
§   Treasurer’s Report for Septembery, 2010
§   Building Inspector Report for September 2010
§   Accounts Payable Checks Paid 18747 through 18774 for a total of $53,274.06
with check 18747 marked as void.
§   Accounts Payable Checks to approve 18775 through 18789 for a total of
$3,391.57.
§   Payroll Paid Checks paid 41162 through 41191 and EFT 56,57,58 and 59 for a
total of $23,716.66
§   Revenue /Expenditure Report ending 9/30/2010
§   Pending Litigation
§   
Seconded by Treasurer Eyster
Motion Approved
Audit Report
Presentation by Shannon Rodriguez
§   Township had a tax decrease of $9500.
§   State Revenue decrease of $42,000
§   General Fund balance of 1.15 million.
§   Budget Surplus for fiscal year 2009-2010 of $144,000 went back into the
General Fund
§   Suggested continued pursuit of collecting Mobile Home Park debt.
§   Pleased with the limited recommendations (2)
Planning Commission
Chair Fielek reviewed the following:
§   September 21st meeting minutes
§   Public Hearing for rezoning request from Gregory Shannon scheduled for
October 19th.
§   Continued discussion of Medical Marihuana within the zoning ordinance. PC
is looking at other communities. Supervisor Martin is on the Tri-county task
force. The task force is looking at definitions and model ordinance for the
area.
§   Planning Commission is reviewing by-laws for changes due to the Zoning
Enabling Act and conflict of interest.
1.   Concern with Commissioner retaining right to speak as citizen when
recusing self for potential conflict of interest.
2.   Insurance that Commissioner would step down from any PC discussion
regarding matter with conflict of interest.
3.   Importance of legal council reviewing final language to protect the
Township.
4.   Should have final changes in October.
5.   Joint meeting with Board to hear presentation from Harmony Gmazel from
Tri-County Planning on Greening Mid-Michigan project
New Business
Monetary Contributions
George and Janet Eyster would like to make a donation to the Township for items
or improvements to the Branch School. There may be work needed to obtain
Historic Designation.
The historical committee would like to see designation by the end of the year.
Motion by Clerk Gaffner that the Township Board accept up to $2400 restricted
funds from George Eyster, VMD and Janet Eyster, PhD for purchasing items for
the Branch School and/or to pay for improvements necessary to obtain Historical
Status for Branch School. Further the Supervisor is authorized to increase the
budget line 101-751-882.001 by up to $2400 as the money is received.
Seconded by Hayes
Motion Approved
Budget Amendments
Supervisor Martin facilitated discussion of the need for budget amendments
including:
§   The number of elections and absentee voters.
§   Revenues sharing being restricted to taxes, assessing and elections
§   Need for sketches for assessing 14-point revue.
§   New category to show state of Michigan where monies are spent as all others
are not mandatory.
§   Needs to be part of BSA Accounting Software to provide reports to state as
they receive a copy of the budget.
§   No addition to budget expenses-further defining expenditures
§   Absentee voter application and ballots taking more time, over 400 absentee
ballots already sent out.
Motion by Trustee Wright that Williamstown Township increase the budget for
Election Deputy by $3100 and decrease the Deputy Clerk by $3100, increasing
Assessing Assistant by $4000 and decrease Supervisor Assistant by $4000,
increase Election Workers by $2600, Elections Printing and Supplies by $3500,
Elections Consultant by $1600 and decrease Contingency by $7700.
Seconded by Trustee Wilbrink.
Motion Approved
Reports
Departments and Committees
Communications Committee
Chair Marvin Thompson brought to the attention of the Board issues of service
that Freedomnet has encountered for the residents of the Township. Provided a
letter that the Committee is requesting be sent to residents that are using
Freedomnet to explain the issues and solutions being sought and the timetable
Freedomnet has expressed will be needed to solve the issues.
Discussion ensued regarding:
§   Appreciation for letter
§   Satisfaction with service
§   Will provide residents with needed information as to issues and solutions
§   Only company still in business that would provide rural service
§   Only reasonably priced service for many residents.
Parks
Supervisor Martin commented on the Volunteer Park Day. Much was done with few
people participating due to the conflicts that day. Soccer is currently using
the fields.
Branch School Open House
The committee was very surprised and pleased with the turn out for the open
house. Between 60-100 people turned out with 5 past students and 1 teacher in
attendance. Supervisor Martin, Treasurer Eyster and Trustee Wilbrink were in
attendance as well. The committee has worked over 3 years to restore the school
under the leadership of Tom Johnson. A dedication plaque were presented along
with certificates of appreciation to Tom Johnson, Fred and Anne Campbell and
Steve Eyke for their volunteer efforts.
Other discussion items discussed:
§   Committee to provide the Township Board with direction on uses for the
school
§   Security for the School
§   Not to be used until policy in place
§   Ways to deter looting and vandalism.
Other important dates coming up:
§   Oct 6th: Town Hall re: ballot issue 6:00 pm Neighborhood Watch 8:00 pm
§   Oct. 14th: Wind and Solar workshop as part of EECBG Grant Series
§   Oct 19th: Joint meeting with Planning Commission 6:30 Tri-county
presentation on Greening Mid-Michigan
§   Oct. 21st: 6:00 pm: Second Town Hall meeting re: Ballot issue for police
service
§   Oct. 26th: Ingham County Commission budget vote. Important meeting
regarding funding for ICSD reserve for out county police service.
§   Budgets are due from departments and Committees for beginning of Township
Budget review.
§   Compensation Committee will be meeting this year.
Public Comment
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 8:30.
Public Comments: None
Closed at 8:31.
Review
Thank you for the donation of artwork from Don Pixley for display at Township
Hall.
Thank you to George and Janet Eyster for their donation.
Letters from Township regarding Freedomnet will go out this week.
Motion by Trustee Hayes to adjourn the meeting at 8:35 pm.
Motion Carried
Meeting adjourned.
____________________________               
Ernie Gaffner
Township Clerk
November 2, 2010
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP
BOARD OF TRUSTEES MEETING
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 8:00 a.m. at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order, reviewed the agenda and explained
procedures for public comment.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wright, Trustee Hayes, Trustee Williams, Treasurer Eyster, and
Supervisor Martin.
Absent: Trustee Wilbrink and Clerk Gaffner
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR AGENDA & NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 8:02 a.m.
·   No Comments
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 8:02 a.m.
NEW BUSINESS
Treasurer Eyster presented the single bid from Superior Electric for exterior
lighting.
Motion by Treasurer Eyster to reject the bid by Superior Electric regarding
exterior lighting for Williamstown Township, in connection with the Energy
Grant.
Seconded by Trustee Wright.
Motion Approved
Clerk Gaffner arrived. 8:25 a.m.
Treasurer Eyster suggested the board obtain bids for interior lighting of the
Township office building, using some of the Energy Grant funds. Numerous
lighting fixtures are now available which use less energy than the existing
fixtures and a substantial reduction in the amount of energy used by the
Township would be realized.
Motion by Supervisor Martin that the Township obtain a minimum of two bids for
internal lighting fixtures, not to exceed $6,000 and proceed with the purchase.
Seconded by Treasurer Eyster.
Motion Approved
Treasurer Eyster presented the bids from S&J Heating & Insulation and Geostar
Mechanical for installation of a GeoThermal heating and cooling system for the
Township office building in connection with the Energy Grant. Bids were
provided for both an open and a closed GeoThermal system.
Discussion by the board:
   Pros and Cons of both open and closed systems.
   Will open system have a positive or negative effect on the wetlands east of
the township?
Motion by Supervisor Martin to approve the purchase of an open loop GeoThermal
system from Geostar Mechanical, unless the wetlands consultant advises that the
system would have a negative effect on the wetlands. A wetlands analysis is to
be completed in one week. If analysis is not possible the Township is to
proceed with the purchase of a closed loop system and a generator is to be
purchased with either system, of a size to meet the needed capacity.
Seconded by Treasurer Eyster
Motion Approved
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR AGENDA & NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 9:06 a.m.
·   No Comments
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 9:06 a.m.
Trustee Hayes moved for adjournment
Second by Treasurer Eyster
Meeting adjourned by Supervisor Martin at 9:07 a.m.
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner
Township Clerk
November 9, 2010
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP
BOARD OF TRUSTEES MEETING
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 p.m. at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order, reviewed the agenda and explained
procedures for public comment.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Trustee Wright, Trustee Hayes, Trustee Williams,
Treasurer Eyster Clerk Gaffner and Supervisor Martin.
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
Motion by Clerk Gaffner to add two items to the agenda:
1)   Under New Business, the Acceptance of Restricted Funds.
2)   After the second Public Comment time, the board needs to go into closed
session for purpose of litigation.
Seconded by: Trustee Wright
Motion Approved
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR AGENDA & NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:02 p.m.
·   John Kane 5170 N. Williamston Rd. Re: postings on website and closed
session
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:04 p.m.
SHERIFF’S REPORT
Report was presented by Sgt. Sump providing the following October stats:
§   Criminal Complaints: 18 YTD: 159
§   Blotter Calls: 18 YTD 136
§   Traffic Accidents: 5 YTD:66
§   Citations: 13 YTD: 128
§   Patrol time: 120.70 hours YTD 1980.20
Detective Bureau is investigating a CSC complaint, Larceny/Fraud and charges
are being sought on a CSC complaint..
Discussion points:
·   Reminder to drive carefully with change in weather.
CONSENT AGENDA
Minutes of 10 05 & 19 10 Meeting
      Reports:   Treasurer’s Report
            Building Inspector
            Accounts Payable – Paid
            Payroll – Paid
            Accounts Payable - Approval
            Revenue/Expenditure
            Pending Litigation
Consent Agenda
Motion by Treasurer Eyster to move the consent agenda consisting of:
1.   Minutes of 10/05/2010 and 10/19/2010 - Williamstown Township board
meetings
2.   Treasurer’s Report, October 10 th 2010
3.   Accounts payable paid, checks 18790 through 18818 with checks 18807 and
18809 marked void for a total of $116,804.42
4.   Accounts payable checks to approve 18819 through 18844 for a total of
$10,875.73
5.   Payroll Checks paid 41193 through 41226 and EFTs 60, 61, 62 and 63 for a
total of $22,484.05.
6.   Revenue and expenditure report ending 10/31/2010
7.   Pending Litigation
8.   Building inspectors report
Seconded by: Clerk Gaffner
Motion Approved
Planning Commission
Chair Fielek reviewed the following:
·   Held the Public Hearing for Shannon Rezoning –will deliberate at 11/16/
2010.
·    Current slate of officers will serve another term.
·   Approved amendments to by-laws regarding conflict of interest.
·    Discussed Medical Marihuana and will continue to review.
·    Article 8 review continued.
·   November meeting will have highlights of grant competition.
By-law changes will be sent to the attorney for review.
Unfinished Business
Budget 2011-2012
·   Proposed budget. Estimated revenue sharing expected to go up. Tax revenue
expected to go down. CPI expected to go up.
·   Please review this first draft of the budget- includes all request to date.
Reminder that a lot of items were transferred to energy grant for 2010-11.
·   Compensation committee will meet for Fiscal year 12-13 recommendations.
·   40,000 in contingency.
·    ($24803) for 1 st time around with draft budget.
·   Correction needed for Zoning Board of Appeals $800 to $2809.
·   Please submit changes by November 16 th . Public Hearing in February. Vote
in Feb or March.
New Business
Early Closing for Thanksgiving
Motion by Trustee Hayes that the Williamstown Township Board approve the
closing of the Williamstown Township Office each Thanksgiving eve at 4:00 p.m.
beginning November 24 th 2010 or until such time the regular Township office
hours are changed.
Seconded by Treasurer Eyster
Discussion: none
Motion Approved
Drain petition
Petition enclosed for resident request for drain commission to look at issues
by petitioners.
Motion by Trustee Wright that the Williamstown Township Board forward the drain
proposal submitted by the Partridge family and dated 10/15/2010 to the Ingham
County Drain Commissioner, along with a letter of support from the Township.
Seconded by Hayes
Discussion: none
Motion Approved
Internet contract proposal
Supervisor Martin explained the interference issues. Communication Committee
has met with Freedomnet to discuss ways to remedy the problem.
Communication Committee Chair Marvin Thompson: Letter sent to subscribers.
Freedomnet found the source of massive interference in Ingham Township. Tech
expert recommends switching to 3.65 Megahertz and is running a trail test in
Grand Rapids to make sure it will work. Freedomnet has rec. gov’t approval.
Replacing system cost $30,000. Township will purchase equipment and sell to
Freedomnet over 3 years at 6% interest. This will allow a quick solution for
residents. This solution guarantees no interference. The proposed solution will
require new devices at subscriber level. Freedomnet has been conscientious
about providing service. This equipment is capable of offering higher speeds.
Motion by Trustee Williams that the Williamstown Township Board approve the
recommended FreedomNet Solutions request to enter into a $30,000 agreement with
the Township for upgrades to the FreedomNet equipment erected on Township
property. The Township Supervisor, Treasurer and Clerk are authorized by the
Township Board to approve a contract between the Township and FreedomNet
without further input from the Township Board “for this agreement only.”
Seconded by Treasurer Eyster
Discussion:
·   Legality of contract w/ government unit. Clarification that Approval by
officers for this contract. 
Motion by Hayes to amend the motion “for this agreement only”
Seconded by Trustee Wright
Motion for the amendment Approved
Motion Approved
Compensation Committee appointments
Supervisor Martin has two appointment recommendations for terms expiring.
Wilbur McNinch as chair. Jim Conroy to replace Dave Robinson who is stepping
down.
Motion by Trustee Hayes, that the Williamstown Township Board approve the
appointment of Wilbur McNinch and Jim Conroy to the Williamstown Township
compensation committee.
Seconded by Clerk Gaffner
Discussion: none
Motion Approved
Restricted Funds
For the Branch School and the purchase of the hanging globe and moon.
Motion by Trustee Hayes that the Williamstown Township Board accept $244 of
restricted funds from the Questers Shagbark to purchase items for the Branch
School. Further the Supervisor is authorized to increase budget line 101-751-
882.001 by $244 and decrease contingency 101-890-965.000 by the same amount.
Seconded by Treasurer Eyster
Discussion:
·   Method of accounting
·   Questers is a group interested in Historical Preservation.
Motion Approved 
Reports
Departments & Committees
·   Election Results- Clerk Gaffner- 66% voter turn out
·   Neighborhood Watch meeting- Trustee Hayes will be setting up a couple more
meetings. Safety points: keep phone on body in case of accident. Sheets
available on how to keep home safe- available on website. Anyone else
interested in setting a neighborhood watch. Gary Rutherford is contact person.
Helpful for TWP to provide funds to facilitate dev. of Neighborhood watches.
North end active with 150 participating and growing. Signage along roads
indicating neighborhood watch area- County approved. Watches also forming in
Pebblebrook and Ban-ga-naka.
·   Medical Marihuana Task Force meeting tomorrow. Discussing definitions and
licensing vs. ordinance. Moratorium was important. Have had a request for a
dispensary.
Public Comment for agenda & non-agenda items**
·   Al LeBlanc: Re: Communication Committee’s work
·   Ger Schultink: Re: Website and Internet Service
·   John Kane: Re: Compensation Committee
Motion by Trustee Wright that the Township Board go into executive session for
the purpose of discussing legal action pertaining to 530 and 2445 E. Grand
River Road and contract negotiations.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes.
Roll Call Vote: Yes: Martin, Gaffner, Eyster, Wright, Hayes, Williams
No: Wilbrink
Closed Session began at 8:02 p.m.
8:38 p.m. Board Back in Regular Session
Motion by Trustee Wright to form a committee of three board members (Supervisor
Martin, Treasurer Eyster and Trustee Hayes) and two township residents at large
chosen by the three board members to serve as a police services committee to
develop a contract proposal for presentation to the Township Board for Township
Police Services effective January 1, 2011.
Second by Trustee Hayes
Motion Approved
The board discussed the scheduled 11/16/2010 public hearing for the purpose of
allowing Township property owners to express any concerns they may have
relative to their property being included or excluded from the voter approved
special assessment for Township police protection. Board members expressed
concern that residents understand the purpose of the meeting and that it was
not an opportunity for people to comment on whether the township should proceed
with procurement of police protection.
Clerk Gaffner moved for adjournment
Second by Trustee Hayes
Meeting adjourned by Supervisor Martin at 8:52 p.m.
___________________________
Ernie Gaffner
Township Clerk
November 16, 2010
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP
BOARD OF TRUSTEES SPECIAL MEETING
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 6:00 pm at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order reviewed the agenda and explained
procedures for public comment.
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Trustee Wright, Trustee Hayes, Treasurer Eyster,
Clerk Gaffner and Supervisor Martin.
Absent: Trustee Williams
PUBLIC Hearing- Special Assessment District - Police Service
Supervisor Martin explained the Public Hearing was to determine the district
and the parcels within the district. Assessment amount of $150. for residential
and $250. for commercial unit was approved by the voters. Questions and
concerns not to do with the district would be taken at the end as time allowed.
Discussion regarding the PH procedures:
·   Did out of state owners receive enough notice?
·   Questioned the need for the notice to be published twice
·   Act 33 of 1951 states: all lands shall be assessed. Vacant Land assessment
would be $0
Public Hearing opened at 6:10.
*John Kane 5170 N. Williamston Rd: Against the special assessment. Statute
requirements were not followed. Advertising requirements were not followed.
Assessment not equally spread amongst property owners. Act 116 of 1923
requirements was not followed. Public mislead about service.
*John Kennedy 4787 Barton Rd.- Question of the notice wording how comment can
be limited to the district based on the public hearing notice.
No one disputed that their property was not in the police district as defined
on the ballot.
Motion by Treasurer Eyster to close the Public Hearing. Supported by Trustee
Hayes.
Motion Approved
Supervisor Martin closed the Public Hearing at 6:18 p.m.
Motion by Trustee Wilbrink to move the Public Comment before the Resolution on
the agenda. Supported by Treasurer Eyster.
Discussion
·   Allow public to voice concerns before voting on the resolution.
Motion Approved
Practicum proposal
Planning Assistant, Wanda Bloomquist described the parameters of the practicum
and two suggestions from the planning commission that could be used for the
practicum.
Discussion included:
·   Short time frame for consideration
·   Staff time needed to complete
·   Savings to Township over consulting fees
·   Yearly opportunity
Motion by Trustee Wilbrink to postpone consideration of participation until
next year.
Supported by Trustee Hayes.
Motion Approved
Public Comment for Agenda and non-agenda Items
   *David Joseph 1048 Cherry Valle: County negligent in removing sheriff
service. Ask that vote on Resolution be tabled. Concerned about property value
decline.
   Wayne Cass 707 Barry Rd: How is budget addressed due to lack of passage by
other twps. What was the contingency plan developed in case it was not passed
by others. No idea what the residents will get for $300,000. Not getting what
was presented.
   *Donna Tocarchick 9605 Deer Trail: Who is determining amount of service?
What type of oversight will there be? How did determination of assessment occur
without a plan.
   *Dan Davey 1215 Wild Cherry Dr.: Have you spoken with all municipalities
that currently could provide coverage for the Township? Feels all property
should be taxed.
*Terry Braden 951 Haslett Rd.: Against the Township spending money for a
service already paid for in County tax. Citizens can protect themselves.
*Sue Stiffler 5620 Shoeman Rd: Procedural questions in regards to Act 33 of
1951. Was there a petition by the land owners as required? Was there a Public
Hearing before the vote by the residents? Response by Supervisor Martin: The
Board has the option to place a special assessment in which case there would be
a public hearing before placement. The Board decided to take it to the voters
to decide in which case the Public Hearing is held after the vote. Stiffler:
Suggest the Board take a step back and hear more from the residents. Could open
the Township up to a law suit.
*Kevin Mark 1318 Epley Rd: Questioned the use of State Police with dispatchment
at Linn Rd. Would like to see a list of what services will be purchased.
Response by Supervisor Martin: State Police will provide service if available.
Only 1 officer for the County- not 24/7.
*Janet Confer- 1210 Wild cherry Dr: Put to vote before knowing what is going to
happen- concerned about future years.
*Mike Schuschaskie 6174 Lounsbury Rd.: Taxes have steadily increased. Wondering
why police service is going away. Thought it would be dropped in less supported
by all the Townships. Response by Supervisor Martin: Treasurer Eyster and she
along with other supervisors have worked for several years to keep service.
*Ron Swenson: 4450 Rodeo Trail: Concerned what services are warranted to be
provided? Is this an annual contract? Per call? Is this assessment enough?
Details are needed.
*Mike Shaft 2185 Mitchell Rd: Questioning whether money will be kept in the
general fund or a special fund.
*Norm Obst 4595 Barton Rd.: How can you levy a constant amount for all
residents? Not fair distribution of tax.
*Pat Apostle 4020 Zimmer Rd.: Need a united force to go before the County to
retain police service. Ingham County should provide what they tax us for.
Discussed their retirement plan.
*Randy Baker 5000 Meridian Rd.: Believe he owns an uninhabitable property. How
does he protest?
*Carl Bartel 9665 Rodeo Trail: Assessment should be null and void due to non
passage by all 13 townships.
*Kendel Getz 4393 Beeman Rd.: Feels the Board took the back door to get
passage. Does not feel we need more taxes.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 6:54.
Remarks by the Board addressed to the residents:
Supervisor Martin: Committee set of 3 Board members and 2 residents. Committee
is creating an RFP to submit to interested agencies that include: Ingham County
Sheriff, Meridian Township, and City of Williamston. Will also contact Mason
Police and Leslie Police as they had expressed interest in the past. The
committee will be working on a contract to present to the board.
There has been a united effort for the past 2.5-3 years. Notification of County
intentions has been posted on website and in newsletter asking for assistance
from residents to attend County Commission meetings. County By-laws do not have
to provide service and have decided they will not.
Clerk Gaffner: Disparity on commissioners on County Board.
Treasurer Eyster: Special Assessment Fund for police services will be a
separate fund from the general funds. Special Assessment funds can not be spent
for non-police expenses.
Trustee Hayes: Committee is working as quickly as possible to avoid gap in
coverage. RFP hopefully available after Thanksgiving. Looking at best service
for dollar. Looking at road patrol 80 hours/week, 911 calls- $ per call and
hourly basis. All options are being investigated. Capt of state police is on
the committee and providing insights.
Trustee Wilbrink: Section 2 of Act 33- we need to eliminate county sheriff per
act.
Motion by Trustee Wilbrink to table the resolution until such time all
information is provided to study it. Support: none
Discussion included:
·   Concern not tabling opens township up to litigation.
·   Figures to add to resolution: $300,800.
·   Did not get an opportunity to review exhibit
·   Should not vote until time to review exhibit has been sufficient
·   Dollar amount does not cover vacant land
·   Board did not discuss millage option
·   Board discussed millage option at previous meetings
·   Every trailer? yes
·   Every apartment? yes
·   Commercial: every unit
·   Motel: considered one business
·   Antique business: work collectively as one business
·   How were figures determined
·   How to fill in blanks on resolution
Motion by Trustee Wilbrink to assess all lands. Support: none
Motion by Supervisor Martin that the assessment on vacant property be $0.
Support by Treasurer Eyster.
Discussion included:
Will accessory building on land be assessed.
Motion Approved
Motion by Treasurer Eyster that vacant land with an accessory building be
assessed as $0 unless a business. Support by Supervisor Martin
Discussion included:
·   What about non residents
·   Clarification: Is a farm considered a business
·   Backwards way of looking at this issue
·   Need to know what money is being used for
·   Plan currently not available.
·   Tonight’s vote is only if properties are in the district
·   Discussed at last meeting what the Public Hearing was about
·   Legal Council for police: Fahey, Shultz
Trustee Wilbrink called for a vote.
Motion Approved
Discussion included:
·   Section 2- Amount to insert is $300,800. Page 2 and 3
·   Amount not to exceed $150 and $250. Item 4 page 3
·   Can be compounded.
·   Some blanks cannot be filled in until after the vote.
·   Board does not have to accept a contract based on resolution unless they
feel is sufficient.
·   Could not offer RFP until we knew who passed it.
Motion by Trustee Hayes to pass resolution No. 2010-96 establishing a special
assessment district and roll. Support by Treasurer Eyster.
Roll Call: Yes: Trustee Hayes, Treasurer Eyster, Supervisor Martin and Clerk
Gaffner No: Trustee Wilbrink and Trustee Wright
Motion Approved.
Motion by Trustee Hayes to adjourn the meeting. Support by Trustee Wright
Motion Approved
Meeting adjourned 7:58 pm
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner
Township Clerk
December 07, 2010
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP
BOARD OF TRUSTEES MEETING
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 pm at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order, reviewed the agenda and explained
procedures for public comment.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Trustee Wright, Trustee Hayes, Trustee Williams,
Treasurer Eyster Clerk Gaffner and Supervisor Martin.
Also present: Attorney William Fahey
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR AGENDA & NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 7:05 p.m.
None heard.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:06 p.m.
SHERIFF’S REPORT
Report was presented by Supervisor Martin in the absence of Sgt. Sump providing
the following November stats:
§   Criminal Complaints: 19 YTD: 178
§   Blotter Calls: 14 YTD 150
§   Traffic Accidents: 8 YTD:74
§   Citations: 22 YTD: 150
§   Patrol time: 309.40 hours YTD 2296.60
Detective Bureau is working on following up on CSC complaint and a larceny
complaint.
Reminder to give ample time when driving and watch for other drivers on the
road. Also to be mindful of locking vehicle and keeping items out of view
during the shopping season.
      Consent Agenda
      Minutes of 11 02, 09 & 16 10 Meeting
      Reports:   Treasurer’s Report
            Building Inspector
            Accounts Payable – Paid
            Payroll – Paid
            Accounts Payable - Approval
            Revenue/Expenditure
            Pending Litigation
Pulled Minutes of 11/9/10
Consent Agenda
Motion by Treasurer Eyster to approve the consent agenda consisting of:
·   Approve the Minutes of 11/02/2010 and 11/16/2010 - Township board meetings
·   Treasurer’s Report, November 2010
·   Accounts payable paid, checks 18845 through 18872 with checks 18807 for a
total of $14,379.09
·   Accounts payable checks to approve 18873 through 18892 for a total of
$6,809.81
·   Payroll Checks paid 41227 through 41276 and EFTs 64-68 for a total of
$30,130.54.
·   Revenue and expenditure report ending 11/30/2010
·   Pending Litigation
·   Building inspectors report
Seconded by Clerk Gaffner
Discussion included:
·   November 9th minutes: Amended the agenda prior to roll call to go into
closed session and consent agenda change. Will bring back corrected minutes to
next meeting for approval.
·   Rev & Expenditure Report Parks Dept. over budget due to mistake of
Restricted Funds
Motion Approved
PLANNING COMMISSION
Chair Fielek reviewed the following:
·   November 16,10 meeting minutes
·   Rezoning application from Dr. Gregory Shannon for parcel # 33-03-03-08-100-
003. Consultant recommended denial of the application due to inconsistency with
the Master Plan. The Planning Commission agreed and is recommending the board
deny the request.
Note: applicant absent from meeting.
·   Discussion included:
1.   Rezoning would seem consistent with AG-C
2.   Adjacent to Meridian with high density
3.   Meridian Twp. proposal expired
4.   Master Plan should be followed. Would set precedence.
5.   Some of the best soil on that parcel by soil map standards
6.   Does not hinder sales to stay AG-C
7.   Can still develop residential lots
8.   50% good for farming
9.   Preservation important
10.   Purchased knowing AG-C
Shannon Rezoning Application
Trustee Hayes moved the Williamstown Township Board deny the rezoning request
by Dr. Gregory Shannon, per the recommendation of the planning commission.
Seconded by Trustee Wright
Discussion:
·   denying restricts further development
·   Option still available to split and protect farm land
·   Master Plan up to be reviewed this year.
Motion Approved
Grant -GRgreenzone
Grand River Green Zone: The competition was a success and will help the
planning commission with the possibilities within the green zone. The
enthusiasm and insights of the students was encouraging.
Unfinished Business
POLICE PROTECTION
Police Proposal
Supervisor Martin reviewed committee charge and introduced legal council:
William Fahey. Mr. Fahey reviewed the consideration and actions of the
committee:
·   5 proposals.
·   3 by local agencies Meridian, Mason, ICSD for different levels of service
·   2 by individuals creating new departments
·   Looking at budget: institutions were outside of budget for 24/7
·   Individuals were within budget for 24/7 but did not feel were realistic
·   Looked at 80 hrs a week with 24/7 for 911 calls.
·   Meridian low bidder, then Ingham County Sheriff Department and then City of
Mason.
·   All fit budget of Township
·   Committee reviewed and evaluated the best fit.
·   ICSD and Meridian were best contenders with ICSD most experience for
contracting services. Meridian new at this.
·   Meridian low bidder and closest to Township.
·   Believe it preferable to go with institutional departments
·   Felt estimates were low for creating own department
·   With own department: Problems with oversight: no supervisory oversight
·   Turnkey operation by going with institutional instead of creating own
department
·   Committee did not feel there was enough time to create own department.
·   Recommend 1st Meridian Township alternately ICSD if cannot agree on
contract
·   Would be 80 hours week min. and hourly for 911 services.
·   Committee felt this fit best the Township needs.
·   City of Williamston decided not to submit proposal-either option of 24/7 or
80 hours
·   Act 33 4806 Sub section 2 can we contract with County as not listed?
·   Twp can contract under Act 33- statute allows a special assessment district
·   There is another statute that would allow us to contract with County. Does
not have to be under Act 33.
·   Has this process been followed correctly, yes
·   Advantageous to have a fixed budget based on hours with Meridian instead of
limited hours.
·   First year most road patrol. Reserve ability to change from 80 hours based
on 1st usage of road patrol.
Clerk Gaffner moved the Williamstown Township Board approve appointing attorney
William Fahey to negotiate with Meridian Township, in an effort to reach
agreement on a contract to provide police protection by Meridian Township for
the residents of Williamstown Township.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes
Roll Call vote: Yes: Clerk Gaffner, Trustee Williams, Treasurer Eyster, Trustee
Wright, Trustee Hayes and Supervisor Martin
No: Trustee Wilbrink
Motion Approved
Discussion continued:
·   Contracting with State Police: they do not contract.
·   Residents felt we pay for ICSD.
·   Appreciation of effort for those submitting proposals
·   Township appreciative of ICSD. Have problem entering contract with
commissioners- not because of sheriff’s department.
·   Look at option with Meridian that would be equal with Sheriff’s proposal.
·   911 cost unknown. Do we add a cap? Yes
·   Thank you to Attorney William Fahey.
·   What do we do if we go over budget?
·   Look at throughout year.
·   Double what currently being provided by County
Budget
Discussion:
·   More money for website due to request by residents for web site being
updated.
·   Website not budgeted for continued maintenance.
·   Communication Comm. Budget change- reduce line item for video maintenance
to $2500 from $5000
·   How much of website budget spent to date- need to know before increasing to
$20,000.
·   American Legal under office maintenance
·   Exploring other Townships of comparable size: do not have more than we do
on website.
·   Staff not available to make sure website is up to date.
·   Out of office webmaster- in office would insure it stays up to date and be
pro active instead of reactive.
·   Can we correct problem with department heads to insure updates are posted.
·   Currently not top priority of office.
·   $5000 to $20,000. Is this enough. Add to budget and then research to
determine the best way to move forward. Report with options next month by
Clerk’s office.
·   Recreation: Senior Citizen grant-can we afford it. Only twp supporting it.
RCRA may come with a request. Need to concentrate on majority of residents.
Hoped other Twp would step up to help support. Request was for $10,000 by
Senior Citizens. Asked for budget from Senior Citizens- was received last year.
RCRA will be asking for support.
·   How many residents from Twp use Senior Center? Last year $5000. Was at
$7000 previous year for 4 years. Only 1 year commitment for $5000. Possibly
matching funds dependent on other twp contribution. Feel we are only ones
supporting. Feel we should only support as last year. Response from other
townships: report from senior center.
·   Other discussion: none
·   Will call for PH in January. Contact Clerk or Supervisor for more
information
New Business
Restricted Fund Donation
Trustee Wright moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the acceptance of
$2,000 in restricted funds from ITC Holdings Corporation. These funds are
restricted in use for plantings in common spaces, neighborhood parks, stump
grinding or compatible species plantings in residential areas.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes
Discussion included:
·   Township property at our discretion.
·   Assistance from MSU to design plan for park.
Motion Approved
Policy change for departments Clerk, Elections, Supervisor, Building,
Assessing, Planning
Clerk Gaffner explained reasoning for proposal.
Discussion included:
·   Year to year items change.
·   Move within departments without needing to come back to board. Does not
change total budget.
·   Not increasing budget- would need approval for this.
·   Trigger: restrict state funds for specific activities- more important to
make sure accounting is rigorous.
·   As we get close to end of year important to be able to make switch- would
eliminate need for special meetings.
·   By removing from board function does not give oversight.
·    Removes check and balance by trustee.
·   This would only apply without that increase.
·   Fine as long as not coming back later for more money.
·   This only applies to specific actions.
·   Did not have this problem when split was made between elections and clerk.
·   Legislature may not go this route- but would use audit for revenues.
·   Has to be agreed upon by three departments.
·   5. Next board meeting addressed that shift has occurred.
·   3. Should say that it has to be approved by all three.
·   Absentee voter apps increasing. Maybe need to increase budget for
elections.
·   Mandates by state are not predictable.
·   20% more required by assessing.
·   More money=more hours or wages- both
Policy Proposal
Trustee Wright moved the Williamstown Township Board approve Board Policy #8,
allowing for the flexibility needed to move budgeted funds between the various
departments an employee works without altering the total approved budget with
amending 5. To be reported at next board meeting all movement funds as allowed
by this policy. 3. Add the word “jointly” before draw Seconded by Trustee
Williams
Motion Approved 
Discussion: Budgetary item requires roll call. Policy does not.
Office space changes
Supervisor Martin reviewed need due to increase of police presence.
Discussion included:
·   Can rearrange front to add desk.
·   Approximately $8000 to make changes for modular changes, electricity, etc.
·   Will be adding two spaces.
·   New or Refurbished. Should look at refurbished.
·   Maybe MSU salvage
·   Need to look professional.
·   Out of police protection? As result of this- not office configuration.
Needs to come out of office budget not police. Police funds should be only for
police protection needs.
·   Police would not be up in reception area.
Reports
Departments & Committees
Clerk Gaffner 9th- petition for drain. Meeting with drain commissioner and
Shiawassee Drain Commission. Problem not with existing drain. Agreed by both
commissions may be done by landowners themselves and will work with residents
without creating drain. Permits would still be required.
Treasurer opening Citizens account for police fund. Separate banks help
oversight and would keep police fund completely separate.
Supervisor Martin: Corcoran Drain along Shoeman Rd. 3 counties involved. No
complaints from residents to Township. Drain Commission has been called by
residents. Clinton and Shiawassee see a need but will not file petitions.
Spaulding Drain: Estimates and plan to assist water flow into Shiawassee County
from Ingham County. May develop wetlands.
Task force for Medical Marihuana. Planning Commission to move forward with
definitions and draft ordinance.
RCRA- has asked City to coordinate. Have list of wants. Will look at proposals.
List was emailed to trustees. Believe RCRA important to community.
Scheduling of fields now by Township. Cost needs to be considered. Will bring
back to board when more details available. In initial talks.
Met with contractors regarding Geo-Thermal and generator. Good for community
needs.
Prepping for installation. Well will be retrofitted. Service will be
interrupted during closed hours. Labs for state will be shut down beginning
23rd until Jan 3rd. Hope to have done prior to this. Well, first, then
electrical. Geo-thermal on the 3rd. Positive impact on wetlands according to
consultant. Open loop system.
State made site visit for grant update. Looked at variety of items done for
grant. Visited Cemetery and park and reviewed grgreenzone projects.
8:43      Public Comment for agenda & non-agenda items**
John Kane 5170 N. Williamston Rd. Re: police protection. Concern over process.
Jeff Hall 40 E. Sherwood: Thank you for opportunity for proposal re: police
service
Sue Stiffler 5620 Shoeman Rd. Re: police protection- compliance with process.
Jim Miller 4470 N. Williamston Rd. Re; Website and Internet Service.
Rod Imhoff 2380 Wilgus Rd. Re; Police protection
Public Comment closed at 8:55.
   Review
Clerk Gaffner- Amend 11/9 minutes
Planning Assistant- Notification of rezoning result
Supervisor Martin-Senior Center
Clerk Gaffner- Website
Treasurer Eyster& Supervisor Martin- office layout
Motion by Trustee Hayes to adjourn the meeting at 9:00 pm.
Support by Trustee Wright
Meeting adjourned.
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner
Township Clerk
December 21, 2010
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP
BOARD OF TRUSTEES SPECIAL MEETING
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 8:00 a.m. at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Road, Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order, reviewed the agenda and explained
procedures for public comment.
ROLL CALL
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Trustee Wright, Trustee Hayes, Trustee Williams,
Clerk Gaffner and Supervisor Martin.
Absent: Treasurer Eyster
Also Present: Attorney William Fahey
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR AGENDA & NON-AGENDA ITEMS
Supervisor Martin called for public comment at 8:01 a.m.
None
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 8:02 a.m.
Police Service Contract with Meridian
Supervisor Martin went over contract. Meridian Township Board had approved the
contract unanimously.
Motion: Trustee Hayes moved to approve the contract with Meridian Township as
negotiated. Supported by Trustee Wright.
Discussion included:
·   #19. 180 days excessive for termination/not excessive
·   Voters cannot repeal.
·   Termination notice may not be sufficient.
·   Commitment by Meridian is sufficient for 180 termination clause
·   Assessment may change yearly.
·   Process of coming to this point- November 16th- Public hearing did not
discuss cost of service/cost of service was discussed.
·   Township should not ratify contract without following proper procedure/
Attorney assured process was followed.
·   Cost was estimated at $300,000 either by ourselves or as part of 13
Townships.
·   Yearly review of special assessment including Public Hearing and can be
part of budget hearings.
Attorney William Fahey: Talks have been going on for over a year. Shorter
termination time would put Township in a position to have insufficient time for
developing a new contract.
Roll Call: Yeas: Trustee Wright, Trustee Hayes, Supervisor Martin, Trustee
Williams, And Clerk Gaffner
No: Trustee Wilbrink.
Motion Approved.
Let the record show that Treasurer Eyster is in support of the contract.
Contract was signed.
Further Discussion included:
·   Clerk Gaffner will swear in officers at Meridian Township/Swearing in gives
authority to work within the Township.
·   Service will begin January 1st.
·   Reviewed schedules. Will be covered 80 hours a week with 24/7 for 911 and
non-emergency calls.
·   Will attend meetings with report.
·   Committee will meet quarterly for review.
·   Will have contacts for neighborhood watch.
·   Mass mailing will go with assessments
·   Postcard to residents with contact for police at first of year.
·   More info in newsletter.
·   Non emergency number: may leave as is. Dispatchers have met to insure
smooth transition. 911 will still be emergency number.
·   Link website to Meridian Township Police.
·   Swearing in gives authority to work within Township.
·   Office in Township for officers to meet with residents.
·   Additional markings on car is being discussed to let residents know they
are here to serve
·   Additional sign on entrance to Township.
·   Appreciation of cooperation with Meridian.
·   Officers are excited to be working with Township.
Chief is available at office or cell phone.
·   Appreciation of work by Attorney William Fahey.
Motion by Trustee Hayes to adjourn
Motion Approved.
Meeting Adjourned at 8:33
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner
Township Clerk
2011 Meeting Minutes
January 4, 2011
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 p.m. at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 N. Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order reviewed the agenda and explained
procedures for public comment.
Trustee Wright moved to place on the agenda the police report just below public
comment and add sick leave policy to the end of New Business. Seconded by
Trustee Hayes
Clerk Gaffner moved to place the budget adjustments before the consent agenda.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes.
Motions Approved.
Pledge of Allegiance
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Trustee Wright, Supervisor Martin, Treasurer Eyster,
Clerk Gaffner, Trustee Hayes, Trustee Williams
Public Comment for agenda & non-agenda items
Daryl Brown 6200 Sherwood Rd. Re: police protection: Hours of patrol coverage
   Hourly basis expenditure
Supervisor Martin answered Mr. Brown’s questions. Referred him to website for
contract or are available for review at the Township Hall.
Supervisor Martin Closed Public Comment at 7:07 p.m.
Police Report
Chief Hall gave report: Hit and Run, couple of deer accident, personal injury
at Williamston and Epley, property damage report at Williamston and Haslett Rd.
Thank you to Supervisor for help in getting started and Clerk Gaffner for
swearing in officers. Met with Chief Young of City of Williamston re: border
areas and mutual aid agreement. Some communities are cautious about mutual aid,
Chief Young is fully willing to provide back up for Williamstown Twp. when a
two person call. Will help everyone involved. Training will be January 5th
regarding entrance to building, etc. Excited to be of service to the Township.
Residents happy to see the presence of Meridian Township.
Budget Amendment
Supervisor martin explained reason for budget adjustments.
Trustee Wright moved that the board approve the following amendments to the
2010-2011 Township budget:
From 101-265-910.000 (Bldg & Grds Ins.) to 101-101-910.001 (workers comp. ins.)
$3,065
From 101-000-001.000 (General Fund) to 101-830-980.265 (Capital Outlay) $38,000
From 101-890-965.000 (Contingency) to 101-294-729.000 (Newsletter) $2,600
From 101-265-910.000 (Bldg & Grds Ins.) to 101-294-910.000 (Commercial Crime
Bond Ins.) $625
From 101-000-001.000 (General Fund) to 101-441-814.000 (Roads) $16,000
From 101-000.001.000 (General Fund) to 101-751-817.000 (Red Cedar Recreation)
$1,560
Seconded by Trustee Hayes
Discussion:
Reasoning for changing of insurance to help show coverage in different areas.
Motion Approved.
Consent Agenda
      Minutes of 11 09, & 12 07 & 21 10 Meeting
      Reports:   Treasurer’s Report
            Building Inspector
            Accounts Payable – Paid
            Payroll – Paid
            Accounts Payable - Approval
            Revenue/Expenditure
            Pending Litigation
Trustee Hayes moved the consent agenda consisting of:
·   Approve the Minutes of 11/09/2010, 12/07/10 and 12/21/2010 - Township board
meetings
·   Treasurer’s Report: November and December 2010
·   Building inspectors report
·   Accounts payable paid, checks 18893 through 18926 with for a total of
$49,997.69
·   Payroll Checks paid 41277 through 41302 and EFTs 69 and 70 for a total of
$20,143.08.
·   Accounts Payable checks to approve 18927 through 18937 for a total of
$42,341.16
·   Revenue and expenditure report ending 1/31/2011
·   Pending Litigation
   Seconded by Treasurer Eyster
Discussion:
Bills payable should come to board before being paid.
Concern about 30,000 to Harber Electric. Approved in EECBG grant.
Fishbeck bill for geothermal. Also approved in EECBG grant.
Motion Approved
Unfinished Business
Budget 2011-2012
Supervisor Martin reviewed changes: added police fund
Questions:
RE: concern for webmaster fee in budget of $20,000.
Maybe $10,000 would be sufficient.
Clerk Gaffner spoke with Meridian Twp about how they handle it. Will forward as
soon as he can regarding what he has found out. Cost and man hours.
Important to keep public informed.
Need to have a better job done than present.
Leave at $20,000 until we have the information.
To date $380.00 spent on wages.
Need to train staff to provide information.
Priorities need to change in office per public.
Wait for more info before deciding on budget amount.
PA allocation out of Township Board
Assessing: from $6000 to $13000. Due to state requesting 20% being done per
year.
New measurements of all buildings, interior review, new pictures, etc.
Will create truer assessments
Capital outlay in Treasurer for new computers
Township Office: $12,000 for repairs and maintenance. Goes towards copiers,
etc. ongoing programs, equipment, etc.
Planning Commission: Wages reimbursable. For site plan review, special land
use, etc. Removal of grant monies showed increase in budget lines.
Zoning administrator: split between building inspector and police.
Cable commission is same as communication commission
Recreation: Red Cedar Recreation Association (RCRA) requesting funds. Nothing
showing in budget.
Park lands: expense increase: doing more for fields to keep in condition and
prairie burn, benches and other improvements.
Historical committee: increase to $3500. $2000 for maintenance and repairs that
might be needed. $1500 to apply for state and federal historical status. All
for Branch School.
Senior Center Grant: budget is over $20,000.
What are other townships contributing? City of Williamston providing space as
in kind support. Schools providing copy center and bulk mailing. Leroy has
indicated they will support but has not determined amount. Asking Township for
$10,000. Discussion of amount by proportion would be $6000. Agreed to $5000.
Energy Grant: There will be a few things that go into next year but not enough
to track as most items will be completed.
Police Service: mistake made on vacant land reduced total assessment amount by
$150.
Cemetery: Capital outlays at $10,000. Redoing Cemetery Master Plan so
anticipating need for cemetery improvements.
Suggest historical committee work with cemetery committee regarding historic
headstones and research.
Budget Hearing
Trustee Wright moved that the Township Board hold a Public Hearing on the
proposed 2011-2012 Budget on February 8, 2011 at 6:30 p.m., to be followed by
the regularly scheduled Township board meeting. The public hearing is to also
allow for property owners to express any concerns they may have relative to
their property being included or excluded from the voter approved special
assessment district for police protection.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes.
.Motion Approved
Police Services Assessment
Supervisor Martin explained amount for budget.
Could be reduced based on contract.
County money could cause reduction.
10% would reduce it to $270,720, or $135.for residential unit/ $225 for
business unit.
Clerk Gaffner moved that the Township Board acknowledges maximum assessment of
$154.50 per residential unit and $257.50 for each commercial unit, for police
services, as allowed by the special assessment proposal approved by the
Township voters on 11/02/2010.
With the 2011-2012 police budget estimated at $270, 720, the Township approves
the collection of $135 per residential unit and $225 for each commercial unit,
for police services, as allowed by the special assessment proposal approved by
the Township voters on 11/02/2010. This assessment is to be included in the
2011 winter tax statement.
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion:
Setting maximum amount every year and then set the fee.
This keeps a record of what could be assessed.
Will reduce budget by 2.5% due to overlap of protection year and budget year.
3% increase could have negative impact on contract negotiations.
Need to protect Township to have the funds if needed due to changes.
Creates safety net
Card will go out showing what Assessment amounts will be.
Motion Approved
DeNike Property 4494 Beeman Road
Supervisor Martin explained process of work to date. Trustee Wright expressed
undertaking and amount of work done to date looks good.
Trustee Wright moved that the Township Board approve the revised time schedule
of 12/20/10 extending the originally approved time lines of January 12, 2010,
for bringing the DeNIke property at 4494 Beeman Road into compliance with
Williamstown Township ordinance.
Seconded by Trustee Wilbrink
Discussion: none
Motion Approved
New Business
Poverty Exemptions
Supervisor Martin explained same process as last year. Worked well.
.Trustee Wilbrink moved the passage of Williamstown Township Resolution #97,
Adopting the Federal Poverty Guidelines for 2011 with an increase of 50% in all
sections as shown in the resolution, and to limit assets to one licensed
vehicle for each resident, with a maximum of two, and to one principle
residence with asset value determined by the following method: true cash value
as stated in an approved assessment role $250,000 for up to 100 % exemption
with a decrease of 20% for every increase of $50,000 in value.
Seconded by Treasurer Eyster
Yes: Bob Hayes, Ernie Gaffner, Frans Wilbrink, Janet Eyster, Martin Wright,
Mickey Martin, Rick Williams.
Cemetery Fee Schedule
Clerk Gaffner explained reason for bringing forward for discussion.
Discussion:
Fees were set in past.
Definitions need to be set due to city contribution of funds.
Status is as of time of use of service.
Maybe should be tied to PRE (Personal Residence Exemption) in Township or
residency status.
City has not contributed to date for this fiscal year.
Ordinance does have time frame for payment by city.
Simpler to add definition in fee schedule than in ordinance.
Should have definition done by end of fiscal year.
Could be renter in township.
Benefit should also go to property owners as well
Fee for space is for who buys it.
Fee for burial is for who is buried.
Hall Rental
Clerk Gaffner explained the request by church group to rent hall on regular
basis. Would like deposit on retainer for rentals instead of each rental.
Clerk Gaffner moved that the Township be allowed to lease the hall at the
approved rental fee schedule and that hall is leased for maximum of 4 dates in
a single agreement. The agreed to deposit is to be held by the Township until
such time as the rental agreement is no longer renewed. Any deposit returned to
the lessee will then be in accordance with the hall leasing agreement.
Seconded by Trustee Wright
Discussion:
May be excluding residents from use for graduations, etc.
Would be month to month.
Deposit required when reserving.
Maximum of 4 dates/month
Treasury will set an expense line for renter
Concern of organization.
Contact for organization recently lived in Township
What if a group the Township did not want to rent to?
Will present hall rental agreement to trustees for review.
Corporation rentals addressed in agreement
Certificate of liability presented
Motion Approved
Parks and Recreation
Field Rental Policy
Supervisor Martin explained reason for coming up with policy due to increase
questions on field rentals.
Supervisor Martin moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Parks &
Recreation Committee’s, definition of qualified organizations or groups and
requirements established by the Parks & Recreation Committee for use of
Township facilities and that this be included with the Parks & Recreation Fee
Schedule approved by the Township Board on April 6, 2010.
Seconded by Treasurer Eyster
Discussion:
New procedure
Groups discussed in parks ordinance.
Do we need to modify definition?
Should we refer to attorney for review?
Look at school district policy
Consistency with other policies of township
Motion Approved
Sick leave policy
Explanation from Treasurer Eyster. Use of Sick leave for personal leave up to
half. This would not change budget. Would not accrue as a payment at end of
employment. Suggesting holiday pay that would match county days. Four days of
holiday pay equals a 2% raise if they fall on days that we would be open. Next
year would be 8 days of holiday pay. No raises for the next two years. Average
8-9 holidays per year.
Discussion:
Should not differentiate between personal and sick.
Used in hour increments.
Option still there to send someone home who is sick even without sick time
accumulated.
Roll over can occur.
Can be used either way- sick or personal.
Limiting time worked to 48 hours per pay period to keep within budget and
spread through out year.
Limit to 40 hours in a week to avoid overtime.
Trustee Wilbrink moved to approve proposed changes in compensation for hourly
employee compensation with the stipulation that sick days can not be used for
personal days but personal days can be used for sick days.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes 
Motion Approved
Reports
Departments & Committees
Clerk Gaffner: Regarding Memo for traffic fines.
Trustee Wilbrink: Niesa still working on building.
Treasurer Eyster: ready to wrap up energy grant.
Issue: when end of January arrives we can not spend any more personal funds.
Unclear whether Wheatfield will have final bill for lighting. Would like
authorization to finish bill payment. Need to find out from state what the
procedure is.
Treasurer Eyster moved to allow Supervisor be permitted to make budget
adjustment s necessary to move any access grant funds in the energy grant back
to the original location of these funds.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes
Motion Approved
Noted that links have been made to websites between townships for police
protection services.
Public Comment for agenda & non-agenda items
None
Supervisor Martin closed Public Comment at 9:20
Review
Resolutions Prepared: Clerk Gaffner
PH for budget: Clerk Gaffner
Fee schedule; definition for resident: Trustee Hayes
Field reservation: Planning Assistant
DeNike notification: Planning Assistant
Hall rental agreement and park policy language: Supervisor Martin
Website: Clerk Gaffner
MTA (Michigan Township Association) conference interferes with next Board
meeting. Next meeting will be February 8th.
Motion by Trustee Hayes to adjourn the meeting at 9:25 pm.
Meeting adjourned.
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner
Township Clerk
February 08, 2011
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
February 08, 2011
Call to Order
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 7:25p.m. at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 N. Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order reviewed the agenda and explained
procedures for public comment.
Pledge of Allegiance
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Trustee Wright, Supervisor Martin, Treasurer Eyster,
Clerk Gaffner, Trustee Hayes
Absent: Trustee Williams
Public Comment for agenda & non-agenda items
James Giddings: 6000 Lounsbury Rd. Regarding police road patrol. Suggested
protocols.
Ruth Templeton 1435 Epley Rd. Regarding: Video review, Equipment purchased,
Budget on website and trustees input.
Al LeBlanc 4720 Jadestone. Regarding: laptop purchase, projection of documents,
Transparency important.
Helen LeBlance 4720 Jadestone: regarding Budget: Revenue questions and Art
tour.
Carl Bartel 9665 Dear Trail. Regarding police service.
Karen Steinbach 6131 Lounsbury Rd. Question regarding all police services such
as gun registration. Meridian Township is the appropriate avenue. Should be
clearer to residents.
John Kane: 5170 N. Williamston Rd. Regarding Posting of minutes on website.
Available in office.
Supervisor Martin Closed Public Comment at 7:40
Trustee Hayes addressed road patrol issues. Committee discussed if there were
was no road patrol. Township responding to the will of the people.
Supervisor Martin explained Art tour funds go in restricted funds for play
ground equipment. Police assessment goes into a designated fund in a separate
bank.
Treasurer Eyster addressed Revenue question: 2 types of revenue. Constitutional
revenue is expected to go up. Statutory revenue is expected to go down and was
not included in budget.
Police Report
Chief Hall addressed Township with police report January 2011 report submitted
to board members.
Explained report numbers on service calls, accidents, etc.
Numbers could go up during summer months.
Good indicator of what can be expected by Township.
Open to suggestions . Presence when most affective
Offered conditional employment to laid off Sheriff Deputy from jail services.
Should meet parameters of commissioners for payment of county monies.
Snow day: prepared to respond.
25 accidents- 12 car/deer 10 citations for accidents.
Officers are still getting familiar with township.
Mutual aid with city. Regional cooperation signed by all police departments and
approved by city’s, townships and county. Allows enforcement and help within
each others districts.
Very sensitive to issues of coverage within Township.
Re: writing citations. Gave examples of what was written. Goal is not to write
citations. One of the biggest complaints from public is speeding.
Questions:
Range of calls received: Assist to fire department Break ins, accidents,
property damage, suspicious vehicles, traffic stops, motorist assist.
Sitting at intersections: Reports done in car. May be watching an intersection-
Helps with public safety.
Clerk Gaffner shared memo regarding ticket revenue.
Consent Agenda
Pulled the Minutes
Clerk Gaffner move the consent agenda consisting:
·   Treasurer’s Report, January 2011
·   Building inspectors report
·   Accounts payable paid, checks 18938 through 18972 with for a total of
$58,876.83
·   Payroll Checks paid 41303 through 41329 and EFTs 71 and 72 for a total of
$14,202.56
·   Accounts Payable checks to approve 18973 through 18990 for a total of
$9,275.31
·   Revenue and expenditure report ending 1/31/2011
·   Pending Litigation
·   Acceptance of Restricted Funds
·    approve the following amendments to the 2010-2011 Township budget: add
expense 207-301-728, 730, 801, 802, 820, 820.001 and 902 for a total of
$75,163.
207-000-672.000 special assessment 300,650
Expenditures
207-301-728.000 supplies           2,703
207-301-730.000 postage            425
207-301-801.000 audit              1,000
207-301-802.000 legal              5,500
207-301-820.000 Contract base      42,925
207-301.820.001 contract 911       22,500
207-301-902.000 Publications       110
Total                              75,163
 
Seconded by Trustee Hayes
Discussion: None
Motion Approved
Trustee Wilbrink moved to approve the January 04, 2011 minutes with the
following corrections:
·   Neisa is working on the Leroy township fire department building.
·   Treasurer Eyster ready to wrap up energy grant.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes
Discussion: none
Motion Approved
Planning Commission
Minutes 1/18/11
Chair Fielek addressed the Board.
Discussion of Wallace Storage on hold as new site plan not available.
Medical Marijuana report by Supervisor Martin. Commission will work on draft
ordinance at next meeting. Not likely to happen before moratorium expires will
ask for extension.
Commission reviewed trails and greenways amendment. Report will be presented to
board.
Will continue with review of Master Plan.
Discuss Grand River Green Zone. Will work on establishing Green Zone Map.
Commission has scheduled a joint meeting with City of Williamston.
Revenue Sharing tied to regional cooperation.
Discussion: Consideration of restrictions to property owners within Green Zone.
Unfinished Business
Budget 2011-2012
Discussion Items:
·   Art tour is restricted funds
·   Revenue is based on state numbers.
·   More extensive assessing being done. New record cards, remeasurement,
photos and sketching. Sent to homeowners for review. Positive feedback on
getting information correct.
·   Website: 20,000 in to cover to keep public more informed. Clerk Gaffner
still working on information. Should be up to departments to get info to
webmaster. Would like to see the 20,000 cut to 10,000. Amended by agreement.
·   Capital outlay: why increase: level of audit: 5,000. Computers, internal
needs.
·   still 45,000 deficit.
·   History is revenue exceeds expenditures. Should have surplus.
·   Legal fees. Appropriating $30,000. legal fees under police service of
14,000.
Legal fees are only police not code enforcement. Legal funds cannot be
combined. Only police service issues will be paid out of 14,000.
·   Compensation committee will be making recommendations in March.
·   Conference and training. Increase from 2-3000 for supervisor. Add 1500 for
treasurer and increase clerk to 1500. Amended by Agreement
·   Police: supplies are being provided? Office for officers. Postcards, info
to residents. Signs at township entrances. More cost in beginning.
·   911 Contract. $90,000 budget seems excessive. Agreed on in contract. This
is a cap.
·   Contingency in Police Fund: 11,000 amount used for? Contingency fund will
be decreased due to decrease in assessment. Assessment is based on two fiscal
year budgets. Difference is placed in contingency. ¾ is placed in next fiscal
year. Allocated by ¼. Can contract be shifted to budget year instead of
calendar year- will look into it but unsure if it can work. Treasurer Eyster
will continue to review.
·   State pays townships to collect in school funding in summer.
·   Screen and video. Need to get installed. Clerk Gaffner will take
responsibility
Trustee Wilbrink moved to table budget until March meeting.
Support: none
Motion fails
Treasurer Eyster moved that the 2011-2012 Budget as presented at the public
hearing on February 8, 2011, be adopted with the following amendments:
·   Decrease for Website from $20,000 to $10,000
·   Conference and Training for Clerk and Treasurer be adjusted to $1500 each.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes.
Discussion:
·   $47, 964 deficit.
·   Compensation committee should have recommendations done in March.
Motion approved.
Hall Rental Amendment
Clerk Gaffner explained reasoning for amendment to insure use by other
residents.
This is only regarding multiple dates.
Allows holding of deposit for multiple dates by one party.
Amendment applies to all groups.
Clerk Gaffner moved the Township approve the addition of the sentence “The
lessee may renew the lease for up to four dates of the following month, during
the last week of the current month for which the hall is leased.” This to be
added to the 1/04/2011 approved motion of “The Township be allowed to lease the
hall at the approved rental fee schedule and that hall can be leased for a
maximum of 4 dates in a single monthly agreement. The agreed to deposit is to
be held by the Township until such time as the rental agreement is no longer
renewed. Any deposit returned to the lessee will then be in accordance with the
hall leasing agreement.”
Seconded by Trustee Hayes
Discussion included:
·   Multiple dates: skipping months would increase deposit.
·   To insure use by residents.
·   Maximum allowed is 4 dates at a time.
·   Same for any group
·   Residents come in well in advance for holidays and graduations.
·   Clause requiring board approval for new group.
·   Ability to limit use.
·   Trustee Hayes will work on Hall rental agreement.
Motion approved
Cemetery Fee Resident/Non-Resident Definition
Trustee Hayes worked on the following resident definitions for the purpose of
the Cemetery Fee Schedule:
“ Resident ”
A “Resident” is any one of the following persons:
      1.   A person residing in Williamstown Township at the time of purchasing
space in a Williamstown Township managed cemetery, with the exception that a
person not residing in Williamstown Township at the time of death will be
considered a “non-resident”, or
      2.   A person residing in Williamstown Township at the time of death, or
      3.   A person residing within the jurisdiction of a governmental agency
providing financial support for maintenance of Williamstown Township cemeteries
during either of the following times:
         a.   At the time of purchasing space, with the exception that a person
not residing in the contributing governmental jurisdiction at the time of death
will be considered a “non-resident, or
         b.   At the time of death
“ Non-resident ”
A person not meeting any of the “resident” definition criteria above is
considered a “non-resident” for the purpose of the Williamstown Township
Cemetery Fee Schedule.
Supervisor Martin move the Williamstown Township Board approve the definitions
of Resident and Non-Resident as it applies to Township Cemetery Fees.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes.
Discussion:
·   Need to maintain is costly and paid by township.
·   Status is at time of purchase or death
Motion approved.
New Business
Supervisor went over appointments for Board of Review and Compensation
Committee.
Committee Appointments
Clerk Gaffner moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the appointments of
Kurt Guter, Ed Timm and Gerald Eidt to the Board of Review
Seconded by Treasurer Eyster
Discussion: none
Motion approved
Clerk Gaffner moved to approve the appointment of Joyce Messing to the
Compensation Committee.
Second by Treasurer Eyster
Discussion : none
Motion approved.
Committee members will need to be sworn in.
Resolution #98
Review of assessment roll.
Total to be collected: $277650
·   AMK-should be assessed for rental space. Assessment will check regarding
units. Raising minimum to 5. Board would have to amend if mistake.
·   Brookshire - assessed for two. Golf course and restaurant.- correct
·   Freedomnet- listed as property tax payer should pay assessment- should look
at contract- need to get clarification.
·   Clearview farms- seasonal business: retail is distinction. Distinction
compared to other ag businesses.
·   Pavik- being assessed two households. 2 residences on this parcel.
·   Partridges- 2 homes
·   Sharp - 4 homes
·   Horstman- 2 homes
Add 900.00 brings total role $278,550.
Wilbrink to table resolution until verification is received for AMK and
Freedomnet
Support: none
Motion fails
Treasurer Eyster moved the passage of Williamstown Township Resolution #98,
CONFIRMING 2011 SPECIAL ASSESSMENT ROLL FOR POLICE PROTECTION WITHIN THE
TOWNSHIP.
Seconded by Trustee Wright
Roll Call Vote: Trustee Hayes Yes Supervisor Martin: Yes Trustee Wright: Yes
Clerk Gaffner: Yes Trustee Wilbrink: No Treasurer Eyster: Yes
Burn Ordinance
Supervisor Martin explained state law illegal to burn household trash and
papers.
Does not include brush
Need to change burn ordinance to reflect state law. State is becoming more
restrictive.
Add standards to outdoor furnaces. Good to do at the same time.
Suggest asking McKenna to work on wording to comply with state law.
Also address wood burners: setbacks, stack height, dumping of ashes, etc.
Clerk Gaffner left the meeting.
Why not planning commission? Board enacted ordinance.
Agreement regarding asking McKenna to help.
Clerk Gaffner returned to the meeting.
Reports
Committee Assignments
Supervisor Martin: went over recommendations for committee assignments.
Trustee Wilbrink will work with rifle club.
Trustee Wilbrink would like to stay on as board representative to Neisa. Not
concerned about pay. Attends additional meetings. Working on restructuring
information.
Request will be considered.
Supervisor Martin would like to see someone attend Williamston city council
meetings.
Trustee Wright moved to approve committee appointments as outlined in the board
packet.
Support: Treasurer Eyster
Discussion:
·   change date on document
·   Trustees not living up to duties.
·   Trustees do good diligence regarding duties.
Motion approved.
Further discussion:
Discussed with trustees before appointments
Memo sent ahead of time.
Departments & Committees
Art committee is working on going forward for art tour. May 6th and 7th.
Coincides with city. Planning on improved attendance over last year. Posters,
tickets being designed. Committee working hard.
Recycling.
Looking into adding township recycling metals, bulk items and paper at May
recycling.
·   Concern regarding freon.
·   Concern over use.
·   Will residents take advantage.
·   Not sure if successful.
·   Worth a try.
·   Hazardous waste would also be nice.
Agreement to try a spring clean up day during May recycling.
Sledding day-good turnout- lots of fun.
Affective date for committee changes: Immediate.
Public Comment for agenda & non-agenda items
None
Public Comment Closed at 9:48
Motion for Closed Session
Trustee Wright moved that the Township Board go into closed session for purpose
of discussing pending litigation. Township Attorney and recording secretary
remain.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes
Discussion: None
Roll call vote: Supervisor Martin: Yes Trustee Hayes: Yes Trustee Wilbrink: No
Trustee Wright: Yes Clerk Gaffner: Yes Treasurer Eyster: Yes
Trustee Wright motioned to come out of close session at 10:30.
Support by Treasurer Eyster.
Motion approved.
Review
Supervisor Martin reviewed meeting.
·   Information is always available at office.
·   Need for someone to step up and make sure it gets on internet.
·   Discussion of getting screen up. Clerk Gaffner will work on getting done.
$500. Allowance to get completed.
·   Board of review and compensation appointments will be sworn in .
·   Clerk Gaffner will publish resolution notice.
·   Budget amendment will be addressed
·   McKenna will be contacted re: burn ordinance amendments.
·   Cemetery committee will address resident definitions.
Motion by Trustee Hayes to adjourn the meeting at 10:35
 
Meeting adjourned.
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner
February 08, 2011
Williamstown Township
Public Hearing Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
Supervisor Martin called the meeting to order at 6:30
Supervisor Martin went over the comment rules for the public hearing.
Deliberation will take place at a separate meeting.
Public hearing is for the 2011-12 budget and police assessment. The budget as
written shows $1,425,456 in revenues and ($55,964) in expenditures. Estimate
low for revenues and expenditure high. County money slated for Township towards
police protection has not been received.
Treasurer Eyster reviewed the contract with Meridian and explained funding from
the Special Assessment. This will appear on the December tax bill. Needs to be
addressed now for 2011/12 budget as part of funding as it falls in that fiscal
year. Contract includes $171,700 for 80 hours of police patrol a week. Meridian
Police will cover the rest of the time 24/7 on calls. Cap of $90000 for
additional services. Maximum contract amount of $261,700 is fixed. Lawyer
($10,000), auditor, ($1,000), supplies ($4,950.) The Special Assessment will
show a10% reduction from 1st year. $277,650 will be generated from the Special
Assessment to work with contract in second year. Residential unit amount will
be $135.00, Commercial unit amount: $225.00. You should not have received a
card unless you own property in the township.
Public Hearing opened at 6:40:
Ken Lycos 1386 E. Sherwood: Concerned over police assessment. County portion is
not figured into budget. Concerned over building a reserve.
John Slater 11 E. Newman Rd- regarding process for a new vote by residents. Act
33: once it is voted in it remains. The board can decide to levy or not to levy
and how much.
John Kane: 5170 N. Williamston. Protest in writing. Statute re: special
assessments. Over 5% should be prorated back to residents towards next Special
Assessment.
Helen LeBlanc 4720 Jadestone Re: Budget for $20,000 towards Web seems high.
Citizens can not initiate referendum due to being a vote.
Ruth Templeton 1435 Epley Budget: Estimated Revenue does not show County
portion figured into budget for police protection. Shouldn’t this be counted.
Question regarding attorney fees, reassessment budget and capital outlay.
Question of code enforcement.
Tim Brady 5795 Shoeman Rd. Opposes police contract.
Melody Wallace 5582 N. Williamston Rd. Support police services for criminal
activity- not road patrol.
Lynn Powell 660 Germany Rd. Vacant land. Mistake regarding parcel on Special
Assessment for 2011.
Emma Hepfer 265 Haslett Rd. Farm is considered residential for assessment
purposes. Voted for assessment.
Karl Bartel 9665 Deertrail. Question regarding City being billed for services
performed by Meridian Twp.
Victoria Wiegandt: 241 E. Grand River. Re: Procedure to reverse police service.
Melissa Wood 4432 Wilfors Dr. Re: Notice of adjustment. County funds towards
police service needs to be addressed.
Al LeBlanc 4720 Jadestone Re: Availability of the budget to the public and
expenditure for Web.
John Kennedy: 4787 Barton Rd. Need for additional copies of budget before
meeting. Asking for clarification of being able to change assessment by people.
Dan Davey 1215 Wild Cherry Dr. Concern of responsibility regarding copies of
the budget for the public.
Public hearing closed at 7:12
Motion by Treasurer Eyster to close the public hearing at 7:12. Supported by
Trustee Wright
Motion approved.
Supervisor Martin explained the ability of the Board to review the assessment
role if county monies come in.
Clerk Gaffner: Hope to use website more regarding police services.
Meeting adjourned.
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner
Township Clerk
March 01, 2011
Township Clerk
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
March 01, 2011
Call to Order
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 7:00p.m. at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 N. Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order, reviewed the agenda and explained
procedures for public comment.
Pledge of Allegiance
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Trustee Wright, Supervisor Martin, Treasurer Eyster,
Clerk Gaffner
Absent: Trustee Williams, Trustee Hayes
Public Comment for agenda & non-agenda items
Helen LeBlanc 4720 Jadestone: support of an Urban Service Boundary
Supervisor Martin closed Public Comment at 7:06 p.m.
Police Report
Chief Hall presented February report to the board.
Other items of importance:
·   New Hire: Sheriff Deputy from jail has started with Meridian on the 28th of
February. He will go through 14 weeks of training. After 14 weeks will begin
patrolling alone if his training has gone well. Will be on probation for 1
year. New officer: Kenneth Harvey. Will be sworn in on March 2nd, 2011. Is
looking forward to being on road patrol.
·   Medical First Responder: Of 12 cars, 9 are licensed as Medical First
Responder.
·    Youth Academy: Has begun with 2 attendees from the Township. 7 week
program. Citizen Academy will begin in September.
·   Thursday night, March 3, will be a neighborhood leader meeting: Thursday,
March 3rd. Two leaders from the township have been invited, Kyle Kittleson and
a representative from the trailer park. Judge Boyd will speak at the meeting.
Will also discuss crime trends and items that are of concern with the
neighborhood leaders.
·   Many favorable comments have come from Williamstown Twp residents. Presence
from residents regarding speeding is appreciated.
·   4 crimes of note: larceny of a vehicle, hit and run accident, malicious
destruction and a drunk driver.
Opened for questions or concerns: none expressed.
Further statistical information can be provided if the Board desires.
Consent Agenda
Clerk Gaffner moved the consent agenda consisting of:
·   Approve the Minutes of 2/08/2011 Public Hearing and 2/08/2011 Township
board meeting
·   Treasurer’s Report, February 2011
·   Building inspectors report – February 2011
·   Accounts payable paid, checks 18991 through 19007 for a total of $13,643.26
and checks 1001 through 1003 for a total of $910.20
·   Payroll Checks paid 41330 through 41362 and EFTs 73 and 74 for a total of
$21,614.33
·   Accounts Payable checks to approve 19008 through 19024 for a total of
$19,397.88
·   Revenue and expenditure report ending 2/28/2011
·   Pending Litigation
·   Budget Amendment – authorizing the supervisor to move some of the Clerk’s,
Treasurer’s and Supervisor’s salaries to or from the Energy Grant and to
transfer $1,500 from the deputy treasurer (101-253-703.000) to clerical support
in the Energy Grant (101-830-703.000) and $292.50 from Trustee salary (101-101-
702.000) to Salary Trustee in the Energy Grant (101-830-702-101) to balance the
energy grant funds.
Seconded by Trustee Wright
Discussion:
Regarding the policy of paying some bills prior to board approval.
Motion Approved
Planning Commission
Minutes 2/15 & 2/22
Chair Fielek reviewed the meetings of the Planning Commission:
Medical Marijuana:
·   Treating Medical Marijuana Caregiver as a home occupation and require
registration. All other uses would be prohibited.
·   Asked that Medical Marijuana Moratorium be Extended an additional 6 months.
·   Have reverted back to a similar ordinance review that was held prior to
public hearing. Have refined approach.
·   Latest revisions have been submitted to board for review.
·   Preserving community values by lack of noticeable presence.
·   Would require inspections, etc. to insure compliance with code.
Questions, comments and concerns:
·   Concern with Only home occupation
·   Why Not in industrial or commercial
·   Time of operation seemed too broad.
Trustee Hayes arrived.
·   Difference between home occupation and home based business
·   Occupation: Not noticeable that someone is working out of home
·   Business: More of a foot print, signs, employee status
·   Fitting into ordinance: minimize impact to neighbors but still be able to
regulate.
·   Quantity of caregivers: distance between caregivers not addressed.
·   City of Williamston’s ordinance amendment is very restrictive. Limited
number of caregivers and locations.
·   1,000 feet from school. Consider adding church, park, etc. Looking at
refining this part of the ordinance.
·   No consumption on premises is encouraging.
·   Why not commercial area: Unlikely could sustain a business in commercial
district.
·   Just home or accessory building also. Should be clarified.
·   Sentiment of board members would like to see in business district- not in
residential setting.
·   Clarification of patient use- home occupation is for caregivers only.
·   Need for access to patients in need.
·   Caregivers could deliver.
·   What is penalty and enforcement for number of patients and hours of
operation violations. Township would have to enforce. Consider Caretaker pay
for cost of enforcement.
Public comment:
Tim Allard, City Manager. Clarification of city adoption. The planning
commission has made recommendation however city has not passed. March 14th and
28th are public hearing dates. 1000 ft from schools. 500 ft from other public
spaces and 1000 feet between caregivers. Would allow in three parts of the
city.
Treasurer Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board approve amending
Williamstown Township Board Resolution #95, extending the six month moratorium
relating to facilities distributing medical marijuana, adopted on September 07,
2010, for an additional six months, or until September 7, 2011. The six month
extension will permit the Township Staff to continue their research on this
issue and work with the Township Attorney to draft appropriate regulations for
the Township to be in compliance with the Medical marijuana Act of 2008.
Seconded by Trustee Wright
Discussion: none
Roll Call Vote
Yes: Supervisor Martin, Treasurer Eyster, Clerk Gaffner, Trustee Wright,
Trustee Wilbrink, Trustee Hayes
No: none
Other business
Grand River Green zone workshop for residents in May.
Neighbors will be notified of workshops and hearings.
Experience with overlay hasn’t been completely successful.
This would insure everyone participates.
Review of Art 8-10 is completed and continuing review through Article 17 for
March 22nd meeting.
Joint meeting was successful. Discussed Medical Marijuana amendments, 425’s,
sewer and water improvements were discussed.
*Clerk Gaffner left the meeting
Only areas that would remain in the township have the 57 taps. Not all 425’s.
Looking forward to continued dialog with City PC
*Clerk Gaffner returned to the meeting.
City of Williamston engineer, Scott DeVries, would like to do a presentation to
PC and Board on the city’s well protection efforts.
Unfinished Business
Special Assessment roll 2010(change)
Need to remove a vacant land parcel
Treasurer Eyster move the Williamstown township Board approve amending
Williamstown Township Board Resolution No. 2010-96, confirming the 2010 Special
assessment Roll for Police Protection Within the Township, by removing the
assessment for parcel 33-03- 03-21-100-005 and reducing the proposed special
assessment roll total amount to $301,950.
Seconded by Trustee Wilbrink
Discussion: none
Roll Call:
Yes: Supervisor Martin, Treasurer Eyster, Clerk Gaffner, Trustee Wright,
Trustee Wilbrink, Trustee Hayes
No: none
New Business
Ordinance cost recovery
Supervisor Martin went over recommendation from Sheriff’s office regarding
hazardous spills. Many townships have an ordinance. Examples were provided.
Discussed a couple of years ago. Eliminates cost of cleanup and can be passed
on to violator.
Other discussion included:
·   Does Neisa bill township for clean up?
·   Haz Mat would pass on cost to local gov’t.
·   Neisa participates with County Haz Mat.
·   Why is Township paying into Haz Mat fund.
·   Clarification is needed as to what the process is and how cost is
disseminated.
·   Need to find out what kind of coverage the township has.
·   Obtain Neisa’s recommendation and legal counsel’s recommendation.
·   Trustee Hayes will check with Neisa,
·   Clerk Gaffner re: Haz Mat funds paid out
·   Supervisor Martin will check with legal counsel.
Park Prairie Burn
Supervisor Martin explained the history and reason for a burn.
This would be third prairie burn which is recommended every third year until
established.
Allows native plants to thrive and suppress invasive species.
Waiting allows invasive species to thrive.
Assessment of reseeding would take place once snow is removed.
Concerned about wildlife habitat nesting in ground.
Trustee Hayes moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Parks &
Recreation Committee’s, recommendation for an Ecological Burn at the Township
Park on Grand River Road. The burn is to be completed by David Borneman LLC and
PlantWise of Ann Arbor, during the spring of 2011 for an agreed to contracted
cost to the Township of $7,240. The Burn includes 53 acres of prairie and 7
acres of woods.
Seconded by Clerk Gaffner
Discussion: none
Motion Approved.
RCRA agreements
Supervisor Martin explained the events to date regarding RCRA. RCRA has asked
the city to take over administration of RCRA. Agreement with Meridian Twp has
been approved for a cost of 16,000 to the city for summer sports: football,
baseball, softball and basketball. 1 year contract. No longer affiliated with
school and needed home base with a desire to keep it local.
Curt Zaleski spoke on behalf of RCRA. RCRA wanted some say as to how it is run.
Storage of equipment, facilitating of some administration needs. Employee used
to run RCRA but was expensive to retain. It was difficult to keep at approx
$50,000 with benefits. Able to trim cost to participants. City is not quite
ready to handle. It gives younger kids a chance to play different teams and at
the same time cuts cost. Needed an entity to be responsible for money. Amount
of money moving through RCRA, RCRA did not feel comfortable being responsible
for funds due to need of a responsible party. Meridian will help with field
prep. Look forward to expanded resources. City is only entity with only
Williamston students.
Proportion of kids: 60% between city and Township. Balance with Wheatfield,
Locke, Leroy and Alaiedon.
Tim Allard addressed the board: Former RCRA Advisory board asked for City and
participating townships. Would be custodial for funds held in designated
account.
Asking for township to adopt agreement that is being presented to townships
with participating residents to allow a voice in decisions being made. Agree to
cover deficit, surplus would go into restricted funds to build for future
programs, improvements, etc. Would give Township a say in recreation
development. Locke and Leroy have been active in discussion to date. Mr.
Zaleski is past president of RCRA and has worked closely with Meridian
Township.
Supervisor Martin discussed information that is in packet. Agreements included
were between Williamston and RCRA and Williamston with Meridian Township.
Financial obligation is a concern. Locke Township is checking with legal
department with a recommendation of Township’s legal counsel reviewing
agreement prior to signing.
Discussion:
·   Allocation of funds from Williamston Schools recreation millage. Question
of what money was to be used for. 5 year millage was passed in 08. School asked
for millage in order to keep facilities open. No charge for use of facilities
for recreation programs that service the youth of the area by school. Working
on policy for individual use.
·   Would reservation fees for field use would be covered by Meridian Township.
·   Liability insurance should cover city and city's should cover township as
additional insured.
·   Financial concern: if legal for us to make financial contribution- it is
currently open ended and makes it impossible to predict. Would like to see a
limit as to financial responsibility.
·   Soccer is not included. Soccer club has picked up soccer due to constraints
of being able to handle load by RCRA. Soccer may be coming back to RCRA.
Basketball split to be able to continue programs. RCRA boosters picked up
football.
·   Groups started splintering off from RCRA.
·   Meridian Township will provide insurance coverage, which is expensive due
to medical and liability.
·   Clarification on Meridian field prep: School fields and any other fields
would be prepped to need.
Tim Allard: Hope to bring splinter groups back into the fold. Including soccer,
swimming and lacrosse. Arrangements have been made to analyze each program
after season. Goal to keep support of each program self sustaining. Approaching
in a fiscally responsible way. Believe there are sufficient funds to cover
cost. Want to be a collaborative effort between municipalities. Plan consistent
with Governor Snyder’s goal of cooperation between surrounding communities.
Other Discussion included:
·   Would like to wait to hear from other Townships as to opinion of their
attorney before proceeding.
·   Suggestion of not charging RCRA for field usage could be considered.
·   Difference between community based programs and private parties re:
participation levels. Layer of participation or charge policy. Value to public
organization
·   Send to parks and recreation committee for review.
Board meeting dates 2011-2012
Calendar provided. One date could be a possible conflict if August primary.
This could be changed if primary is scheduled.
Trustee Wright moved that the Township Board hold Township Board meetings for
the 2011-12 fiscal year on the first Tuesday of each month, starting at 7:00 pm
with a second meeting tentatively scheduled on the 3rd Tuesday of the month
starting at 5:30 pm.
Seconded by Treasurer Eyster
Discussion: none
Motion Approved
Reports
Energy Grant: Treasurer Eyster updated the Board on the EECBG Grant. Extension
through end of April. Lights have arrived - which is the last of materials.
They should go up when reasonable weather. Should be wrapping up soon.
Generator will be hooked up to propane and needs to be hooked up to building.
Will set second tank for generator for running at full capacity. Housing at
cemetery for incinerator toilet is needed. Bus shelter will go up as soon as
weather breaks. Will allow us to provide emergency shelter for residents. Will
be 1st township providing emergency shelter in area. Neisa also set up for
emergency service.
Projector: Clerk Gaffner hopes to have up and running at next board meeting.
Art Tour: Supervisor Martin explained that plans are moving forward. Tickets
should be available April 1st. Some residents will be new participants.
Urban Service Boundary: Supervisor Martin attended the presentation at joint
Meridian meeting on the 22nd. Haslett and Okemos schools were in attendance and
expressed their concerns re: Medical Marijuana . CATA did presentation
regarding new design for rapid transit to downtown Lansing at cost of
$197,000,000. Should be hearing more from CATA regarding proposal due to
request by CATA of road funds. Board members should try and attend any
presentations by CATA.
County Chapter meeting was held last week. Discussion of County Sheriff was
priority.
Revenue sharing report projects increases of Township share. Statutory amount
is being reduced hurting city’s and villages. Census may help if we have an
increase in population.
Well head protection. Will be setting up a joint meeting of the PC and Board to
go over plan. Hopefully in April on third Tuesday.
Have not heard from Compensation Commission to date.
Calendar Date: Tentative meeting for March 30th 5:00 p.m. to wrap up any cost
and charges to budget.
Public Comment for agenda & non-agenda items: None
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 9:05
Review
Clerk Gaffner to publish resolutions/amendments.
Supervisor Martin will continue working with RCRA
Planning Assistant Bloomquist- Will confirm the Prairie Burn
Cost recovery: Supervisor Martin, Trustee Hayes and Clerk Gaffner will gather
information for April meeting
Clerk Gaffner: Posting of approved dates
Question regarding approved plan in overlay district: Senior Housing approval
has expired.
Motion to Adjourn: Trustee Hayes.
Meeting adjourned at 9:15
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner
March 30, 2011
Township Clerk
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 7:00p.m. at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 N. Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the agenda.
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Trustee Wright, Supervisor Martin, Treasurer Eyster,
Clerk Gaffner, Trustee Williams and Trustee Hayes
Trustee Wright moved to add Budget Amendments right after Compensation
Committee
Seconded by Trustee Hayes
Motion Approved
Public Comment for agenda & non-agenda items
Ruth Templeton 1435 Epley Rd.: questions on budget regarding: attorney fees,
roads, planning, capital outlay, internet.
Supervisor Martin closed Public Comment at 5:04 p.m.
Compensation Committee
Wilbur McNinch addressed the Board and explained the process that the committee
went through for recommendations. Meetings began in 2007. Table provided
showing appointments and terms. Joyce Messing replaced Sally Stewart this year
and new member Jim Conroy was added to committee. Good participation from all
members of commission. Final recommendation is to keep salaries the same as
last year.
Discussion:
·   Is information available regarding comparable townships in book of
information reviewed.
Clerk Gaffner moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Williamstown
Township Compensation Commission recommendation that there be no change in
salary for all elected Township officials, including trustees, supervisor,
treasurer and clerk, for budget years 2011-2012 and 2012-2013.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes.
Motion Approved
Supervisor Martin thanked all members of Committee for their service and Chair
McNinch for leadership.
Budget Amendments
Treasurer Eyster moved that the Williamstown Township Board authorize a budget
amendment of $18 be added to 101-100-990.000 Bank Fees out of contingencies
101-890-965.000
Seconded by Trustee Wright
Discussion: none
Motion Approved
Clerk Gaffner move that the Williamstown Township Board restrict the use of the
Art Tour income so that the artists’ fees are restricted to paying the Township
expenses for the Art Tour and the ticket, contributions and other income be
restricted to a Township selected project.
Seconded by Treasurer Eyster
Discussion:
·   Reason for restricted fund due to income in one fiscal year while
expenditures are in another. Formalizes restrictions.
·   Artist fees covers cost to Township for promotion of tour.
Motion Approved
Treasurer Eyster explained reason for the next motion to create restricted
funds.
Treasurer Eyster moved that the Williamstown Township Board authorize budget
amendments of $2,375 for 101-751-884.000 (Art Sale and Tour Fees Restricted)
and $1,728.33 for Art Tour Restricted 101-751-884.001. out of contingency 101-
890-965.000
Seconded by Hayes
Discussion: none
Motion Approved
Accounts Payable
Clerk Gaffner moved the consent agenda consisting of:
General Fund - Accounts payable paid, checks 19025 through 19051 for a total of
$42.388.42 and Police Fund – Accounts payable paid, checks 1004 through 1008
for a total of $8,620.68
General fund - Accounts Payable checks to approve 19052 through 19060 for a
total of $9,590.90
Revenue expenditure report ending 3/31/2011
Seconded by Treasurer Eyster
Discussion:
Question of My Williamston and Energy Chek.
Fahey Shultz is police related.
Motion Approved
Motion to Adjourn by Trustee Hayes.
Meeting adjourned at 5:25
____________________________               
Ernie Gaffner
April 5, 2011
Township Clerk
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 p.m. at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 N. Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order, reviewed the agenda and explained
procedures for public comment.
Pledge of Allegiance
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Trustee Wright, Supervisor Martin, Treasurer Eyster,
Trustee Hayes, Trustee Williams
Absent: Clerk Gaffner
Public Comment for agenda & non-agenda items
Rod Imhoff 2380 Wilgus Rd.: Regarding Medical Marijuana and placement of
caretakers in residential vs. business districts. Concern with the review of
the Burn Ordinance by the Board.
Ruth Templeton 1435 Epley Rd.: Re: Burn Ordinance
Supervisor Martin closed Public Comments at 7:04
Police Report
Chief Hall reviewed the submitted report. Cost includes the investigation of
the oil spill. Organized the 1st neighborhood group in the Mobile Home Park.
Assigned Jeff Adams to Mobile Home Park neighborhood. The Board might want to
consider a unique sign to Williamstown Twp for Neighborhood Watch. Entrance
signs to Township will be up soon. Discussion regarding the possibility of
assigning a motorcycle to the Township in conjunction with a car. This is
another way to address traffic complaints. New Panasonic paperless ticket
device with a printer-creates easier to read citations. Downloads to reports
and directly to 55th district court. Still practicing relaxed enforcement to
ensure residents are aware of presence. Compliance checks will be taking place
in liquor establishments- letter goes out first. If an establishment doesn’t
pass they are issued a citation and notice is sent to the liquor commission.
Oil spill was investigated and barrels were from Hammond Farms. They sell them
empty so it makes it difficult to trace. New equipment from a Grant award:
equipment that is used will be updated with new data collector and additional
training for 5 people from the Department. Will be shared with East Lansing and
Ingham County Sheriff for use in fatalities and crime scenes.
Questions from Board:
·   Speed limit warning trailer brought into Twp for use? Would be nice to see
rotated through the Township.
·   Further description of the new equipment being purchased from grant: This
would allow 1 person to compile site data.
Consent Agenda
Trustee Wright moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the Minutes of 3/01/2011 and 3/30/2011 Township board meetings
Treasurer’s Report, March 2011
Building inspectors report – March 2011
Accounts payable paid, checks 19061 for a total of $480.00
Payroll Checks paid 41363 through 41395 and EFTs 75-78 for a total of
$21,184.03
Accounts Payable checks to approve 19062 through 19078 for a total of
$42,570.49
Revenue and expenditure report ending 3/31/2011
Pending Litigation
Seconded by Trustee Hayes
Discussion:
·   Payroll for Prairie Burn. Discussion of which fiscal year it would fall in.
When occurred not when paid is how it is looked at by auditors
Motion Approved
Planning Commission
Chair Fielek reviewed the 3/22/2011 meeting with the Board.
·   Medical Marijuana was a large discussion. Still feel residential is a way
to proceed but will give option for use outside of residential districts. Pros
and Cons will be looked at for both options. Will hold public hearing when both
options are ready.
·   Map is ready for public forum on Grand River Green Zone. May 24th is date
reserved for public forum.
·   Finished initial review of Articles 10 through 17 and will be working on
Articles 18 through 24. Once these last articles are reviewed, the PC will then
review all changes and call for a Public Hearing.
·   The Commission is preparing to review the Master Plan. Not a total review
but several key areas will be reviewed. The last survey was very good but have
not determined which way to go for new one. The census data is out and will be
looked at during the review.
·   Population did not increase much as anticipated. 4,978 pop for Twp. City
approx 3800.
·   Curious to see how PH went for City of Williamston regarding Medical
Marijuana. Nothing new legislatively or from court cases. Caregivers are paid
for the raising of Marijuana-is not free. Can be paid for raising- upwards to
$400 per ounce-up to 2.5 ounces a day per patient.
·   Using a monkey survey is one of the methods suggested to survey the
residents.
Unfinished Business
Burn Ordinance
Supervisor Martin reviewed the burn ordinance. Suggested revisions were in the
packet. Statewide ban regarding the burning of household waste was to go into
affect but has since been put on hold. Other updates were to address outdoor
wood burners, NEISA language, etc. Trash burning has been restricted in all but
two of the districts: Ag-Sf and AG-C.
Discussion:
·   Page 11. Suggestion of modifying limited burn areas to all weekends in
April/May and October and November due to weather restrictions and amount of
yard debris
·   Agreement from others. Weather is unpredictable and allowed times should be
increased.
·   Complaints from neighbors regarding burning: health related. If allowed
every weekend hinders use of their own property. Maybe more would be agreeable
but not every weekend.
·   Short term for yard waste. If don’t want to extend offer a place to take it
to be chipped.
·   Discussing the removal of compostable yard waste from landfills. May result
in more jobs.
·   Maybe 1st and third weekends.
·   Not the same person burning multiple times is more of an issue.
·   Compost it.
·   More opportunities to get it done.
·   Smoke has no boundaries- still difficult for those with health issues.
·   Composting should be investigated more.
·   Issue mostly in small subdivisions.
·   Curbside pick up may be an option
·   5.03- conditions. remove
Out door woodburners:
·   Stack height- higher more efficient, etc. 2 ft above the highest within 200
ft. seems excessive. 2 story house with 2 ft above is high.
·   Alpena Twp has an ordinance that requires a certain type of smoke stack
add-on.
·   Could be dependent on distance from residences.
·   Take out permit.
·   Issue with distance from property lines.
·   e. regulations i: add R-1 if they can meet the requirements.
·   add specific standards
·   don’t want people making their own.
·   ANSI standards best.
·   Leave it so it changes with standards or where to find standards.
·   Similar to wood stoves in homes and accessory buildings standards
·   how can you have the 7.5 g/h- depends on type of wood.
·   Clarification on above numbers.
·   Add ash disposal- where
·   Retrofitting existing units- would be grandfathered in. Complaints would be
addressed individually- would fall under blight ordinance.
·   5.07- Incinerator- do we allow in home incinerators? Would fall under state
regulations. Will look into this one.
Cost Recovery Ordinance
Members of the Board were checking with Neisa, Haz Mat and legal council for
recommendations. Will be discussed at Thursday’s Neisa meeting.
Legal council memo in packet.
Discussion included:
·   Cost recovery for dumping is a legitimate concern for landowners.
·   Can be customized.
·   Concern with billing. Recommend not paying bill for recent spill until
totally reviewed.
·   Need cost recovery for protection of township and residents. Without a
township policy we can not pass on to county, state, etc.
·   Haz Mat team doesn’t know what they are dealing with until they get there.
·   Would like to see customized dealing with hazardous waste, gross
negligence, etc.
RCRA
Supervisor Martin reviewed packet information and how it applies to the City
proposal from last month. Locke Township voted against participating with RCRA.
Have not heard from LeRoy or Alaiedon and Wheatfield has not participated. What
type of commitment is the Board willing to make?
Discussion included:
·   Anything of money would need vote- would need clarification from legal
council.
·   No disadvantage for not participating.
·   Agreement between Meridian and City is already in place. Benefit: would be
all united as a community. Concerted community support.
·   Concern is when it comes to financial as we service other communities.
·   Authority would be a vote of the people.
·   RCRA would pay a fee like everyone else.
·   Would there be an impact to our residents?- Same fee for everyone.
·   Because of servicing other school districts- money should be off the table.
·   Could sign letter of support to city.
·   If we want to do more- check with legal council.
·   Lack of support from other townships if Authority.
Letter of support to the city will go out from Board.
New Business
Park & Rec request
Supervisor Martin reviewed the request from Parks and Rec for dugouts on the
North field. Williamston Suns has proposed providing the labor if Township will
support with $1000.00 for materials.
Trustee Wright moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the request of the
Williamstown Township Parks Committee, approving the expenditure of up to
$1,000 for materials for the construction of baseball dugouts on the north
baseball field at Grand River Park with labor provided by the Williamston Suns
organization and the dugouts will be built to specs approved by the township
building inspector.
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion: Definition of Geocaching.
Motion approved
Reports
Departments & Committees
·   Park burn took place last Wednesday. Went well.
·   Discussion of pamphlet that was developed for meetings. Will be available
for the public at the next meeting.
·   Ingham County Chapter meeting. Supervisor Martin was elected president of
the Ingham County Chapter for two years. Also elected President of the Michigan
Association of Township Supervisors.
·   Please let Supervisor Martin know if attending Chapter meeting.
·   Will be a bike ride through the township on July 16th and 17th..
·   No joint meeting on the 19th of April. Will reschedule after Tri-County
Planning’s work is completed.
Public Comment for agenda & non-agenda items
Rod Imhoff 2380 Wilgus Rd.
·   Concerned with the Board not having the Planning Commission review the Burn
Ordinance as they were involved in 2002 and 2003 and size of burn piles.
·   Responsibility of oil spills.
·   Neisa recommended 6x6 for piles and was discussed at length by planning
commission.
·   Complaints: taking written complaints is board policy.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 8:40.
Trustee Wright motioned that the Board go into closed session to discuss
pending litigation and confidential correspondence with Rec Sec to stay.
Support by Trustee Hayes.
Roll call Vote: Yes: Trustee Hayes, Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer Eyster, Trustee
Wright, Supervisor Martin, Trustee Williams.
Closed Seassion
Trustee Wright moved to resume open session at 9:50.
Support by Treasurer Eyster
Motion Approved
Review
Attorney Vince Spagnuolo will proceed with Board directives.
Wanda will contact Williamston Suns regarding dugouts
RCRA- Supervisor Martin will write a letter of support to the City of
Williamston
Cost recovery: Trustee Hayes, Clerk Gaffner and Attorney Spagnuolo will do
further research.
Motion by Trustee Hayes to adjourn the meeting at 10:00 pm.
 
Meeting adjourned.
____________________________               
Ernie Gaffner
May 3rd, 2011
Township Clerk
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Call to Ordaer
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 p.m. at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 N. Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order, reviewed the agenda and explained
procedures for public comment.
Pledge of Allegiance
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Hayes, Clerk Gaffner, Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer Eyster,
Trustee Wright, Supervisor Martin, Trustee Williams.
Public Comment for agenda & non-agenda items**
None
Closed at: 7:05 pm
Police Report
Chief Hall reviewed the written report. Summer hours will see an increase of
calls. The department has been maintaining consistency with the hours. Officers
have enjoyed working with the Township. The chief along with other officers of
the Meridian Police Department will be joining the Williamston Gun Club. The
gun club will allow all officers to shoot there. They currently shoot 4 times a
year. This will allow them to develop a relationship within theTownship. The
Gun Club is very sensitive to enforcing their rules and desire to be good
neighbors. The gun club closing hour is 8:00 pm. The department would like to
shoot in low light once a year and may be able to work this out at the Gun
Club. Great public relations for the Meridian Police to be members of the gun
club.
Discussion:
·   Knowledge on how things are going with the other Townships- do not have an
update.
·   Meridian has had a problem with break-ins on the west side of the Township.
·   Important for people to call in when they see something going on.
·   Restrictions have been lifted on writing tickets.
·   Training sessions: using a survey devise. This month training on laws.
Attorney coming from State Police regarding update on new laws. Also arson
training which will be helpful.
Consent Agenda
Clerk Gaffner moved the consent agenda consisting of:
·   Approve the Minutes of 4/05/2011 Township board meeting
·   Treasurer’s Report, April 2011
·   Building inspectors report – April 2011
·   Accounts payable paid, general fund checks 19079-19102 for a total of
$9,941.40 and police fund check 1009 for $45,456.25
·   Payroll Checks paid 41396 through 41430 and EFTs 79-81 for a total of
$22,960.93
·   Accounts Payable checks to approve 19103 through 19117 for a total of
$9,089.49
·   Revenue and expenditure report ending 4/30/2011
·   Pending Litigation
Seconded by Treasurer Eyster
No discussion
Motion Approved
Planning Commission Report
4-19-11 minutes
Actions of the Planning Commission included:
·   Made progress on developing a proposed Medical Marijuana ordinance. Will
look at both home based business and as a special use in non-residential
districts. Public Hearing will be at May 17th meeting. Hope to move to Board in
next few months.
·   Reviewed revised map of Grand River Green Zone. Will be having a Public
Forum on May 24th.
·   Continued review of the Zoning Ordinance. Will be looking at consolidated
materials before calling for a PH and proceeding further. Considering revisions
to the Master Plan. Will be looking at Chapters 1,2,4,7 and future land uses.
The goal is to have any revisions and addendums completed this fiscal year.
·   Approved annual report as presented to the Board.
Unfinished Business
Office furniture
Supervisor Martin expressed the due diligence in searching for used furniture.
Treasurer Eyster reviewed the information provided in the packet: The Board was
provided a long list of individual pieces going into revisions to work
stations. This will free up back office for use by Meridian Township Police.
Equipment purchased will match what we currently have. Will not have any impact
on the main area with 4 stations. Available to go in sometime this month.
Amount of $8289.50 with $2000 from the departments of clerk, treasury,
supervisor and town hall. Funds will not be coming out of the police fund.
Discussion: none
Burn Ordinance
Supervisor Martin gave an update on the revisions to the Burn Ordinance. Do not
have a proposed document at this time. Additional research material was
supplied in the packet. After reviewing the additional research, more
consideration may want to be given to the distance between the wood burner,
property lines and neighboring residents. DEQ and EPA suggested distances would
eliminate some residents. Most municipalities are doing a large set back in
lieu of banning.
Discussion included:
·   Property line or nearest building. Should it be to the nearest building vs
property line.
·   Most limited to clean wood- wood pellets, corn. Definition of clean wood
should be addressed and will be looked into.
·   Are we going to regulate indoor fireplaces, woodstoves, etc If it is the
desire of the board to do so they can in the future. Right now we have nothing
regarding the wood furnaces. What about summer restrictions? Can be added.
·   Should review be through the planning commission- does not need to as it is
a stand alone ordinance.
·   Stack height should be addressed by closeness to a building. Taller stack
is more efficient. Nearest building not property line may cause a problem later
on.
·   Property line is easier to regulate. If property line eliminates use, then
maybe nearest building would help access. Can research more. Will eliminate a
majority of the residents by the 200 ft set back. Materials enclosed in packets
address setbacks.
·   The weekends addressed for additional burn dates in restricted areas were
added. Any other research wanted: how many parcels do we eliminate by using the
200 ft. Minimum 400 ft width to have a burner with 200 ft distance.
·   Maybe distance to a building and lower set back.
Police Assessment
Treasurer Eyster reviewed with legal counsel how much money can be kept in the
police fund special assessment. The township assessment is set up under Act 33
and does not require Twp to return funds over 5%. It allows the township to
reasonably have money for unforeseen circumstances, to build funds for
equipment, etc. The Board approved to decrease the assessment for the next
year. Will bring a policy back that would allow funding to follow fiscal year.
It is hard to figure budget when they are not aligned. Needs to be in a policy
to know how much to carry over, etc. Will bring back a suggested policy to the
Board for consideration. Meridian Township is not on the same fiscal year.
New Business
BSA systems conversion
Treasurer Eyster reviewed conversion. BSA made a conversion about 3.5 years
ago. System is self contained. System has been totally rewritten- but some real
good enhancements would be available. Old system will not be updated with
improvements. Taxing and assessing is more integrated. The two systems are
currently not in sync and they would be in the new system. The new system
integrates better with GIS systems. We have held off so that it could be
tested. County has asked for others to wait but they are setting to convert in
June if approved by commissioners. Assuming they convert, the township would
get a discount to convert by the end of the year. Our server is up for
replacement this year. Cost is quite a bit more to go to a web based server. We
don’t have to make the move but it is recommended. It currently takes most of
the year to get through taxes. We need a review of all our hardware to make
sure we are compatible with the upgrade. May need additional software that is
free from Microsoft. Most of the cost is addressed in the memo. This will take
most of the money for capital improvements for this year. We will need to do
this at some point and would like to do it in June. Would like to schedule for
June with the ability to cancel. County is going to County Commissioners for
approval in May. Not asking for approval now- and would not recommend if the
County does not approve. The system also has enhanced auditing.
Will bring back to board in June with final numbers.
Restricted funds
Supervisor Martin explained the restricted funds. This is a budget amendment.
May want to look at how high to set contingency fund. Must be reviewed each
year. Can not be done at budget time because we need to know what is left. May
is first month to do carry over and be accurate.
Treasurer Eyster moved that the Williamstown Township Board change the
following budget expenditure lines to carryover restricted funds:
101-751-881.001 Parklands Restricted Funds   increase $2,000
101-751-884.000 Art Sale and Tour Fees       increase $275.24
101-751-884.001 Art Tour Restricted       increase $1,778.33
101-890-965.000 Contingency Fund      decrease $4,053.57.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes
Discussion:
None
Motion Approved
Reports
Departments & Committees
·   Art tour is May 6 & 7th. Friday and Saturday. Studios, Branch School and
Twp Hall will be open for artist. Hopefully, weather is cooperating this year.
Post cards out, tickets available.
·   Recycling clean up and yard sale is May 14th. Will have a lot going on and
could use board members help 9-3.
·   Road commission allotment is $11,000 this year. They will be doing more
chip sealing. State wide every road has been given a pacer rating. The road
commission advocates repairing good roads with pacer rating of 7 or better. The
cost goes up much more when the pacer rating goes down. Compare with what roads
we want to have done. More important to work on 5-7 year plan. Two years ago
the Road Commission saved a lot of money due to a mild winter. Funds have
depleted due to less tax. County gets declining amount due to lack of tax money
coming in. This will force hard decisions to be made by the Township. Providing
draft legislation from municipalities may move forward, however would need to
be a grass roots effort.
·   Consolidation of Townships is not likely as it is a constitutional right
and would not be possible w/o major effort. There was a statewide program for
bulk purchasing but we would not purchase enough for us to use the program. We
don’t receive statutory revenue. We anticipate an increase in revenue due to
population increase. There are 60 freshmen legislatures this year.
·   Annual report is out and should be on the website.
Public Comment for agenda & non-agenda items**
Al LeBlanc 4720 Jadestone. Appreciate projected information.
Closed at 8:26.
Ernie Gaffner moved to go into closed session for the purpose of discussing 2
legal opinions and two litigations and for the recording secretary to stay.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes.
Roll Call.
Yeas: Bob Hayes, Ernie Gaffner, Frans Wilbrink, Janet Eyster, Martin Wright,
Mickey Martin, Rick Williams.
Went into closed session at 8:36.
Treasurer Eyster moved to go back into open session. Support by Trustee Hayes.
Motion approved.
Back into open session at 9:30.
Review
Legal council has direction.
Treasurer Eyster will do further research regarding conversion of BSA
Treasurer Eyster will work on a Policy for restricted funds
Office furniture should be in by June meeting.
Trustee Hayes moved to adjourn.
Meeting adjourned at 9:40
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner
Township Clerk
May 20, 2011
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Special Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Board of Trustees special meeting convened at 10:08 a.m. at
the Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 N. Zimmer Rd., Williamston,
Michigan. Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order.
Pledge of Allegiance
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Supervisor Martin, Treasurer Eyster and Clerk
Gaffner
Absent: Trustee Wright, Trustee Hayes and Trustee Williams
Public Comment for agenda & non-agenda items
Since there was no one in the audience there was no call for public comment.
Supervisor Martin closed Public Comments at 10:10
Treasurer Eyster presented information on the rational, costs and logistics of
implementation of new computer hardware and conversion upgrade of the
Township’s bookkeeping software from BS&A. To stay current with Ingham County
and other municipalities using BS&A software, there is a need for Williamstown
Township to approve the conversion to BS&A.NET
The cost of conversion and the required larger server along with training for
Township staff and installation is $23,425.
Assessing and Tax $7,200
Financial $3,175
Building $3,750
Training $2,400
Server and Installation $6,900
Total $23,425
Treasurer Eyster stated that the total cost for this conversion exceeded the
2011-2012 budgeted amounts for these costs but BS&A would allow payments over
the next two years and no interest charges will be assessed. Trustee Wilbrink,
stated he believed there was sufficient reason to use some money from the
Township surplus and pay the total amount at the present time.
Consensus of the board discussion was that knowing there may be additional
costs to the Township in other budget areas requiring movement of funds from
the surplus, it would be best to take advantage of the offer from BS&A and
address the issue later in the 2011-2012 budget year.
Motion by Clerk Gaffner that the Williamstown Township Board approve the BS&A
software conversion to BS&A.NET and purchase of additional computer hardware
required to meet the specifications of the software conversion and provide
training of Township Staff, at a total cost of $23,425. It is also understood
that the payment of $23,425 will be spread over the next two years, with no
interest charge and final payment to BS&A will be paid in April 2013. It is
further understood further staff training may be required at an additional
cost.
Second by Treasurer Eyster
Motion Approved
Motion by Trustee Wilbrink to adjourn the meeting at 10:20 a.m.
Meeting adjourned.
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner
Township Clerk
June 7, 2011
Call to Order
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 p.m. at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 N. Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order, reviewed the agenda and explained
procedures for public comment.
Pledge of Allegiance
Clerk Gaffner moved to place the FreedomNet Carryover funds before the Consent
agenda on the agenda. Seconded by Treasurer Eyster.
Motion Approved.
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Hayes, Clerk Gaffner, Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer Eyster,
Trustee Wright, Supervisor Martin, Trustee Williams.
Public Comment for agenda & non-agenda items**
None
Closed at: 7:04 pm
Police Report
Chief Hall reviewed the written report. Haz Mat investigation continues.
Motorcycle presence has begun. 3 break ins were reported in the Township and
neighborhood watch has been notified.
Discussion:
Response from residents very favorable.
FreedomNet Carryover funds
Treasurer Eyster explained the reason for the motion to carry over funds. Need
to move out of fund equity into this fiscal year.
Treasurer Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board approve moving $30,000
from the fund balance to the 2011-2012 Township Budget to fund the board’s
commitment to Freedomnet of $30,000 for upgrades to the equipment on Township
property. This was originally approved for the 2010-2011 budget but was not
spent and needs to be rolled into the current budget.
Seconded by Trustee Wright
Discussion:
Freedomnet owns the equipment
Motion Approved.
Consent Agenda
Clerk Gaffner moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the Minutes of 5/03/2011 and 5/20/2011 Township board meetings
Treasurer’s Report, May 2011
Building inspectors report – May 2011
Accounts payable paid, checks 19118-19152 and 19154-19156 for a total of
$53,936.58 with check 19153 marked as void
Payroll Checks paid 41431-41463 and 41471, EFTs 82-85 and special EFT 25 for a
total of $22,875.35 (checks 41464-41470 paid in June)
Accounts Payable checks to approve 19157-19161 and 19163-19184 for a total of
$26,986.57 with check 19162 marked as void
Revenue and expenditure report ending 5/31/2011
Pending Litigation
Seconded by Trustee Hayes
Discussion: none
Motion Carries
Planning Commission Report
Minutes 5/17/11 & Public Forum
Chair Fielek reviewed the meeting. Medical Marijuana was the main topic due to
the Public Hearing. Two options were presented to the public. Very low turnout.
Deliberation will take place on June 21 st with a recommendation to follow.
Request will be sent to Meridian Township for a joint PC meeting. Sub-committee
appointed to review Master Plan. May 24 th the PC held a public forum for the
Grand River Green Zone. Positive response from attendees. The Planning
Commission will move forward with the adoption process for the Green Zone.
Discussion:
Good feedback from township residents.
Presentation of the GR GreenZone competition submittals and Tri County regional
plans by Harmony Gmazel was very informative.
Unfinished Business
FreedomNet upgrade report
Communications Chair, Marvin Thompson, gave a report of the problems that have
been challenging for providing consistent service. FreedomNet did a pilot of
new equipment in Grand Rapids and found a few problems that need to be
addressed before installation. This will move service to a licensed frequency.
At a May 5 th meeting with FreedomNet, a lease agreement was approved.
FreedomNet has ordered the equipment. Installation should be quick once it is
in. Priority will go to residents with problems. Money allocated to date by the
Township has been primarily for the road to the tower. Lease payments are
received for the land the tower sits on and we benefit with free service to the
Township. May take a couple of years to adequately service all residents.
Discussion:
·   Cost to the residents will remain the same.
·   Intereference: Currently two frequencies that are the same as the
interfering source. This system will relieve the interference. FreedomNet has
been very cooperative and willing to work with the Township to create a
solution.
·   Reliability has been good except for interference with amateur radio.
·   FreedomNet has extended service in other areas. Interference has been in
Locke, Wheatfield and Williamstown Twps.
·   Thanks to Marvin Thompson and Kurt Guter for their dedication to the
residents of the Township. 
Police funding policy
Treasurer Eyster created a policy for putting the funding of the Police within
the Township’s fiscal year. A few minor changes are needed. This will enable
police funding to work with our software.
Treasurer Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board approve Policy #9,
funding the police budget on the same fiscal year as the regular Williamstown
Township General Fund Budget, April 1 through March 30.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes.
Discussion:
Concern of being an issue with Meridian Township.
Strictly for bookkeeping purposes.
Possibility of matching contract with fiscal year.
Motion approved.
Burn Ordinance
Supervisor Martin reviewed changes to final document.
Main changes regarding outdoor woodburners:
·   75 ft. from nearest property line or 200 ft. from nearest residence for
woodburners.
·   Stack height for outdoor woodburners.
Trustee Hayes moved the Williamstown Township Board approve Ordinance #41,
titled “Ordinance to Regulate Open Burning and Establish Fire Safety
Regulations” with the following amendments:
1.   Page 4. Section 5.02 a. Third bullet: after- such as add: ie to match
table.
2.   Page 7. Section 5.11 a. End sentence after ground. Remove balance of
sentence.
3.   Page 8. Section 5.11 e. v. Add the word “adjacent” between “nearest” and “
residence”
4.   Page 11. Table Notes 3.a. Change “1 st Saturday and 1 st Sunday” to “1 st
full weekend” and to “1 st and last full weekend”.
5.   Add to definitions: Weekend. Consisting of Saturday and Sunday
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion:
·   Need for a Public Hearing
·   Stand Alone Ordinance does not require a PH
·   Zoning Ordinance requires Public Hearing.
·   Stack Height issue of 2 ft over the peak.
·   Tying stack height to distance from residence.
·   NEISA requirements
·   Minimum 15 ft above the ground and require a spark arrestor.
·   Add full weekend to language in limited burn.
·   Burning of yard debris: ie: change text to ie: to match table.
Motion Approved
Tri-County Urban Service Boundary Study – Resolution
Supervisor Martin gave a synopsis of the efforts that have gone into this study
over the past 7 years. The Township has participated to date. This is in
support of the study and moving forward. Though the Township does not have
services, this is to support a service boundary regionally and between our
neighbors. Clerk Gaffner reviewed the Resolution of Support and what it covers.
This is not a cost consideration but support of the concept, to develop a plan
and agreement to work with neighboring municipalities.
The Green Zone Public Forum addressed the USB Committee efforts to date.
Supervisor Martin moved the Williamstown Township Board approve resolution #100
ADOPTING THE 2011 TRI-COUNTY URBAN SERVICE MANAGEMENT STUDY AND ITS
RECOMMENDATIONS
Seconded by Treasurer Eyster
Discussion:
·   This is not a mandate.
·   This is a study to build further a plan to implement.
·   No cost to date.
·   There may be further cost but is not yet determined.
·   Legal defense fund may be established and a type of revenue sharing.
·   Correction of Charter in Brochure
·   Cost to developers for services
Roll Call: Yes: Trustee Williams, Trustee Wright, Clerk Gaffner, Supervisor
Martin, Trustee Wilbrink, Trustee Hayes, Treasurer Eyster
Motion Approved
New Business
Code Enforcement/Meridian Police
Supervisor Martin explained the option of having the Meridian Police Dept.
assist with code enforcement. They have agreed to add checking the park and
cemetery to their patrol hours. If they saw a code violation, a report would be
supplied to the Township. This would help ease the stress of neighbors
reporting on other neighbors. Is this something the Board would like to
consider? The Township currently follows up only upon written complaint.
Residents could call Police for investigation.
Discussion:
·   Can police department issue a citation? Is this something we want to
consider?
·   How is this handled in Meridian? All departments can report on issues.
·   Officers can address issues w/o a report and speak to owner.
·   Have currently responded to a request by the Township.
·   Formal complaints- can this be a step in the process. Three prong approach-
informal and formal response.
·   Should consider a citation ordinance to help police service.
Direction from Board: Develop a policy for handling complaints. Look at sample
citation ordinances. Consensus to move forward with a policy.
Foreclosed property
Treasurer Eyster explained that property on Milton Road has been foreclosed
upon by Ingham County for back taxes.
Treasurer Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board not exercise its option
to purchase the foreclosed property in Williamstown Township, parcel 33-03-03-
01-200-002.
Seconded by Clerk Gaffner.
Discussion:
·   Township has first option, if the Township does not exercise their option
it then moves to the State for consideration, then back to County Land Bank.
·   Does Board have a policy that should be addressed?
·   Do to legal considerations- not recommended to purchase for back taxes.
Motion approved
Ordinance – Establish Planning Commission
Supervisor Martin reviewed the need for this Ordinance. This is to comply with
Public Act mandating the ordinance.
Trustee Wright moved the Williamstown Township Board adopt Ordinance #48
establishing a planning commission for Williamstown Township.
Seconded by Trustee Williams.
Discussion:
New ordinance repeals old ordinance.
Motion Approved
Safe routes to school
Supervisor Martin gave brief history of Safe Routes to School grant process.
Township needs to obtain an easement from Hideaway Woods as part of the grant
award.
Supervisor Martin moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the purchase of
an easement consisting of .014 acres more or less for the installment of an
additional sidewalk for the “Safe Routes to School” program. Purchase price of
the easement to be $1 (one dollar). Such purchase is to take place after
Williamstown Township receives written notice from Hideaway Woods, Inc. that
the Township is released from all costs of installation and maintenance of the
leased area.
Seconded by Trustee Wilbrink
Discussion
·   Maintenance issue falls on residents.
·   This would be purchasing an easement not the property.
·   Hide away woods is in agreement
·   The grant will fund a sidewalk along Mitchell Rd. South along west edge of
soccer fields then Williamstown Rd. Other sidewalks and crossings are also
involved and create a safe area for students.
Motion Approved
·   Further Discussion: For further consideration by the Township will be two
lights. More information is needed. One would be at the end of Hideaway Woods.
Another for flashing speed light on Rowley Rd.
·   Clarification of exact locations for lights.
·   Ingham County covers county primary- should involve county.
Discussion of packet delivery.
·   Would be helpful to see material ahead of time.
·   Does not give board members opportunity to ask questions.
·   Possibility of changing meeting date to the second Tuesday of the month to
give time for bill payment, elections and some holidays.
·   More time for citizens to review.
·   Place on Agenda for next meeting.
Trustee Hayes moved to change the July 5 th meeting to July 12 th .
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion:
Make sure it is posted appropriately
Motion approved.
Reports
Departments & Committees
Art Tour: Very successful. Thank you to committee. More attendees than last
year. Committee set for next year. Artist reported better sales. Art Tour will
be held again next year. Next month should have information on play equipment.
More interest from other artist.
Uniforms: Maintenance has acquired new uniforms. Sets them apart. Picture on
website. They enjoy the uniform and helps in approaching residents.
Recycle: Big recycling day was a success! Many positive comments. No major
issues arose. Consider doing again in the fall combined with recycling.
Garage Sale: Full house at garage sale. Not as much traffic as anticipated.
Karen Warsco is taking over coordinating the garage sale.
Gates at cemetery and park: Park Committee has already approved the concept of
a gate and dawn to dusk hours. Will ask the Cemetery Committee to consider.
Eagle Scout: Drew Payton’s project of the building for the incinerator toilet
is complete and they did a wonderful job.
NEISA: Switching insurances to save cost. Will save approx $21,000 total by
switching. Discussed about paying for responses. NEISA does not bill for
structure fires but would bill for other services- some clarification needed.
Ambulance revenue is $53,000 for calendar year. Issue collecting for ambulance
service. Meridian does not bill residents.
Personal Property Taxes: Treasurer Eyster has been working on back personal
property taxes and has been collecting. Working on a policy for dealing with
authorizations that happen in one fiscal year but payable in different fiscal
year. Creating a table of encumbrances or committed funds. This removes it from
general funds and creates a reminder.
Other Highlights:
·   New configuration is set up in front office. Converting to .net for all BSA
software. Training is Thursday and Friday on site and further training at BSA.
New servers and computers installed. Generator works as intended.
·   State interviewed Township for the EECBG Grant received. Will be
highlighting approximately 5 townships.
Public Comment
none
Closed at 9:15
Review
Clerk Gaffner will obtain more info on safe routes to schools and lighting.
Treasurer will follow up on the foreclosed property with Ingham County.
Supervisor Martin will work with Meridian Police regarding Code Enforcement and
Ordinance
Trustee Hayes moved to adjourn.
Meeting adjourned at 9:17
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner
Township Clerk
July 12, 2011
Call to Order
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 p.m. at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 N. Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order, reviewed the agenda, and explained
procedures for public comment.
Treasurer Eyster moved to discuss changing the August meeting date during
discussion of new business. Seconded by Trustee Hayes.
Motion Approved.
Pledge of Allegiance
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Hayes, Clerk Gaffner, Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer Eyster,
Trustee Wright, Supervisor Martin, Trustee Williams.
Public Comment
None
Closed at: 7:05 pm
Police Report
Chief Hall stated that there had been a substantial accident on the corner of
Zimmer and Sherwood Roads earlier that day. Response from police was less than
2 minutes.
Reported one break-in on Foster Rd. in early June.
National Night Out is the 1st Tuesday in August (August 2, 2011) from 6-9pm.
This event is meant to bring neighbors together in the fight against crime.
Meridian Township Police are cooperating with neighborhoods for a fun,
successful night.
13th annual Citizen Academy begins September 8, 2011. Fliers will be delivered
to Twp. for display.
Supervisor Martin commented on MTPD billable hours with total less than 6,000
for 6 months.
Consent Agenda
Clerk Gaffner moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the Minutes of 06/07/2011 Township board meeting
Treasurer’s Report for June 2011
Building Inspector’s Report – June 2011
Accounts payable paid; checks 19185-19216 for a total of $135,436.76
Payroll Checks paid 41464-41470 and 41472-41505 and EFTs 86-88 for a total of
$26,062.95 (check 41471 paid in May)
Accounts Payable checks to approve 19217-19239 for a total of $10,771.71.
Revenue and expenditure report ending 6/30/2011
Pending Litigation
Seconded by Treasurer Eyster
Discussion: none
Motion Carries
Planning Commission Report
Minutes 6/21/11 & Public Forum
Chair Fielek reviewed the meeting. The main topic of the June meeting was
Medical Marijuana primary caregivers with 5 patients. There were 20 residents
at the meeting and the majority was overwhelmingly opposed to allowing
caregivers to service 5 patients. Their major concerns were safety and
enforcement.
Planning Commission also sees a need to pursue a partial overhaul of the Master
Plan
Discussion:
Medical Marijuana - The need for legal counsel opinion. Are special use permits
transferrable or not needs to be addressed. Trustee Wright commented on the
Attorney General’s Report and brought up the difference between caregivers and
dispensaries. The need to look at intent was also discussed.
Master Plan Review – Supervisor Martin suggested granting permission to update
Master Plan provided there are no major budget concerns. Trustee Wright agreed
stating that there is not a lot going on presently, making this an optimal
time. Supervisor Martin said to move forward with the idea; will get projected
cost from McKenna by next meeting.
Unfinished Business
None
New Business
Emergency Siren
Ingham County Sheriff’s Office has notified the Township that we have been
selected to receive an Outdoor Warning Siren. This is primarily for weather
related emergencies, and will be activated remotely by Ingham County 911
Center. Electricity would be needed for operation, and location was discussed.
Possible locations are: Summit Cemetery, Branch Rd. School, WT Park, or the
Township Hall. Clerk Gaffner and MT Police Chief Hall are going to check the
location of other emergency sirens, and Clerk Gaffner will find out the range
of the siren from Sergeant Ott at ICSO. If a decision needs to be made
immediately, Clerk Gaffner will give the approval to install the siren at the
Township Hall.
Auctions: Online/Live
These types of businesses are presently absent from the ordinance. There has
been an inquiry about them recently and Supervisor Martin recommended that this
issue be addressed.
Rick Williams moved the Williamstown Township Board authorize the Planning
Commission to review and recommend zoning requirements applicable to any
auction business located in Williamstown Township as they proceed with their
current review of the zoning ordinances.
Seconded by Treasurer Eyster
Discussion: None
Motion Carries
August Board Date Change
Trustee Wright moved to change the August 2nd Board meeting to August 9th.
Seconded by Clerk Gaffner
Discussion: Clerk Gaffner will post appropriately.
Motion Carries
Reports
Departments & Committees
Senior Center – Trustee Williams reported that Leroy Township has issued a
$1,600.00 check to the Senior Center.
Williamston Library – Supervisor Martin and Treasurer Eyster have been invited
to a meeting on July 20th regarding forming an authority to build a new library
in Williamston. Three units (City of Williamston, Wheatfield Township, and
Williamstown Township) will make up that authority and ask for a millage to
build. Funds for operations still come from CADL.
BS&A - The Township has recently installed .NET software from BS&A. Transition
is going well.
Cemetery – Board members have all been given the new Cemetery Master Plan. They
have been asked to review it and discuss any concerns at the August 9th
meeting.
MTA – There is an MTA meeting in Leslie on July 27th at 6:30
NIESA – Trustee Hayes stated that the worker’s compensation insurance program
that NIESA had been looking into has fizzled out. Clerk Gaffner discussed that
the Township was considering the same program and had also been notified of its
failure.
Public Comment
none
Closed at 8:20
Closed Session
Trustee Wright moved the Williamstown Township Board go into closed session to
discuss separate written Legal Opinions of Counsel concerning; 1) The contract
with Ingham County 2) Cost Recovery Ordinance
Seconded by Treasurer Eyster
Discussion: none
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Hayes, Trustee Wilbrink, Trustee Williams, Trustee Wright,
Treasurer Eyster, Clerk Gaffner, Supervisor Martin
Motion Carries
Township Board back in regular session 
Resumed at 9:15
Clerk Gaffner moved to advise the Township attorney to proceed with the
drafting of a cost recovery ordinance and proceed with the contract with Ingham
County for police funding.
Seconded by Treasurer Eyster
Motion Carries
The Board had a brief discussion concerning the procedure the Township might
follow if hazardous material were to be discovered on any Township property.
Trustee Hayes has had experience with various procedures and will provide a
written guide at the next board meeting for the Township to consider.
Review
The Township’s position on Medical Marijuana caregivers will continue to be
discussed.
The Township Master Plan will be reviewed. PC will include review of Auctions
with their current zoning review.
Clerk Gaffner will continue to investigate Outdoor Warning Siren.
Trustee Hayes moved to adjourn.
Meeting adjourned at 9:20
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner
Township Clerk
August 9 th , 2011
Call to Order
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 p.m. at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 N. Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order, reviewed the agenda, and explained
procedures for public comment.
Pledge of Allegiance
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Hayes, Clerk Gaffner, Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer Eyster,
Trustee Wright, Supervisor Martin, Trustee Williams.
Public Comment
None
Closed at: 7:01 pm
Police Report
Chief Hall reviewed the written report. Billable hours are a bit higher due to
the accident at Zimmer and Sherwood. Used new accident site reconstruction
equipment at the scene. Chief Hall submitted materials to the board regarding
citizen complaint procedures. The department investigates all complaints.
Citizen contact form gets mailed on a regular basis to survey the job being
done by the department. Over 21 neighborhoods in Meridian Twp participated in
the Annual Night Out Event. The west side of Township experienced some flooding
during the heavy rain on Grand River and undermined the road causing closure.
Consent Agenda
Treasurer Eyster move the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the Minutes of 7/12/2011 Township board meeting
With Corrected total for payroll paid $26,062.95
(Check 41505 approved to ING but amount not included in total)
Treasurer’s Report, July 2011
Building inspectors report – July 2011
Accounts payable paid, checks 19240 through 19253 for a total of $19,993.67 and
Police account payable paid, checks 1010-1011 for a total of $46,510.50
Payroll Checks paid 41506 through 41540 and EFTs 89-92 for a total of
$29,159.69
General Account Payable checks to approve 19254 through 19280 for a total of
$10,826.43 and Police Account Payable checks 1012-1013 for a total of $1,116.50
Revenue and expenditure report ending 7/31/2011
Pending Litigation
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion: none
Motion approved
Planning Commission Report
Minutes 7/19/11
Chair Fielek reviewed the meeting of July 19th. Proposal of lot splits on a
shared drive by Gregory Shannon was rejected by the commissioners and reviewed
the proposed modification of the site plan submitted by Keith and Sandie
Litchfield and the recommendations of the Planning Commission.
Trustee Wilbrink moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Litchfield
site plan modification, subject to the McKenna recommended requirements of 7/
28/2011, excluding the wood gates for the front of the dumpster.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes
Discussion:
·   Letter from McKenna is based on the revised site plan.
·   Question of the need for the fence around the landscaping contractor.
·   Landscapers have been there since it was a dealership w/o a fence.
·   In the initial modification plan a fence was proposed across the front
between Graff and the corner of the building.
·   Discussion of the requirements of the zoning ordinance.
·   Purchase agreement on the property and don’t want to do anything to hold up
the sale.
·   Can make the sale subject to the approved site plan or approve as is.
·   Variance can be asked for by applicant. Paving can be relieved by PC
recommendation. Variance would be needed to waive paving.
·   Screening for contractors operation only. Some fencing already present on
the site.
·   Front: chain link with webbing and woven wire on the back of the site is
allowable.
·   The parking and loading would also have to be paved along with circle
drive.
·   Would prefer the circle drive remain crushed asphalt. This would require a
variance.
·   Spruce trees planted as screening would interfere with utilities.
·   Dumpster would be behind the fence. Would not require wooden gates around
the dumpster.
·   Deposit landscaping waste and remove weekly. Consenses on weekly removal of
waste.
·   Parking of redwood was on west side of drive. This would be a modification
to the site plan. Will leave the parking as presented on the site plan.
·   Letter would be forthcoming on the board approval of the site plan.
Motion approved.
The PC would like the board to consider a survey in the updating of the master
plan. One option would be a survey monkey, a formal survey in the December tax
bill or an internet survey. Supervisor supports the use of a survey. The
biggest concern with the internet or Survey Monkey is insuring it is limited to
residents only and the ability to limit the number of times the survey can be
taken.
Unfinished Business
Cemetery Master Plan
Cemetery committee has chosen option B of the cemetery plan. This option takes
the township out 50 years. They will be meeting this month to formulate the
steps to take to implement the plan. Receiving more cremains than full burials.
A scattering garden would complement the rising desire for cremains. There
would also be a natural burial area. Foote is almost full. Cemetery committee
may come back with a recommendation to obtain an option to purchase more
property. It is legal to do natural burials as long as there is no embalming.
Resolution Proposal- Medical Marihuana
Clerk Gaffner moved the Williamstown township Board approve amending
Williamstown Township Board Resolution #95, extending the six month moratorium
originally approved on September 7, 2010 and extended by amendment on 3/01/2011
to September 7,2011 for an additional six months or until March 1, 2012. The
six month extension will permit the Township to continue their research on this
issue and work with the Township Attorney to draft appropriate regulations for
the Township to be in compliance with the Medical Marijuana Act of 2008.
Seconded by Treasurer Eyster
Discussion:
·   Extension due to case law being made now.
·   Give time to see how what comes out of the court decisions.
·   Moratorium would preclude everything but patient rights.
Roll Call: Ayes: Trustee Wilbrink, Trustee Wright, Treasurer Eyster, Supervisor
Martin, Clerk Gaffner, Trustee Hayes, Trustee Williams
Motion Approved.
Meeting Dates
Trustee Wright moved that the Township Board hold 2011-12 fiscal year Township
Board meetings per the schedule listed below, with the first meeting of the
month commencing at 7:00 pm with a second meeting tentatively scheduled on the
3rd Tuesday of the month starting at 5:30 pm.
 
First meeting:  7:00 PM  
MONTH           DATE CHANGE TO: DATE REASON FOR CHANGE
April           5                    
May             3                    
June            7                    
July            5                    
August          2    9               Election (Primary) Conflict
September       6    13              Scheduling
October         4    11              Scheduling
November        1    No change       Election Conflict
December        6    No change       Holidays
January         3    10              Scheduling
February        7    14              Scheduling
March           6    13              Scheduling
Second meeting:     5:30 PM          
April           19   tentative        
May             17   tentative        
June            21   tentative        
July            19   tentative        
August          16   tentative        
September       20   tentative        
October         18   tentative        
November        15   tentative        
December        20   tentative        
January         17   tentative        
February        21   tentative        
March           20   tentative
Seconded by Trustee Hayes
Discussion:
They should be left as currently posted.
Allows time to put information together.
Insures time to get packets posted on the website.
Gives board members more time to go over the material included to make informed
decisions.
Motion approved.
Emergency siren location
Clerk Gaffner has spoken with Officer Ott. Township Hall first choice as it is
centrally located. Second option would be the Township Park. Branch school
would be last choice due to historic significance.
Master Plan Review Cost Proposal
Trustee Wright moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the cost proposal
from McKenna to update the Township Master Plan, with a total cost not to
exceed $12,950.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes.
Discussion:
·   Money was budgeted for review of the Master Plan
·   Still leaves $13000 in budget.
·   Seems excessive.
Motion approved.
New Business
FEMA Resolution Proposal
Treasurer Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve Resolution #99,
The Community Resolution and intergovernmental Agreement to Manage Floodplain
Development for the National Flood Insurance Program.
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Clerk Gaffner explained this is needed in order for residents to have access to
flood insurance. This resolution was recommended by FEMA. Building inspector
will report yearly to FEMA. New flood plain maps are out. Delineations that
have been done are included in the new map.
Roll Call : Ayes: Trustee Wilbrink, Trustee Wright, Treasurer Eyster,
Supervisor Martin, Trustee Hayes, Trustee Williams, Clerk Gaffner
Motion Approved
Township Hall Rental Agreement
Supervisor Martin explained the reason for the revisions. New language makes it
clearer for users to understand.
Clerk Gaffner moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Revised Hall
Rental Agreement.
Seconded by Treasurer Eyster
Discussion:
·   Capacity discussion.
·   Issue with blown fuses and use of products.
·   Group rates.
Motion approved
Living Church of God rental
Treasurer Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Living
Church of God’s request, allowing them to reserve Township facilities for up to
two months in advance, giving their members more notice of scheduled meeting
dates
Seconded by Clerk Gaffner
Discussion:
·   Property owner in Township will sponsor the church.
·   This will allow more notice time to members of the church.
·   This will provide the Township more revenue from rentals.
·   Church rents on Saturdays.
·   Usual attendance is approx. 30 people.
Motion approved
Reports
Departments & Committees
Picnic this Thursday has been cancelled.
MTA: meeting on July 27th attended by Mickey and Janet. Concern over drain
assessment- White Oak saw $120,000 cost for this year. Drain Commission started
doing control burns to help lower the cost.
City: Joint meeting with scheduled for August 17th. Time will be communicated.
Neisa: wanted to meet with the Clerk over haz mat concerns. Would like County
to be present also. Auditors report is available.
Public Comment
John Kane, 5170 N. Williamston Rd.: Scattering of cremains.
Rod Imhoff, 2380 Wilgus Rd.: Drain Assessments and Hall rental.
Ruth Templeton, 1435 Epley Rd.: Master Plan budget expense and Use of Township
Hall for an Emergency Shelter.
Public Comment Closed at 8:36 pm
Review
Hall rental: Supervisor
Litchfield: Planning Department
Funeral resolution, meeting dates and Medical Marihuana Resolution: Clerk
Trustee Hayes moved to adjourn.
Meeting adjourned at 9:20
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner
Township Clerk
August 23, 2011
Call to Order
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 9:00 a.m. at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 N. Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order.
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Hayes, Clerk Gaffner, Treasurer Eyster, Supervisor Martin
Absent: Trustee Wilbrink, Trustee Wright and Trustee Williams
Public Comment
None.
Closed at 9:01a.m.
Ingham County Agreement
Ingham County Commissioners have come to agreement for payment towards police
funding. All attachments have been provided and Meridian Township has signed
off.
Clerk Gaffner moved the Williamstown Township Board enter into an agreement
with Ingham County, accepting $122,678 to be used by the Township in payment of
police services provided by Meridian Township.
Seconded by Treasurer Eyster
Discussion: none
Roll Call: Ayes: Clerk Gaffner, Treasurer Eyster, Supervisor Martin, Trustee
Hayes.
   Nays: none
Motion Approved.
Floodplain Ordinance
Treasurer Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board approve Ordinance #25,
revised 2011, addressing floodplain management provisions of the State
construction code.
Seconded by: Trustee Hayes
Discussion:
·   FEMA maps are new.
·   This insures participation.
Roll Call: Ayes: Clerk Gaffner, Treasurer Eyster, Supervisor Martin, Trustee
Hayes.
   Nays: none
Donations
Supervisor Martin expressed gratitude on behalf of the Township for the
following donations:
Pat Graham of a Japanese maple in memory of Tom Graham.
Jim Coates of a grill at the pavilion in memory of Chris Graham.
Approval Request Landscaping/Polaris
Trustee Hayes moved to approve the installation of landscaping at the Grand
River Park by Nash Nurseries for a total cost of $1,500.
Seconded by Clerk Gaffner
Discussion:
·   Plan for landscaping was included in packet.
·   Security concern with landscaping.
·   Keep open for foot traffic back to dog area.
Motion Approved
Polaris
Polaris was purchased in 2007 at a cost of approximately $12,000.00. The clutch
has gone out and needs new tires. Only has 300 hours on it. $2065 to get
everything completed. Checking with Deer Creek to trade in and get a Kabota.
Can only get it fixed at one location. Not that old and having major trouble.
Consensus to move forward at looking at trade in. Deer Creek is providing a
bid. Cemetery has enough in budget for consideration.
Budget amendments Cemetery & Building Dept
Clerk Gaffner moved that the board increase the cemetery consulting budget line
209-276-812.000 by $19,000 and reduce the cemetery fund balance by $19,000 and
that the inspection fee line 101-371-811.000 be increased by $10,000 and the
salary building inspector line 101-371-702.000 be decreased by $10,000.
Seconded by Treasurer Eyster
Discussion:
·   Cemetery plan is complete- need to do engineering plans.
·   Didn’t put enough into the consultant fee.
·   Thought we would have a building inspector full time.
·   Still working with current inspector on a fee basis.
Motion Approved
Adjourn
Trustee Hayes motion to adjourn.
Meeting adjourned at 9:28
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner
Clerk
September 13 th , 2011
Call to Order
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 p.m. at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order, reviewed the agenda, and explained
procedures for public comment.
Pledge of Allegiance
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Hayes, Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer Eyster, Trustee Wright,
Supervisor Martin,
Trustee Williams.
Absent: Clerk Gaffner
Public Comment
None
Closed at: 7:01 pm
Police Report
Officer Brad Bach reviewed the written report.
There have been 6 breaking and enterings in the area. Suspects have been
identified. Break ins usually occur during the day and holidays. Working in
cooperation with Shiawassee County. Citizen academy starting this month with 4
residents participating. 10 neighborhood watches formed within the Township.
Explained the set- up of a neighborhood watch. Phone tree used in lost child,
emergencies, lost elderly parent, etc. Try to do picnics and ways to get
neighbors to meet. Branching out to other residents near an established
neighborhood. Sends info to all leaders about what is happening within the
township. National night out is another way to help get neighbors meeting each
other. Fire arms training is beginning this week at the Gun Club for officers.
Consent Agenda
Treasurer Eyster moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the Minutes of 8/9/2011 and 8/23/11 Township board meeting
Treasurer’s Report, August 2011
Building inspectors report - August 2011
Accounts payable paid, checks 19281 through 19309 for a total of $22,523.95
Payroll Checks paid 41541 through 41574 and EFTs 93-94 for a total of
$18,044.95
General Account Payable checks to approve 19310 through 19334 for a total of
$16,322.72 and Police Services Payable checks to approve 1014 and 1015 for a
total of $1,033.00.
Revenue and expenditure report ending 8/31/2011
Pending Litigation
Seconded by Trustee Hayes
Discussion: none
Motion approved
Planning Commission Report
Minutes 8/16/11
Chair Fielek reviewed the minutes of the Planning Commission. Public Hearing
next Tuesday regarding the Grand River Green Zone Planned Development. Invited
the Board to attend the meeting.
Reviewing draft regulations for auction houses.
Will be calling for a public hearing soon on revisions to date.
Unfinished Business
None
New Business
Park Resolution
Supervisor Martin reviewed the reason for the resolution. If the Board does not
want hunting/discharging of weapons allowed, the board needs to pass the
resolution and forward to the DNR. This is due to the right to carry and parks
are not exempt.
Trustee Wright moved the Williamstown township Board approve the Williamstown
Township Board Resolution #96, requesting that the Department of Natural
Resources proceed as soon as feasible with the procedures called for in MCL
324.41901 to prohibit hunting, and the discharge of firearms and bow and arrow
in the entire Williamstown Township park.
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion:
·   Does bow and arrow cover cross bows.
·   Coverage of other types of weapons
·   Is hunting legal at the Township Hall.
·   Should this resolution address all properties
·   One for each property.
·   Research other properties that may need a resolution including the
cemetery, school and hall property in the future.
Roll Call : Ayes: Trustee Hayes, Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer Eyster, Trustee
Wright, Supervisor Martin, Trustee Williams.
PC appointments
Trustee Williams moved the Williamstown Township Board appoint Gerald Eidt, Ger
Schultink and Rod Imhoff to the Board for Planning Commission for a three-year
term.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes
Discussion: none
Motion approved
Business License
Supervisor Martin explained the reasoning for addressing the use of a business
license. Several options were included in packet. Business license would insure
it was a permitted use, provide the building inspector a chance to inspect the
premises for safety. This would apply to commercial and industrial businesses
only. This would allow the Township to inform new business owners of the zoning
ordinances.
Discussion included:
·   Burden on private sector.
·   Vehicle for them to know what the regulations are up front.
·   Owner of property would have to report new businesses.
·   Nominal fee recommended
·   Would help reduce amount of misunderstanding before moving in.
·   Reasonable renewal allows for dealing with issues, complaints, etc.
·   More mediation instead of code violations.
·   Transfer of ownership would require relicensing
·   Safety issues would be caught
·   Uses not permitted would be caught before established.
·   Points of the three sample ordinances that should be in our requirements.
·   Better handle on businesses going out of business and dealing with personal
property taxes.
·   Before board only if concerns or rejected.
·   Final approval would be from board.
·   Would be part of a consent agenda.
·   Township should send out renewals.
·   Would renewals go to property owner or to individual mailing address.
·   Could not open until the business had license.
·   Would be an ordinance.
·   Important for permitted use and signage.
·   Get us in ahead before money being spent by business and changes needed.
·   Merit for us to do this.
·   Save the township and business owners conflicts and money.
·   Hazardous waste handling is important to be part of new ordinance.
·   Good points in sample ordinances to consider in developing Townships.
·   Consensus to move forward with draft for board to consider.
·   Packet for new business owners similar to resident welcome packet with
ordinance information for getting started.
·   Packet on line for businesses considering moving into the Township
Reports
Departments & Committees
·   Township offices open from 9-7 to collect property taxes September 14, 2011
·   Surveyors have been out to cemetery to start the layout on the new plans.
·   Communications committee meeting next week. Lot of issues with Broadstripe
and electrical outages. Consumer forum with the MPSC on October 6th. Pending
sale of Broadstripe with a larger cable company.   
·   Making changes to recycling on Saturdays allowing us to take more and
receive a credit for commodity sales. Allowing commingling of items such as
plastics and paper. Working on consolidating delivering of different recycled
materials. Recycle more and do for less. Concern for non-residents using
recycling at cost to Township. Checking with other municipalities to cooperate
on cost for residents
·   Scheduling of the ball fields. If there is a conflict suggesting having
parties that reserved call Meridian Police. Have schedules posted at park and
send to police. May want to have confirmation of reservation with them during
field use. Organized teams need to have reservations or do not use the fields.
Need to protect the rights of those that follow the rules. We set a policy that
benefits the people that use it.
Public Comment
None
Public comment closed at 7:54 p.m.
Review
Resolution: Clerk’s department
PC Appointment: Supervisor
Business License: Supervisor
Parks: Wanda
Trustee Hayes moved to adjourn.
Meeting adjourned at 7:55 p.m.
____________________________
Mickey Martin, Acting Secretary
Supervisor
October 11, 2011
Call to Order
The Williamstown Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 p.m. at the Williamstown
Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan. Supervisor
Mickey Martin called the meeting to order, reviewed the agenda, and explained
procedures for public comment.
Treasurer Eyster moved to add cemetery purchase under New Business. Seconded by
Trustee Hayes.
Motion approved.
Supervisor Martin announced the passing of Tom Mitchell and offered condolences
to Deputy Clerk Shirley Mitchell.
Pledge of Allegiance
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Hayes, Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer Eyster, Trustee Wright,
Supervisor Martin, Clerk Gaffner and Trustee Williams.
Public Comment
None
Closed at: 7:02 pm
Police Report
Chief Hall reviewed the police report.
·   Impressed with the number of neighborhood watches within the Township.
·   Grant received for license plate readers. Cameras will pick up plates, read
the plate and take a picture. Compares license number to an internal database.
Received 13 computers for cars and shared regionally with IC, MSU and EL.
Currently solidifying the data base and will be useful in the township.
·   Liquor license check was held and all establishments in the Township
passed. Cadets are used for testing.
·   Citizen Academy taking place with 25 people involved-4 are township
residents.
·   Investigator went to county prosecutor to issue a warrant on the Hazardous
spill in the Township. Hopefully this will be a deterrent to dumping and
possibly able to receive restitution.
·   Gate to the park is completed and was donated by Cardinal Fabricating. Once
installed Meridian will begin opening and closing the park.
·   Police survey goes out to every 25th customer. Survey results represent
both Meridian and Williamstown Township.
Audit
Shannon Rodrigus from Layton & Richardson reviewed the audit. Key Components
include:
·   Page 1: Unqualified opinion.
·   Page 1-2: Statement of assets and activities. 2.4 million in assets. An
increase over the previous year.
·   Pages 3-5: overview of financial statements that follow
·   Page 3-6: gov’t. funds statements. Decrease less $123,000 due to EECBG
grant and roads. Footnote further describes the numbers.
·   Pages 16-20: budget to actual figures. Total revenues were over budget and
under budget for expenses.
·   Letter of comments and recommendations.
·   Prior recommendations were implemented.
·   No current year recommendations.
Discussion:
·   There is a copy of the audit on the table for the public to review and it
is also available on the web for viewing.
·   Good to have a positive cash flow.
·   Township Board has shown fiscal responsibility.
Consent Agenda
Trustee Hayes moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the Minutes of 9/13/2011 Township board meeting
Treasurer’s Report, September 2011
Building inspectors report – September 2011
Accounts payable paid, checks 19335 through 19363 with checks 19338 & 19339
marked as void, for a total of $125,391.59 and Police account payable paid,
check 1016 for a total of $46,491.25
Payroll Checks paid 41575 through 41605 and EFTs 95-99 for a total of
$24,412.73
General Account Payable checks to approve 19364 through 19377 for a total of
$11,869.14 and Police Account Payable checks 1017-1018 for a total of $804.50
Revenue and expenditure report ending 9/30/2011
Pending Litigation
Budget amendment- Add $10,000 contingency line item to the cemetery fund and
police fund. Add $1,300 to 101-215-902, $1,500 to 101-253-728, $400 to 101-215-
728, $1,500 to 101-191-730, $1,100 to 101-209-730 and $2,200 to 101-294-729.
Reduce general fund contingency by $8,000. Add $3,000 to Cemetery Capital
Outlay 209-276-980 and reduce cemetery contingency fund by $3,000. Reduce the
Police Special Assessment 270-000-672 to $270,685
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion:
Question of payment to Meridian for police. This covers July, Aug. and Sept.
Purpose of budget amendments: Restoring to previous year’s budget. Oversights
when putting budget together.
Question regarding payment to Nash Nursery.
Police assessment reduced and missed putting reduction in budget.
Motion approved
Planning Commission Report
Minutes 9/20/11
Chair Fielek reviewed meeting. Public Hearing on Green Zone Planned
Development.
Number of comments suggest further review, especially regarding businesses in
district. Will be reviewing the comments and going over at the next meeting.
Also reviewed auction standards and received valuable comment from public.
Reviewed 1st segment of Master Plan in the update process.
Unfinished Business
Safe Routes to School
Supervisor Martin expressed township was in support of the grant. Request has
come forward for monetary support with a crossing light.
Clerk Gaffner spoke to the progress of grant. Part that applies to the Township
is a light that is needed for the crosswalk at Hiddenview and Vanneter Rd.
Location was revised to place on Township property and it is being requested
the Township cover the cost of running the light. Grant is sufficient for an
LED light. Based on DTE estimate, the cost to the Township should run
approximately $150 a year.
Support For Streetlight
Supervisor Martin moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the
installation of a street light on the east side of Vanneter Road illuminating
the crosswalk at Vanneter Road and Hiddenview in support of Safe Routes to
School. It also agreed that the Township will pay the annual operating cost of
this light with an estimated annual cost of approximately $150.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes
Discussion:
·   Grant will cover cost of LED installation.
·   Location of light- engineering decision.
·   Township will be responsible for the bill in perpetuity.
·   Township currently pays for one other light.
Motion approved.
New Business
Garage Sales
Supervisor Martin explained second year of garage sale. Picked up this Saturday
due to the weather. May consider not every month but possibly every other
month. More vendors this month and more customers. Added to Craig’s list this
month. The Township currently pays a coordinator to run it. May bring some
proposals forward of some changes. People who do come enjoy it. Suggested to
try same format another year.
Park Ordinance revisions
Park ordinance has not been updated since 2001. Parks committee has gone
through the ordinance and has sent suggestions to McKenna. Final recommended
draft is for review.
Reviewed suggested changes. Discussion included:
·   Should we add a sign about swimming in the river? (will check into it)
·   Public hearing will be here at the Twp on “December 7th Wednesday at 7:00
regarding hunting, use of firearms and other weapons at the park.
·   Some uses would require a Special Park Use Permit. Different permit for
over 100 people.
·   Why strike out Township Board instead of making each use a Board decision.
·   Committee working closely with users of fields and Meridian Township.
·   It appears in ordinance that it is one person making decisions. One person
opening themselves up to criticism. Perhaps it should be park committee along
with supervisor. Should be more than one person determining.
·   Applicant needs to plan ahead to gain approval.
PUBLIC PARK ORDINANCE #39
Trustee Hayes moved the Williamstown township Board approve amending
Williamstown Township Public Park Ordinance #39, identifying permitted
activities within parks, to establish guidelines governing the permitted
activities, to provide for use permits and setting fees for such permits, and
prescribing penalties for the violation of the provisions of this Ordinance
with the change of “or” to “and/or” in Section 3.22.
Seconded by Treasurer Eyster
Discussion: none
Motion Approved.
PUBLIC PARK USE APPLICATION FEES
Clerk Gaffner move the Williamstown Township Board approve the Williamstown
Township Park Special Use fees as outlined in the Township Special Uses.
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion:
·   Would like attorney to review hold harmless clause.
·   Fees and deposits are in consideration of wear and tear.
·   Fees should also include certificate of insurance. Hold harmless can be
included in this.
·   Number of participants estimated? Not a problem if lower.
·   Appears to be a big jump in fee structure.
·   Fee would cover damage to paths, fields, structures. Deposit of $500.
Minimum. 25-50 deposit $150.00 then $500.00.
·   Depending on event could possible require a surety bond besides deposit.
Fee would cover cost. Do need to protect for possible damage.
·   Have we looked at how other municipalities handle rentals
·   100 deposit on 100 fee.
·   Does not cover use of fields as this is covered elsewhere.
·   Talk to other communities to see what their experience is. Will look at EL
and Meridian.
·   Will bring back at next meeting.
Clerk Gaffner and Trustee Williams withdrew motion
Special Uses to be brought back to the next meeting for consideration.
CEMETERY PURCHASE
Cemetery committee recommending a windshield and canopy for Kubota that was
just purchased.
Trustee Wright moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the purchase of
equipment to be added to the recently purchased Kubota RTV for use in the
Township cemeteries, at a cost not to exceed $850.
Seconded by Treasurer Eyster.
Discussion:
None
Motion approved
Reports
Departments & Committees
Clerk Gaffner reviewed HazMatt issue. Ingham County Road Commission will pay
for cost of cleanup on 3/07/11 and are able to receive reimbursement for their
cost. NEISA has been advised that their first contact should be the Ingham
County Road Commission.
Historical Tour was very well attended, especially by students. Beautiful day
for the tour.
Supervisor Martin held a meeting with DTE representatives and township
residents who have had a lot of issues with power outages. So much of the lines
go through trees and trees fall. Will be putting something in the newsletter.
Important that all neighbors call when out of power. Helps DTE pinpoint trouble
locations. Residents need to maintain properties for trees near lines. Tree
coverage is the main issue.
DTE will increase trimming in area. Right of way gives right to trim trees.
Good productive meeting. One resident has had 21 outages in a year.
Ingham County MTA meeting will be held at Leroy Township this month.
Public Comment for agenda & non-agenda items**
None-
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 8:28
Review
Safe Routes to School: Clerk
Park Ordinance: Clerk, Supervisor
Adjourn
Trustee Hayes called for adjournment at 8:29
Trustee Hayes moved to adjourn.
Meeting adjourned at 7:55 p.m.
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner
Clerk
November 01, 2011
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order, reviewed the agenda, and
explained procedures for public comment.
Pledge of Allegiance
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Hayes, Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer Eyster, Trustee Wright,
Supervisor Martin, Clerk Gaffner and Trustee Williams.
Public Comment
None
Closed at: 7:02 pm
Police Report
Chief Hall reviewed the police report.
·   Stops were up to 156.
·   Property damage is up from previous months.
·   Open house was this past Saturday in Meridian Twp. Press release went out
to the paper and through the Township email. Township residents did attend.
·   Zimmer/Germany Rd accident victim may be out of the hospital at the end of
the week. Case still open. Unable to discern the origination of the
intoxicants.
·   November 7th is court date for the hazardous material dumping.
·   Officers went out to the gun range on October 7th with the City of
Williamston police force.
Consent Agenda
Clerk Gaffner moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the Minutes of 10/11/2011 Township board meeting
Treasurer’s Report, October 2011
Building inspectors report – October 2011
Accounts payable paid, checks 19378 through 19388 for a total of $4,647.15
Payroll Checks paid 41606 through 41637 and EFT 100-102 for a total of
$17,099.60
General Account Payable checks to approve 19389 through 19400 for a total of
$1,329.20 Revenue and expenditure report ending 10/31/2011
Pending Litigation
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Motion Approved
Planning Commission Report
Minutes 10/18/11
Chair Fielek reviewed the PC meeting of 10-18-11. The Planning Commission spent
a considerable amount of time deliberating on the GR Green Zone. Concerns of
the residents were addressed. The Planning Commission will also look at an
overlay approach for the Green Zone. Additional language would exempt parcels
under 20 acres. Larger parcel owners questioned reasoning for Green Zone. There
is a concern of effectiveness if used as an overlay. Public participation has
been good.
Draft language for Auction regulations were reviewed with a Public Hearing set
for the next meeting along with the revisions to Art. 8 thorugh Art. 24.
Review of the Master Plan continues.
Election of current officers to serve another term include Mike Fielek as
chair, Rex LaMore as Vice Chair and Gerald Eidt as Secretary.
Unfinished Business
Business License Ordinance
Supervisor Martin explained that the draft provided to the board incorporates
past discussion.
Trustee Williams moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve the Township
Business License Ordinance, specific to businesses located in districts: B-1,
B-2, OS-1, I-1 and AG-C.
Seconded by Treasurer Eyster.
Supervisor Martin reviewed important aspects of the ordinance. Business license
will keep the Township informed as to what businesses are moving in. Should
help with the issue of businesses locating in a wrong district. This would not
affect home occupations or home based businesses. This also gives the building
inspector the opportunity to inspect and give an occupancy permit improving
safety. The Township has had businesses ask for a Certificate of Occupancy in
the past.
Discussion:
·   4.03(C) remove the reference to real property. Add “until delinquent
personal property taxes are paid in full”.
·   4.04(D) change “a” to “that” and “may not continue that”
·   Is business defined well enough for the above statement?
·   Violation should only preclude the existing business not other businesses
owned by the same person.
·   On leased property: this applies to the property owner.
·   Property owner needs to report the businesses that are leasing the
property.
·   Bismark St home owner is considering moving her business to her out
building. Limit on number of customers, etc. Suggest the owner come into the
Township to review the ordinance.
·   5.01 License Renewal. Current license expires on midnight, December 31st.
Renewal needs to be in by December 31st. Add: the Township must issue renewal
within a month and business may continue until renewal has been received.
·   Approximately 100 businesses currently in the Township. Businesses receive
a personal property statement. The current date would allow combining of
mailing cost.
·   Renewal notice would go out to the businesses.
·   Township should be proactive in getting businesses to comply. Should not be
a burden for either the Township or business owner.
·   Question of verification on delivery.
·   These issues will be addressed in policy and procedures.
·   Penalty: Does not mention how to enforce. This allows the Township to take
the matter to court. The judge would deem what the actual fine would be.
·   Fee would be $75.00 to cover the cost of the inspection for Certificate of
Occupancy.
·   Renewal fee could be less. Maybe $25.00 unless an inspection is necessary.
·   C of O inspection is $45.00.
·   Consider setting the renewal fee that if no complaints, issues or changes
from the last renewal, the fee would be set at $25.00. If there are changes,
issues or complaints, cost of renewal would be higher. This would cover any
inspections, etc. bore by the Township.
·   Form could have a box to check when there are no changes.
·   Who is going to enforce and issue violation notices?
·   The Township welcome’s all legal and conforming businesses.
·   This will make it easier to enforce the ordinance.
·   Benefit to the business owner, residents, and other property owners.
·   This should help alleviate the possibility of not being allowed to do what
they want and red flags can be dealt with before the new business spends money.
·   This is used in other communities and helps law enforcement and emergency
response.
·   Businesses within the Township move from one area to another in different
zoning districts.
·   Will be displayed by the business in a prominent area.
·   Attorney should review the language.
Supervisor moved to table this motion to the next meeting to allow time to make
changes to language and review by the attorney.
Second by Treasurer Eyster.
Discussion: Will come off the table next month as currently written.
Motion Approved
Parks Special Use permit and fees
New copies provided with corrections.
Trustee Williams moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Williamstown
Township Community Park/Facilities list of special uses and the Special Use
Permit/Reservation form dated 11/01/2011.
Seconded by Clerk Gaffner.
Discussion:
·   Supervisor Martin referenced the changes to the Hold Harmless clause in
both permits approved by the Township attorney. Also added to alcohol permit
the need of certificate of liability and liquor liability policy by the
applicant.
·   Researched many different places for their policies and this seemed format
best fit our needs, from the boy scouts to large events such as a muddy buddy
race, fundraising, etc. This gives the township discretion on handling each
event on their own merits. Damage deposit can be waived and allows the Township
to set the amount felt appropriate for the activity.
·   Alcohol permit would be needed if serving alcohol.
·   May need to change a few things as the form is used.
·   Suggest rewording the Special Uses form.
·   Question regarding camping: drop the established organizations?
·   Does the Township want to consider allowing camping? Would like to leave it
as written.
·   Add: this list not exclusive.
·   Re-enactments: further definition. Add: historical
·   Last group of items: minimum damage- make into bullets or make into
sentences.
Motion approved.
New Business
Budget
Supervisor Martin explained the refinements that will be needed. This is an
initial rough draft. Would like the Board to take two weeks to look the budget
over and get any suggested amendments back to her in writing.
·   Park: Wanda
·   Clerk: insurance, elections, etc.
·   Treasurer: workers comp, etc.
·   No increase in staff wages- approved last year.
·   Planning Commission: Planning Assistant and Chair Fielek.
·   Added a few new revenue items: art fees, art tour tickets.
·   Property taxes have a 2.7 CPI proposed.
·   Revenue sharing up to 329,000 due to increase in population.
·   Revenue will be up due to sales tax collections up 6%.
·   Can’t remove energy grant yet.
·   Added refund in recycling for commodities sold.
·   Will email a workable copy to everyone to make changes and notes.
·   Raise in Williamston’s contribution to cemetery.
·   Earning nothing on investments at this time.
Questions:
·   Net revenues less than expenditures.
·   Road maintenance is according to policy passed.
·   Expenditures are due to roads showing in budget this year. Difference from
original and this budget.
·   Difference of $58,000 and roads are $53,000 of the difference.
·   Elections for presidential year plus three elections next year will affect
the elections budget.
·   If current budget was completely spent the difference would come out of
fund equity.
·   Fund equity should go back up some this year. Last year it went down due to
Grand River Bike Lanes.
·   Drains are out of the control of the Township.
·   Need suggested changes by the 15th.
·   Estimated revenue through 10/31 reflects not having December taxes in. Will
also receive additional revenue funds.
Reports
Departments & Committees
Historical Committee is going to try and locate all of the historic barns
within the Township. Would like to have a photo inventory of the historic
buildings located in the Township.
Mickey attended a conference that provided great ideas to implement. Some of
the suggestions being considered:
·   The Treasurer is looking at on-line bill paying. BS & A has this option.
This should help with accuracy on property tax payments.
·   How do we show appreciation to those that work so hard in the Township by
volunteering. Can not do an appreciation dinner, however the Township is
allowed to do a training seminar for volunteers. Training on liability would be
a good topic. Great opportunity to open up to volunteers, committees and give
valuable information. Maybe do around the first of year. Would like to get
board consensus to look further into doing this. Consider doing this on an
annual basis.
·   Collection of sales tax went up 6%. Townships population grew by 6.4%. IC
commissioners should pay attention to this.
·   State population went down. Communities pay for emergency financial
managers. Some townships are in trouble. Statutory sharing will only benefit 40
townships.
·   The state passed a bill limiting the state’s purchase of land.
·   Legislators are moving forward on newspaper publishing act. Would allow the
use of website or print for legals.
·   Dick Posthumus spoke: Governor’s main priority is budget and then
restructuring how we tax businesses. Feels that local gov’ts can consolidate.
Another bridge to Canada is needed but is not moving forward at this time.
Spoke about Medical Marijuana laws. Continue with moratoriums-hope to see
legislation sometime in November. Passed a right to garden law.
MTA chapter meeting:
·   State police reorganizing and now working in squads. Gained 5 members for
the tri-county. More hands on and not just patrolling freeways.
·   Suggestion of not using CC at restaurants- largest area of abuse with CC
information theft. Scanners can now go through purse and wallets. Clear after
use at gas stations. Can purchase pocket scanners that hold 5000 swipes on the
internet.
Road Committee is creating a spreadsheet for potholes throughout township.
Public Comment for agenda & non-agenda items**
None-
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 8:46
Review
Supervisor: business license
Have suggested budget amendments to the supervisor by November 15th.
Adjourn
Trustee Hayes moved to adjourn at 8:50 p.m.
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner
Clerk
December 6, 2011
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order, reviewed the agenda, and
explained procedures for public comment.
Pledge of Allegiance
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer Eyster, Trustee Wright, Supervisor Martin,
Clerk Gaffner and Trustee Williams.
Absent: Trustee Hayes
Public Comment
John Kane, 5170 N. Williamston Rd.: question regarding possible closed session.
Closed at: 7:05 pm
Police Report
Chief Hall reviewed the police report.
Two items of importance within the Township:
·   Neighborhood watch groups are up to 15 in the Township. Officer Jeff Adams
has been working hard to get them set up.
·   A number of burglaries in the Township have been solved. A suspect has
confessed to break-ins and taking a small number of jewelry items from jewelry
boxes.
Consent Agenda
Clerk Gaffner moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the Minutes of 11/01/2011 Township board meeting
Treasurer’s Report, November 2011
Building inspectors report – November 2011
Accounts payable paid, checks 19401 through 19441 with checks 19408-19412
marked void for a total of $19,578.86
Payroll Checks paid 41638 through 41684 and EFT 103-105 for a total of
$23,074.84
General Account Payable checks to approve 19443 through 19467 for a total of
$14,798.63 Revenue and expenditure report ending 11/30/2011
Seconded by Treasurer Eyster
Motion approved
Planning Commission Report
Chair Fielek reviewed the PC meeting of 11/15/11. Two public hearings were
held; one on the revisions to Article 8 through Article 22 and the other on
Auction Regulations. The Planning Commission voted to recommend the Board
approve revisions to Art.8-Art.22 and deliberation will take place in January
on the Auction Regulations.
The Planning Commission also reviewed Dr. Shannon’s request for a shared drive
regarding lot splits based on the option to split for non-farm dwellings. The
Planning Commission voted to deny this request based on design, poor planning
with two abutting drives, was not in keeping with the rural character and lack
of driveway restrictions and agreement on maintenance.
Commissioners would like to see a survey go out with the property assessment to
aid in the review of the Master Plan. The Board should have the survey for
review at the January meeting.
Article 8-22 were in the Board’s packet for review. In light of what transpired
at the meeting, there was a party affected by the changes. At the end of the
meeting it was determined to recommend the revisions to the Board for approval.
As chair, in the public interest, recommend sending back to the PC for further
deliberation.
The Planning Commission finished their deliberation on the Green Zone language
and has recommended the board approve the language presented. The Planning
Commission deliberated over several months and addressed the issues brought
forward to them in this current language. There was no opposition at the last
meeting to the Green Zone. There was discussion over the use of the Green Zone
as an overlay vs. zoning amendment. The zoning amendment will give consistency
to the design of the area where the overlay could end up with partial
participation. This will expand the uses available to land owners with
development. The view shed protects the Township. Already seen with Pine Knoll
and proposed developments. Green Zone only applies to parcels over 20 acres.
Supervisor Martin was pleased with the changes brought forward. Business owners
were concerned and felt the changes were sufficient.
Discussion included:
·   Favor overlay as it provides either/or.
·   Would create inconsistency
·   Might be too restrictive
·   Not common throughout the area
·   Might find problems since not tested in other areas
·   Concepts are popular in other states with LEED
·   Gold LEED home being built within the Green Zone
·   Landowner could request rezoning
·   Meridian working on Urban Service Boundary
·   Incentive for Innovative Development
·   Existing uses can continue
·   350 ft. setback seems excessive
·   Pine Knoll currently has more than a 350 ft. setback
·   Proposed Ashton Meadows also had 350 ft. setback
·   Natural buffer is desired
·   Could split a parcel off without affecting the Green Zone
·   Parcels less than 20 acres would stay in current zoning
·   Parcels could be combined to use the Green Zone
·   Preference as overlay.
Trustee Williams moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the adoption of
Zoning Ordinance Article 25.00C, the Green Zone Planned Development District.
Seconded by Treasurer Eyster
Trustee Hayes arrived.
Further discussion: none
Motion approved.
Trustee Wilbrink moved to refer Art 8 through Art. 22 back to the Planning
Commissioner for further review.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes
Discussion: none
Motion Approved
The Planning Commission will not be meeting in December.
Unfinished Business
Budget 2012-2013
Supervisor Martin and Treasurer Eyster made adjustments to the budget and were
able to reduce the amount of the deficit by a substantial amount.
Recommendations have not been received from the Board members.
Trustee Williams said the communications committee will be meeting next week
and will discuss the budget.
Elections did not include a line for supplies. A 728 will be created for
supplies.
Historical Committee will be meeting next week to discuss the budget.
A changeable copy of the budget will be sent out to the Board.
The budget will not be available on the website until it is ready for the
Public Hearing.
Business License Ordinance
A confidential letter had been received from the Township Attorney regarding
the Business License Ordinance.
Treasurer Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board waive its’ attorney-
client privilege as it relates to the Township Attorney’s opinion letter dated
11/28/11 regarding the Williamstown Township Business License Ordinance.
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Motion approved
Supervisor Martin reviewed the suggestions of the Township Attorney to
incorporate into the Ordinance.
Discussion:
·   Recommend adding: a false statement is cause for revocation.
·   Definition of Home based business should be extracted from the zoning
ordinance and place here.
·   Sufficient to say “as defined in ordinance”
·   Exemption of charitable and religious establishments.
·   Ninety day period to get existing businesses to comply with new ordinance.
·   Consider adding all three suggestions as stated.
·   Ordinance contains an administrative procedure regarding denial.
·   Suspended license would be sent certified notification.
·   Important to pass tonight or could it come back with changes for the board
to review.
·   Would like to have included with assessment notices.
·   Would like to have everyone an opportunity to review once more.
·   Motion was tabled at the last meeting. Need to make sure we are correct in
the procedure to address the next meeting.
·   Should vote to deny this month and bring back next month.
Treasurer Eyster moved the Township Board approve the adoption of the Business
License Ordinance as presented at the Nov 1, 2011 meeting.
Seconded by Clerk Gaffner.
Motion fails.
Recommendations from the Township Attorney will be incorporated and brought
back next month for review.
New Business
Summit Cemetery Final Design Proposal
Treasurer Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Design and
Construction Engineering Services Proposal submitted by Rowe Professional
Services Company at a cost not to exceed $9,900.
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Supervisor Martin explained the cemetery committee wanted this brought forward
for the development of the balance of the cemetery. This would be for the
consultants design and construction plans, and oversight. There are sufficient
funds for the estimated cost. Cemetery committee is very much in favor of
moving forward. This is the first step of the approved plan. Some minor steps
have been occurring but this is a major step towards completion. This will
begin with the roads. Cemetery committee will meet on Dec. 14th with engineer.
Begin the bid process for work to begin when weather clears. Engineer will give
complete oversight.
Motion approved.
Treasurer Eyster moved the cemetery contingency fund be reduced by $10,000 and
consultant fund be increased by $10,000.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes.
Discussion:
Verify for this year’s budget
Jeff Markstorm is a city resident
Motion approved.
Donation approval
Trustee Wright moved the Williamstown Township Board approve acceptance of the
$1208.40 donation to the Grand River Township Park from Prime Housing Group and
the donation of $1500 for playground equipment at the Township Hall by George
and Janet Eyster.
Second by Trustee Wilbrink.
Discussion:
·   Donations in access of $1000.00 need board approval.
·   The amount of Prime Housing is unusual.
·   Tribunal decision was per agreement between outside assessor and Prime
housing group. This amount is same as what taxes were reduced by. Concerned
with portrayal of donation.
·   The agreement was made by outside assessor (AVS). Not by anyone on the
board.
·   Tribunals can be settled before they go to the judge.
·   Surprised when check was received.
·   If an agreement had not been made up front, then the Township would not
take the donation.
·   We would have received $24.00 if they had not received the reassessment.
·   This way we are receiving the $1208.40.
·   Concerned with look of impropriety.
·   Would like money for the park.
Motion approved.
Reports
Departments & Committees
·   Congratulations to Treasurer Eyster for recognition from Pure Michigan on
the Energy Block Grant
·   Taxes went out December 1.
·   Art tour moving forward. Nice committee. Artist will be painting the backs
of the benches at the park. Celebration at the park with tents, pot luck, music
and benches. Tour is May 4th and 5th and the celebration will be on the 5th
following the tour.
·   St. Katherines has offered space for presentation of art for 5 artists.
Call for artist going out in paper.
·   Recycling changes being made. Getting funds back from commodities sold by
Granger.
·   January 19th- training for volunteers- 6:00 pm at Spag’s Banquet room.
Insurance carrier will talk about risk reduction. This will give back to the
volunteers as well as educate them on risk reduction.
·   Questers came to the township and want to help verify names in the
cemetery, etc.
Public Comment for agenda & non-agenda items**
None-
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 8:19 pm.
Review
Clerk: publish passage of Green Zone
PC: Art. 8-22 back to the Planning Commission
Supervisor: Revisions to consultant re: Business License
Supervisor: Begin process on the cemetery plans
Supervisor: Thank you for donations
Trustee Hayes moved to adjourn at 8:23 p.m.
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner
Clerk
2012 Meeting Minutes
January 10 th , 2012
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order, reviewed the agenda, and
explained procedures for public comment.
Pledge of Allegiance
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer Eyster, Trustee Wright, Supervisor Martin,
Clerk Gaffner, Trustee Hayes and Trustee Williams.
Public Comment
John Kane, 5170 N. Williamston Rd.: regarding public awareness of business
license ordinance and updates of minutes to website.
Public Comment closed at 7:04.
Police Report
Chief Hall reviewed year end information. Calls for service is approximately
the same number with Sheriff’s count the previous year. Meridian sends an
officer on ambulance calls. The department has enjoyed being of service to the
Township. Will begin servicing the park by locking and unlocking the gate.
Chief Hall attended the meeting with Supervisor Martin regarding speed limit
issue on Mitchell Rd. The state police have an impact on the speed limit for
the area. A study will be conducted on the site. The major concern is
pedestrian traffic on the road. The new sidewalk is helpful.
Police did complete their night shoot within operating hours of the gun club.
This will be a yearly occurrence. The force will begin a 12 hour schedule
beginning Dec 31st. This will help patrol in the school zones, during business
traffic, and allows more officers on patrol and on shifts. This will vary the
hours of presence in the township. Neighborhood watch signs are ordered and
should be in soon. Officer Jeff Adams has been instrumental in the number of
watches in the Township.
Consent Agenda
Treasurer Eyster moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the Minutes of 12/06/2011 Township board meeting
Treasurer’s Report, December 2011
Building inspectors report – December 2011
General Fund Accounts Payable paid, check 19442 and checks 19468 through
19491for a total of $19,673.33
Police Fund Accounts Payable paid, check 1019 & 1020 for $46,555.75
Payroll Checks paid 41685 through 41717 and EFT 106-109 for a total of
$23,641.01
General Account Payable checks to approve 19492 through 19509 for a total of
$5,705.93
Police Account Payable check 1021 for a total of $2,843.50
Revenue and expenditure report ending 11/30/2011 and 12/31/2011
Amend Budget – Move $1,208.40 to Park Lands and $1,500 to Art Tour Restricted
from contingency.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes
Motion Approved
  Planning Commission Report
Chair Fielek presented the survey that the Planning Commission has requested be
included in the assessment notices to guide the Planning Commission in the
update the Master Plan.
The Board suggested the following changes:
∙   Change the font on the response to be a bit different for ease of reading.
∙   What is intensive development: what types are we mentioning?
∙   Suggest removing or reword 3(D) or 3(E)
∙   3(i) clarify
∙   Should a map of the township be added?
∙   Give reference to a map-direct to the website.
∙   Formatting: go back to a-d response to save room.
∙   Higher density development: should this be clarified?
∙   Mixed use: define better
∙   11.   Wider shoulders or sidewalks- change to two separate questions.
∙   14.   Clarify that this is private land
Unfinished Business
 Business License Ordinance
Review has been completed by the Township’s attorney and consultant.
Language was corrected regarding business “owned or operated”.
Trustee Hayes moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve the adoption of the
Business License Ordinance (Business Registration Ordinance).
Seconded by Treasurer Eyster
Discussion:
∙   4.04(c) should have petition filed with clerk- not registration agent.
∙   Clarification of when an ordinance is reviewed or created from the PC or
Board.
∙   This is a stand-alone ordinance.
∙   Not part of the Zoning Ordinance.
∙   Does not encompass planning issues.
∙   Mechanism to know what businesses are in the Township.
∙   Higher cost to go through PC.
∙   Only applies to businesses in commercial districts.
∙   Does not apply to home based business/occupations.
∙   Some questions/concerns from businesses.
∙   Explanation has helped with questions from affected businesses.
∙   Ag-C is included as ag businesses are allowed in this district.
∙   4.02(a) should be certified mail.
∙   Should send second notice to make sure it has been received.
∙   Expensive to send by registered mail.
∙   Will develop a policy to insure everyone receives proper notification.
∙   4.02(C) requiring too much information here.
∙   Change “and” to “or/and” contact person is needed
∙   More than one is good for contact
∙   Information would be helpful.
∙   Not much different from personal property tax information.
∙   Residential addresses could be removed.
∙   Could ask for emergency contact numbers.
∙   Business addresses, phone number and 3 emergency contact info.
∙   Option for additional information.
∙   Change “shall to may”.
∙   E. do we have a hazardous chemical survey
∙   Material safety data sheet on file and labeled with business
∙   We need to know where to get the information
∙   Registration agent is supervisor. Written request to hearing with the Board
should go through clerk.
∙   5.02   question of why not charitable or religious establishment.
∙   Comfortable with how 5.02 is currently worded.
∙   2011 needs to be changed to 2012.
∙   Purpose of ordinance
∙   Conformation that a business is working within correct zoning district
∙   Help businesses from moving into inappropriate area
∙   Safety
∙   Township should not be policing businesses and charging
∙   It will be helpful to facilitate appropriate businesses
∙   Matter of educating businesses
∙   Additional fees hurting business along with Personal property tax, police
assessment, etc.
∙   Enforcement clause should be included.
∙   Board would choose how to move forward with oversight of businesses
Trustee Hayes amended motion to include: changing “may to shall” and change of
“registration agent to clerk in 4.02(C).
Motion by Trustee Wilbrink for a roll call vote.
Motion died due to lack of support.
Motion Approved.
Budget 2012-2013
Cemetery Committee requested $100,000 be added for capital improvements to put
in roads, etc.
Historical committee would like to keep in $1500 for registration of the school
as a historic structure.
Increase 751-882 to $3500 from $ 2000.
Additional $1000 of funds for acquisition of materials for the school.
Most of $2000 in budget is for acquisition.
Historical barns: would like to have a pictorial history of barns in the area.
May use the photos as a fundraiser for future acquisitions. Have discussed
doing the same with historic homes also.
Green Zone Map
Clerk Gaffner moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve the Green Zone
Planned Development District Boundaries map dated 5/19/2011 in accordance with
the Township Zoning Ordinance Article 25.00C adopted by the Township Board on
December 6, 2011.
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion: none
Motion Approved
New Business
Poverty Exemption resolution
Trustee Wilbrink move the Williamstown Township Board approve the 2012
amendments to the Township Poverty Guidelines Resolution #97.
Seconded by Treasurer Eyster
Discussion:
∙   Roll date was changed to reflect 2012 
Roll Call vote: Yea: Trustee Hayes, Clerk Gaffner, Trustee Wilbrink, Treasurer
Eyster, Trustee Wright, Mickey Martin, Rick Williams.
March meeting date
Current date conflicts with March Board of Review and Public Hearing.
Agreed to change the meeting to Wednesday March 7th at 7:00.
Rentals (discussion)
Supervisor Martin gave an explanation of the letter in packet. Economic times
has turned a lot of owner occupied homes into rentals. The Township currently
does not deal with licensing or control of number of rentals in neighborhoods,
etc. Request that the Board have the PC look at the issue due to number of
calls and concerns being addressed by the Township.
Discussion included:
∙   Not case of buying for rental but needing to move and needing to rent out.
∙   Residents don’t want to have subdivisions turned to rentals.
∙   Economic times have increased rentals.
∙   Do we want to require licensing?
∙   Possible to limit rentals to a percentage?
∙   This would be unfair and difficult.
∙   Not as large an issue as in EL.
∙   Would like the Board to have the PC review this issue.
∙   Property values increasing will limit rentals
∙   Concern over condition and maintenance.
∙   Residents looking for security within area.
∙   Currently must be a family unit
∙   Family definition has been helpful
∙   Occupied home better than a vacant one.
∙   Home foreclosures hurting the neighborhoods.
∙   Over 50% rentals is sign of declining neighborhood.
∙   This is mostly concerning lower valued homes.
∙   Rentals in barns and unapproved apartments: has become an issue
∙   Not up to code for residential living.
∙   Reasons: financial, family.
∙   Inspections are still needed.
∙   How to proceed.
∙   Violation notice- come into compliance
∙   Violation of building code
∙   If we don’t know about a violation- is the Township liable?
∙   If we do know and don’t do anything our liability is evident.
∙   Assessors have found some of the violations.
∙   Would like to know the extent of our liability.
∙   Need to enforce the Township Ordinance
∙   Property reassessment every 5 years.
Will request the Planning Commission to place the rental issue on the agenda.
Policy units police assessment
Clerk Gaffner move the Williamstown Township Board approve Township Board
Police Services Assessment policy #11.
Seconded by Trustee Wright
Treasurer Eyster has put the policy in a format for ease of understanding the
policy.
Discussion:
∙   Good policy language. Makes it clear who is assessed and for what.
∙   “Partitions” should be changed to “petition”.
∙   This gives residents the policy and procedures for corrections, etc.
∙   If not charging a business, why charge mobile homes or residences.
∙   Difficult to know number of units for a business location due being able to
reconfigure units.
∙   Residential units are defined.
∙   Does not seem equitable to charge a vacant residential unit vs. business
unit.
∙   Definition of business unit is in question.
∙   Residential unit is well defined by the census
∙   Distinction is being made in the policy
∙   This policy is a logical way to proceed.
Motion carries
Willow Village Letter
Letter addresses being assessed for every trailer in the park whether
inhabitable or not.
Discussion:
∙   Not all trailers are occupied.
∙   Some are not able to be occupied.
∙   Those not being able to be occupied should be removed.
∙   Complaints from neighbors on condition of park.
∙   Blight ordinance may need to be enforced.
∙   Should be made inhabitable or removed.
∙   Can petition for future assessments once units are removed.
∙   Incentive to remove trailers to retroactively return assessments.
∙   Should not give incentives without consulting attorney.
∙   Should not violate policy we just passed.
Reports
Departments & Committees
∙   Training dinner being held at Spags on January 19th at 6:00 Please RSVP
∙   MTA conference in Detroit the last week of this month.
∙   Park gates are being locked.
∙   Cemetery is sending out RFP’s for construction. Ready to start improvements
in June.
∙   Signage and education needs for Mitchell Rd.
∙   Parks Committee doing a comprehensive plan for capital improvements
∙   NEISA board addressed the issue of firefighters speeding to fires through
neighborhoods. Any complaints should go to fire hall.
Public Comment for agenda & non-agenda items**
None-
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 9:00 p.m.
Review
Publication of Business Ordinance and Poverty Guidelines: Clerk
Review of rental issue: Planning Commission
Trustee Hayes moved to adjourn at 9:02 p.m.
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner
Clerk
February 14 th , 2012
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order, reviewed the agenda, and
explained procedures for public comment.
Motion by Trustee Hayes to add to the agenda under Unfinished Business: 4494
Beeman Rd. update. Seconded by Clerk Gaffner.
Motion approved.
  Pledge of Allegiance
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Trustee Wright, Supervisor Martin, Clerk Gaffner and
Trustee Hayes.
Absent: Treasurer Eyster and Trustee Williams.
Public Comment
None
Public Comment closed at 7:03.
Police Report
Chief Hall presented the written report. Mark Divney is a new officer to the
force. He was previously with ICSD and was previously assigned to the Township
and is also a veteran. Mark is currently going through field training and is
the 39 th police officer on the force. Money set aside in the budget for new
on-line reporting to be activated in three to four months. This will be good
for reporting suspicious activity or minor items. There were no break ins to
report in January.
Neighborhood watch signs are in and the road commission will be installing
them.
Request was made to see comparisons/averages to past on activity as part of the
police report.
Consent Agenda
Clerk Gaffner  moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the Minutes of 1/10/2012 Township board meeting
Treasurer’s Report, January 2012
Building inspectors report – January 2012
General Fund Accounts Payable paid, check 19510-19518 and checks 19520 through
19536 for a total of $22,669.28 with check 19519 marked void
Payroll Checks paid 41718 through 41756 and EFT 110-117 for a total of
$24,230.48
General Account Payable checks to approve 19537 through 19557 for a total of
$11,938.92
Police Account Payable to approve check 1022 for a total of $600
Revenue and expenditure report ending 1/31/2012
Second by Trustee Hayes
Discussion:
Updated reports distributed at the meeting contain the most recent EFT’s.
Motion Approved
Jack Helder with the Williamston Community Library Foundation gave a
presentation of Foundation and Library activities, the request for Township
participation in a Joint Building Authority with the City of Williamston and
Wheatfield Township, and the projected date for a millage vote to support a new
library of August 7 th , 2012.
A brief history of uses, location for the new building, the demographics of
users, what a new library would provide to the community, the support of the
Capital Area District Library and the anticipated cost of a new building of
which preliminary plans have been completed.
A 2009 survey showed: 15% thought the current library was enough. 61% would
agree to pay a tax increase to pay for a new library building. .
Anticipated Cost: 3.9 million dollars with $500,000 of this in private funding.
A .67 millage paid over 20 years would build the library.
Discussion included:
Tom Colis from Miller Canfield spoke about the role of a Building Authority and
the different ways in which the cost of the project could be allocated per
community. Population or Taxable Value are two possibilities. Draft resolution
adopting articles of incorporation along with the draft articles will be
forwarded to the Clerk for distribution to the Board. Residents would vote on
just the Township portion. The Township could not enter without voter approval.
Concern was discussed over the city’s responsibility for providing a building.
CADL is divided by districts. This district includes the Township, City of
Williamston and Wheatfield Township. It is a state mandate that funding of the
library would go through DDA, EDA and TIFA’s.
What is the back up plan if the ballot proposal fails? Planning for success.
Draft documents will be sent to the Clerk for distribution to the Board and the
Supervisor will place on the Agenda for the March meeting.
  Planning Commission Report
Minutes 1/17/12
Auction regulations
Chair Fielek reviewed the actions of the planning commission:
∙   The PC is currently exploring rental regulations. Consultant is presenting
regulations of other communities. Concern may be more the appearance of
rentals. The PC will continue to explore the rental issue.
∙   Auction deliberations. Would like the board to consider the auction
regulations proposed by the PC.
∙   Would like the Board to address auction regulations with Art 8-18 this
evening. The PC has reviewed Art 8-22.
∙   The PC reviewed the Population Analysis for the Master Plan.
Unfinished Business
4494 Beeman Rd.
The Ingham County Health Department has approved the well and septic with a
copy of the approval submitted to the Township by the Health Department.
Matt DeNike acknowledged that he has not been able to meet the previous
timelines. The exterior is complete and he is currently working on the
interior. Plans to have completed by Christmas of 2012.
Supervisor Martin motioned that the timeline for completion of 4494 Beeman Rd.
be extended to January 8th, 2013 to obtain an occupancy permit.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes.
Discussion:
Pleased with the exterior improvements.
Motion passes.
Budget 2012-2013
Supervisor Martin explained minor changes have been made to insure it is as
accurate as possible. Categories were added in Clerk for postage and printing.
The budget is ready to call for a public hearing in March.
Supervisor Martin further explained the Police Assessment would remain the same
as last year. $135.00 for residential property and $225.00 per business or
commercial property. Correction: Fraternal order of Eagles needs to be assessed
$225.00. Clarification: Each individual business in a complex will be assessed.
Multiple vacant suites in a commercial complex will be assessed.
Trustee Hayes moved the Township Board approve holding a Public Hearing March
7th, 2012 for the 2012-2013 Township Budget and the Police Assessment Role.
Clerk Gaffner support.
No discussion
Motion passes.
Article 8-22
Supervisor Martin asked if the Board had any items for discussion. She proposed
only going through Article 18 to allow for further review of the balance of the
articles through Article 22.
Discussion:
Under kennels 8.02 P(e) sound control. Add: that animals shall not be kept in
outside runs between the hours of 6:00 pm and 8:00 am.
Page 11-2: section 11.03 development standards. Change “detached one family
residential uses” to “for all uses except principal and accessory uses”. This
wording needs to be changed throughout the residential districts.
Article 14: RE Section 14.03.(3) need to change “400 ft.” to “300 ft.” for road
frontage.
Article 17: MF residential; C. special uses: Cemeteries. Remove Cemeteries as a
special use and place in RR through AG-C.
Art 18 option E. 18-4 Maximum number of lot splits. Remove “in addition to the
existing parcel shall”.
Article 8: Add the proposed Auction Regulations.
Trustee Hayes moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the recommended
revisions to Article 8-18 with the above changes.
Seconded by Trustee Wright.
Discussion:
Kennel hours are only for commercial kennels.
Motion passes.
New Business
Meeting Dates
All meetings will be on the second Tuesday of the month except May.
Trustee Hayes moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the 2012-2013
meeting schedule as presented in the board packet.
Seconded by Trustee Wright.
Discussion:
Concern expressed regarding November date.
Pleased with the move to the second Tuesday.
Motion Passes
Park Grant Request
Supervisor Martin explained that the Township Park plans are being completed.
The parks committee would like the Township to apply for a state grant to do
improvements of a pond, pavilion, restrooms, sand volleyball courts and also
field improvements for both soccer and baseball.
Discussion:
Consider Playground equipment for the Grand River Park.
Building for year round use.
Cost of matching funds.
Would not use a consultant to write the grant.
Consensus of the Board members to move forward on submitting a grant for
Township Park improvements.
Building permit fees
Supervisor Martin explained that the fees are not covering the Township’s cost.
Fees have not been raised since Walt Aven was the building inspector. Would
like to look at adjusting the fees to be compatible with surrounding Townships
and to cover costs incurred by the Township. Would like the board to allow
research to bring back a proposal at the next meeting.
Discussion:
Township needs to cover costs.
Look at comparison as well as what the Township costs are.
Current costs are based on sq. ft., some are flat fee.
More transpires than just the inspections.
Add a buffer to be able to archive on computers or drives.
Actual plans and paper has to be kept permanently.
Consensus to move forward.
Reports
Departments & Committees
∙   Warning siren- stake on east side of parking lot NE of pavilion is the
location for the new siren. Unfortunately it cannot be placed on the existing
tower.
∙   Historical meets tomorrow night.
∙   Art tour: 21 artist and 8 locations. Mark your calendars for May 4 and 5.
Park bench backs are off and are being painted by artist. Artist gathering at
park after tour for a celebration.
∙   Recycling will be handled by Northwest Refuse beginning in March. All glass
and plastic, tin, paper, boxboard and cardboard. We take Styrofoam to DART. The
Township will receive a credit on commodities. Hope to eventually cover our
cost completely.
∙   MTA next Wednesday at 6:30
Public Comment for agenda & non-agenda items**
∙   John Kane 5170 N. Williamston Rd.: Fraternal order of Eagles in the
Township. Pleased with the siren location. Auction regulations: Minimum size of
acreage in Ag-C.
∙   Rod Imhoff 2380 Wilgus Rd. Would like to see CFL’s and rechargeable
batteries be added to recycling.
Supervisor Martin closed public Comment at 8:35
Review
Clerk- publish passage of Auction regulations and Art 8-18.
Clerk- Post PH and meeting dates.
Supervisor-Library representative
Supervisor- building fees
Supervisor-Grant
Trustee Hayes moved to adjourn at 8:35 pm
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner
Clerk
March 7, 2012
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order, reviewed the agenda, and
explained procedures for public comment.
  Pledge of Allegiance
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Wilbrink, Trustee Wright, Supervisor Martin, Clerk Gaffner and
Trustee Hayes.
Absent: Trustee Williams.
Public Comment
None
Public Comment closed at 7:02
Police Report
Chief Hall added the comparison values to the report comparing last year’s data
to this year.
Billable hours are down for both January and February due, in part, to the
change in patrol times. Presented the 2011 Meridian Police Annual Report
showing both Meridian and Williamstown Twp. activities. All or part of the
report can be added to the website.
ICPD held a press conference regarding burglaries in the area and issues
regarding heroin use. This was a cooperative effort in solving the crimes/
issues between Williamston, Meridian, Fowlerville Police and the Sheriff’s
Department. At this time there is not an update on the meeting that was held on
the Mitchell Road speed limit.
Public Hearing  
2012-13 budget and Police Assessment Role
Supervisor Martin reviewed the procedure for the public hearing.
2012-13 Budget: The Board has been working on the budget since last November.
There were zero salary increases for elected officials and no hourly wage
increase for staff except for the Sexton. $100,000 was added to cemetery for
capital improvements to the cemetery. Cemetery funds are kept separate from
general fund. State revenue sharing is up due to census updates. The Board
adopts the budget by department not line by line.
Police Assessment: Police assessment also is in a separate fund. The assessment
amount for 2013 is $135.00 per residential unit and $225.00 per commercial
unit. The total assessment amount is $278,505. Passing the police assessment
will change the budget numbers by a small amount.
Public Comment:
Karl Bartels: 9665 Deer Creek. Regarding funds paid to the County for services.
Levied County tax must be collected.
Closed public comment at 7:21.
Trustee Hayes moved to close the Public Hearing on the Budget and Police
Assessment.
Second by Treasurer Eyster
Motion Approved
Consent Agenda
Treasurer Eyster moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the Minutes of 2/14/2012 Township board meeting
Treasurer’s Report, February 2012
Building inspectors report – February 2012
Fund Accounts Payable paid; check 19558-19570 for a total of $28,722.69
Police Account Payable paid check 1023 & 1024 for a total of $1,650
Payroll Checks paid 41757 through 41781 and EFT 118-119 for a total of
$15,939.98
General Account Payable checks to approve 19571 through 19588 for a total of
$5,340.83
Revenue and expenditure report ending 2/29/2012
Seconded by Trustee Hayes
Discussion:
·   Clarification of check 19558 for Broadstripe review.
·   Check to Tri-County is for meals on wheels.
Motion Approved
  Planning Commission Report
Minutes 2-21-12 meeting
Chair Fielek reviewed the minutes of the Feb. Planning Commission meeting.
·   Discussed the proposal of a rental ordinance at length. There was concern
over developing a rental ordinance as it would not cover blight issues.
Commissioners are developing a resolution with suggestions of enforcement.
Discussed blight issues in regards to abandoned properties.
·   Continuing review of the last articles of the zoning ordinance.
Unfinished Business
Deliberation: Budget 2012-13 & Police Assessment Role
Supervisor Martin reiterated that there was no comment from the public
regarding the budget and one comment regarding the police assessment role.
Clerk Gaffner moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve Resolution 2012-98,
confirming the 2012 Special Assessment Roll for Police Protection within the
Township with the Special Assessment Roll total of $278,505.
Seconded by Treasurer Eyster
Yes: Trustee Wright, Treasurer Eyster, Supervisor Martin, Clerk Gaffner and
Trustee Hayes
No: Trustee Wilbrink
Supervisor Martin explained that there is no state statute that dictates county
sheriff has to provide patrol. Monies collected for the county are dispersed by
the county commissioners.
Treasurer Eyster moved for approval of the 2012-2013 budget as a departmental
budget as presented at the public hearing on March 7, 2012 be adopted as
presented with the following provisions and amendments:
1.   Salary caps for each position may not be changed without a vote of the
Williamstown Township Board with the exceptions provided in Board Policy 008.
2.   Line item 207-000-672.000 (Special Assessment Revenue) is increased to
$278,505.
3.   The total revenue for police services is increased to $278,805.
4.   The net of revenues/appropriations – Fund 207 is reduced to -$13,845.
5.   The budget does not include Fund 703 Current Tax Collection Fund.
Seconded by Trustee Wright
Discussion:
Clarification on 2, 3 and 4.
Road improvements and maintenance: is a carryover of funds from last year and
funds of 30,000 for this year. Notification of the allocation from county has
not been provided to date.
Roll Call Vote:
Yes: Trustee Wilbrink, Trustee Wright, Treasurer Eyster, Supervisor Martin,
Clerk Gaffner, Trustee Hayes
Library Authority Representative
Trustee Wright moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the appointment of
Treasurer Eyster to represent the Township on the Williamston Library Building
Authority Board.
Support by Trustee Hayes
Motion Approved
Discussion:
Frustration with Wheatfield Township not sending a representative and
addressing the library issue. Township Representatives job is to participate in
the discussion and allow the residents to decide.
New Business
Cemetery Bid Acceptance
Supervisor Martin reviewed the actions of the Cemetery Committee to date. Bids
were in the board packet. Cemetery committee has recommended American Asphalt
and feels they have addressed all the committee’s concerns.
Trustee Wright moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the bid from
American Asphalt for paving at Summit Cemetery at a cost not to exceed $80,
875.
Seconded by Treasurer Eyster.
Discussion:
Pleased to see they were selected by the committee. Surprised at the difference
in the bid amounts.
Cemetery committee may not do all of A, B and C at this time. May hold off on C
until a future date.
Clarification: Work being done is part of the extension in the Master Plan
Motion Approved
Zoning revision Article 18 E & 19-22
Trustee Wright moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve Williamstown
Township Zoning Ordinance articles 18E & 19-22 as revised.
Trustee Hayes support.
Discussion: Art. 22 only allows 5 principal uses. Seemed wireless towers should
need a Special Use Permit.
Wireless standards are extensive so a Special Use Permit would not be needed.
Some Special Uses in Article 22 should be reviewed to move to principal use.
The need for a Special Use Permit allows for more information to be provided
before granting the use.
Concern over loss of business due to constraints of obtaining a Special Use
Permit.
Motion Approved
Road Maintenance 7 year proposals
Supervisor Martin expressed her appreciation of the work by the road committee
and the participation of the ICRC. The concern being addressed is over cost to
keep maintenance up on the paved roads within the township. Only 2 miles remain
unpaved. The roads are rated on a pacer system: looks at cracks, rolling, etc.
This is a very defined procedure with ratings from 1 to 10. 1 is the worst. It
has been determined that if you can keep your roads at a 5 or 6 and repaired on
a continual basis, this is the most cost effective approach. All roads have
been inspected.
Williamston, Sherwood, Meridian, Haslett and Zimmer are county primary roads.
North of Haslett, Zimmer is not a county road. Maintenance of all roads in the
county is the responsibility of the county, however they must have a match if
they are going to do major work on a local or collector road. Does not have to
come from the Township but this is generally where it will come from. The
Township can request any improvements they want but the responsibility is still
with the road commission. The match is for resurfacing and major repairs/
improvements. The Roads Committee has submitted the following three proposals
for review of the Board of how funds could be used to repair our roads.
Option A would only maintain collector roads but would not cover local roads.
Could revert roads to ground asphalt roads. Ingham County takes care of all
gravel roads. This is not true of all counties. Some townships buy the gravel
for road maintenance. Most of the roads of this county are paved which is
unusual. Livingston has a majority of their roads unpaved. The Township Board
committed last year to put aside $30,000 per year.
·   Option A is assuming the 30,000 from Ingham County. Concern of cost
increases and being able to maintain roads appropriately. One solution would be
to move some roads from collector roads to local road.
·   Option B looks at the above scenario.
The Roads Committee did not anticipate ever getting more than the $30,000 from
the county.
The County provides road ratings (pacer score), this is done by hiring state
trained personnel.
If a road gets below a 4 then the cost increases to bring it back up to par.
Cost curve minimizes at the 4/5 level.
Are there examples of any 7’s? Most of the roads are 4 or 5’s. There are short
segments that are 3 or 2. Do not have a pacer score for GR. Agate and Thatcher
are a 2 along with a portion of Vanneter Rd. and Meadowdale.
Clarification of the three alternatives:
A. Would maintain only 16.5 miles of twp. Other roads would need to be done by
Special Assessment or other method. County maintains ground asphalt roads which
are not as loose as gravel. Not as good as chip and seal. This might work well
for less traveled roads.
John McLaughlin spoke to the pacer rating: The higher the pacer rating the less
surface maintenance needed. A lower rating indicates the subsurface of the road
has been compromised.
B. Could reclassify some of the roads from township collector roads as local
roads. This would drop the miles down to 10.5 to be placed on the 7 year
maintenance plan. This would leave $20,000 for local road maintenance along
with special assessments. Special assessment would be higher the further the
pacer number dropped.
Discussion:
·   How long will the road commission forward the unused funds to the next
year?
·   In any given year you could have a number of projects come forward.
·    Qualifiers that help score the roads would include traffic count and
speed.
·   Bill Conklin of ICRC has been involved in the 7 year cycle.
·   What will happen when the road commission board is demolished?
·   Current funding is provided by the state gas tax. Revenue could be
declining.
·   The committee has been very thorough in their discussion of these issues.
·   Will need to prioritize roads.
·   There is not enough money to maintain all the roads in the Township. This
is different for each township in the county.
C. Millage request of 1 mil would maintain all roads at a pacer level of 7 or
better on a 7 year cycle.
Discussion:
·   It is up to the Board to decide how to move forward.
·   The township is not responsible for principal arterial roads.
·   Option C assumes property values continue to go up with 1 mil. In order to
increase funding.
·   Could look at millage on a 7 year cycle.
·   Special assessment would be a loan and we would need to finance the special
assessment.
·   Bonds may be needed to be able to loan the money for special assessments.
·   Bad weather could affect the amount of money received from the county due
to maintenance.
·   There is a formula cap used by the county.
·   Options A and C use the same classifications for the roads.
·   Option C would include all the roads.
·   Is there a need to expand the options?
·   The Board would like to review the pacer ratings for all roads along with
estimates on cost.
·   Need to come up with an overall plan and prioritize roads.
·   Would also like to see a scenario of not getting any money from the county.
Not sure if this is productive. The Board will have to review this issue
frequently to stay on track.
·   Looking at special assessment over a period of time could cause cash flow
issues.
·   Would like to see the best way to fund a special assessment. The Township
could cap amount spent each year.
·   How to be fair gets difficult.
·   Roads may need to get so bad before residents are willing to pay for them.
Need to provide an incentive to keep roads in good condition.
·   Mitchell and Vanneter were taken over by the county due to school traffic.
Reports
Departments & Committees
Supervisor Martin attended the Public Hearing held by the Ingham County road
commission for the Zimmer Rd. improvements. Surprised at the lack of attendance
by residents. Meridian residents were in attendance. One correspondence from
twp. resident. A round about at Burcham and Park Lake will be constructed in
Meridian Township. The Intersection at Zimmer and Grand River will be redone
with widening approaches with the addition of a light. Cost of approximately
$200,000 plus the signal. Improvements will be on Zimmer between Grand River
and Haslett, and include the replacement of the bridge over the Red Cedar. Will
be adding paved shoulders to Sherwood. The Township may have to contribute to
the paved shoulder between Sherwood and Haslett if they don’t have enough
money. This will complete the loop. Zimmer Rd bridge replacement will be funded
by federal, state, and county funds. $1,300,000 approximate cost to widen to
current standards and would match the road. No compensation for trees cut in
ROW. No discussion of improvements south of Grand River for Zimmer.
Sherwood would be next on the list for major repairs.
Art tour moving forward well. St. Katherine’s will be added. Hope that board
members will volunteer. Swings will be up as soon as weather cooperates before
the art tour.
Found a new website that will be much more user friendly and organized in a
fashion that will be easy to work with. Can link with BSA and allow residents
to pay taxes on line. This would be a cost savings to customer service. Will be
able to add burn permit activation to the website. Transparency is an important
issue with the residents.
Starting new recycling provider. The Township will be compensated for paper,
boxboard and tin. Northwest will be accepting more items and expands
collections. All paper will be mixed in one bin. Mixed color collected for
glass. Northwest will be giving a bid for collection during spring recycle day.
The township continues to strive on reducing the cost of collection. The
collection of hazardous waste for recycle day would be nice.
Thank you to road committee for their work to date and working to maintain
fairness in the needs of the township and residents.
Public Comment for agenda & non-agenda items
·   Karl Bartels: 9664 Deer Trail. Regarding funding for roads and showing
pacer rating to residents. Pleased with anticipated web site improvements.
Would like to see police information on line.
Supervisor Martin closed public Comment at 9:19   
Review
Clerk: Cemetery, publish: budget, ordinance revision
Roads: More information to be provided to the Board for discussion.
Supervisor: website, roads
Board of Review: Next week.
Trustee Hayes moved to adjourn at 9:20 pm
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner
Clerk
March 29, 2012
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 8:00 am. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the agenda.
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Williams, Trustee Wright, Supervisor Martin, Clerk Gaffner,
Treasurer Eyster and Trustee Hayes.
Absent: Trustee Wilbrink
Public Comment
None
Public Comment closed at 8:02
MNRTF Grant Application Resolution
Revised resolution shows a change in the grant request with the Township
contributing 40%. The township would not be adding additional cash but is
considering the labor that will be used.
Clerk Gaffner moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve Resolution #101,
authorizing the Township to seek a grant from the Michigan Natural Resources
Trust Fund, in the amount of $93,800, to be used for park enhancements
specified in the grant application. Total cost of project expected to be
$156,500 with the Township providing 40% of the total cost.
Seconded by Treasurer Eyster
Discussion:
Funds available in the park budget.
$25,000 for park improvements and maintenance
This would be used for the improvements over 2 years.
The grant allows two years to complete the improvements.
Ayes: Trustee Wright, Treasurer Eyster, Supervisor Martin, Clerk Gaffner,
Trustee Hayes, Trustee Williams
Nays: none
Accounts Paid and Payable
Trustee Hayes moved General Fund Accounts Payable paid, check 19589-19610 with
check 19598 marked void and checks 19612-19614 for a total of $117,657.11.
Account Payable checks to approve 19611 for a total of $130.29
Second by Treasurer Eyster
Motion Approved
  Year End Budget Amendments
Treasurer Eyster moved the Board approve the following budgett amendments
for the 2011-2012 budget:
Budget amendments
                                           
Add to               Reduce                 Amount
                                           
101-215-704.000      101-215-512.000        $ 200.00
Wages Rec. Sec.      Consulting Fee          
                                            
101-265-703.000      101-265-805.000        $ 500.00
Wages - Janitorial   Janitorial Services     
                                            
101-265-704.000      101-265-975.000        $ 500.00
Wages - Mowing       Site Improvement        
                                            
101-420-702.000      101--420-864.000       $ 60.00
ZBA meeting pay      ZBA Conf. And Training  
                                            
101-425-702.000      101-425-812.000        $ 260.00
Communications Wages Comm Consultant Fee     
                                            
101-751-703.000      101-751-881.000        $ 900.00
Park Wages           Park Lands              
                                            
209-276-702.000      209-276-812.000        $ 65.00
Cemetery Wages       Cem. Consultant Fee     
Seconded by Trustee Wright
Discussion:
·   These amendments were reductions in other areas in their respective
departments.
·   Very close to the proposed budget
·   Question of when the Communications Commission became Consultants.
Motion Approved
Donation
Trustee Hayes moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve acceptance of the
$1,000 donation from the Wilbur & Ruth Wright Charitable Fund, designated for
use at the Historical Branch School project.
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion:
·   Joan Wright is interested in the historical significance of the school.
·   Donation is not designated for a particular improvement
·   Committee should determine what the donation is to be used for.
·   Consider having a book at the school showing documentation of donations
made.
Motion Approved
Public Comment for agenda & non-agenda items
None.
Supervisor Martin closed public Comment at 8:24 am.
Trustee Hayes moved to adjourn at 8:25 am.
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner
Clerk
April 10, 2012
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 pm. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the agenda
and explained the procedure for public.
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Williams, Trustee Wright, Supervisor Martin, Clerk Gaffner,
Treasurer Eyster and Trustee Hayes, Trustee Wilbrink
Public Comment
Rod Imhoff, 2380 Wilgus Rd.: regarding need for roofing permits
Public Comment closed at 7:08
Police Report
Chief Hall reviewed the police report. Numbers are up a bit. On March 31st,
the department was dispatched to the Red Cedar Antique Mall. Called from the
alarm, building was broken into. Antique jewelry was taken. This has been
happening around the state in Antique Malls, also in Indiana and Illinois.
Trends: more calls but nothing out of line. Comparison chart shows three years
comparison and includes the ICSD. Eight assist to ambulance this month.
Officers are limited as to supplies that can be carried. County and Township/EL
dispatches should be combined sometime in May. The State Police reported back
on the Mitchell Rd study with an average speed of 45 to 48 mph. No change in
the speed limit was recommended at this time. Chief Hall will verify the report
with the Board.
Julie Chrsinske CADL Report
Annual reports were distributed to trustees and officers. Julie is the Head
librarian for the Williamston Branch. Williamston highlights for year: Library
had over 66,800 visits. This is an increase over previous years. Over 500 kids
participated in summer reading programs. Provide literacy training to the
schools. Friends group held quarterly book sales and they also provide special
programs. 2012 programs coming up: Mother’s Day event and a special author
visit.
Open for questions:
Appreciative of the presence of the library.
E-books are available through the library as well as training on the new
devices.
There is a misconception of the need for libraries with the advent of internet
access. Borrowing is always better than buying. Research material and access is
available through the library.
Media specialists go into the high school to teach researching and explain the
professional data bases that are available through the library. Genealogy
information is available through the library. Offer adult computer programs. No
charge for these services. Provide access to those that don’t have it- rural
areas are affected due to lack of internet access.
Consent Agenda
Treasurer Eyster moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the Minutes of 3/07/2012 & 3/29/2012 Township board meetings
Treasurer’s Report, March 2012
Building inspectors report – March 2012
General Fund Accounts Payable paid, check 19615-19629 for a total of $$4,916.73
Police Account Payable paid check 1025 &n 1026 for a total of $94,995
Payroll Checks paid 41782 through 41836 and EFT 120-122 for a total of
$24,132.13
General Account Payable checks to approve 19630 through 19636 for a total of
$2,382.37
Revenue and expenditure report ending 3/31/2012
Seconded by Trustee Hayes
Discussion:
∙   3/29 meeting. Wages should not be increased. Cannot go over without board
approval. ZBA had more meetings than anticipated. Cemetery wages, park wages,
consultants were moved up to payroll. Parks has a set amount of money and it is
difficult to determine the amount needed due to weather. Wages are first
priority.
∙   Police fund included $50,000 towards purchase of CD.
∙   Would like to see quarterly report to keep better tabs on budget.
Motion Approved
Planning Commission
Vice Chair LaMore reviewed the actions of the Planning Commission Minutes 3/20/
12
PH for MNRTF grant – grant application is consistent with current Master Plan.
Mapleshade Petition- concern over quality of some properties. The Planning
Commission was unable to identify other unchartered townships that have rental
regulations. Inviting East Lansing to talk about their rental regulations.
Planning Commission will look at the blight ordinance.
Continued review of the zoning ordinance. Looking forward to having the updated
ordinance and having it available on the website. Hope to review community
input from survey at the next meeting.
Discussion:
∙   Regarding the grant application: Commission felt it would be a valuable
asset to the park. Cost was a concern. Locke Township should be asked to help
with resources.
∙   Regarding rentals: Required per state to send someone out to inspect a
property if requested by tenant- residential. This is one reason for
registration. State inspections may need to go through the state. Blight
ordinance reflect standards of the township and should be applied to all units
whether owner occupied or rental.
∙   Do we need a rental license to cover cost of inspections?
∙   No other unchartered township was found to be dealing with rentals.
Supervisor will put a query out to other townships regarding rental
regulations.
Unfinished Business
Building permit fees
Supervisor Martin explained the fee schedule and the research that went into
the recommended rates. Explained that roofing requires an inspection.
Inspection cost is $45.00 per visit. These fees reflect the number of
inspections that will be needed and the cost to the Township. Meridian Charter
Township will be handling commercial permits for the township. Fees for
commercial permits are set by Meridian. Discussion over cost estimates
provided. Pool inspections for above ground pools are required by the state.
Treasurer Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve the Building
Permit Fee Schedule dated 4/05/2012 and included in the Board packet.
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion: none
Motion Approved.
Siren
Clerk Gaffner explained why the fee for battery maintenance was part of the
grant. Township is responsible for laying all underground wiring. There is
power near the tower for placement of the siren. Flat monthly fee of $21.00 for
siren electrical cost with separate meter, approximately $7.00 month if part of
an existing service. Silent test is every Saturday. Sound 1st Saturday of every
month. Negative to placing closer to hall is aesthetics. Would save on
underground placement and extended cost for meter if placed close to the hall.
If the township were to purchase the siren the cost would run $20,000. Pole is
approximately 50ft. tall. Maintenance agreement guarantees cost. Can we get a
maintenance agreement without the battery coverage due to generator back up
already in place? Please get questions to Ernie for further research.
Questions:
∙   Can it be put next to building?
∙   Maintenance w/o battery.
∙   Cost for electricity confirmed.
∙   No need to set a new service for just a tower.
∙   How tall is the pole?
∙   How long the siren runs.
∙   Need to know how often the battery would be changed.
∙   What is range of sound?
∙   When is installation planned? Aurelius has one up.
∙   Locke and Leroy refused the sirens.
Cemetery Improvements
Supervisor Martin explained the reason for the motion. $19,000 is left after
roads are completed. A lot of items are part of this plan that can be done now
and should be addressed.
Clerk Gaffner moved the Williamstown Township Board authorize the Cemetery
Committee to make improvements to landscaping, signs, fences, roads and other
items they deem necessary at a cost not to exceed $100,000.
Seconded by Trustee Williams.
Discussion:
∙   This amount includes the road improvements.
∙   Do not need to bring these items back to the board for approval.
∙   Option to bring expenditures back to the board.
∙   Committee has best interest of the Township
∙   Allow the committee work out the details.
Motion approved.
New Business
None
Reports:
NEISA: appointed Trustee Wilbrink as first alternate at large.
Bob Hannah is member at large.
Was awarded grant for fire engine.
Departments and Committees
Recycling: 1st month of recycling with Northwest went very well. Working hard
to find ways to reduce cost and expand services. Most things can be recycled.
More help can always be used. Streamlined collections. May is big spring
cleanup. Hoping to have electronics pick up. Freon removal. Hazardous waste, if
the school will organize, and document shredding.
MTA meeting next month at Locke Township. May 18th at 6:30. Spicer group will
be there speaking about flood plains, soil erosion, etc.
New Website will be much more user friendly once up and running. Burn permits
will eventually be available on line. Would have to have initial permit before
using on line service.
BSA information will be available on line. ReVize of Troy Michigan is doing our
website. Hope to be able to reduce township hours. Newsletter will also be
online.
Public Comment for agenda & non-agenda items:
Ruth Templeton 1435 Epley Rd.: Board of Review dates on the web:
Rentals and homestead exemptions; property rights and wetlands.
Public Comment closed at 8:30
Review
Clerk: Publish synopsis
Supervisor: Building permit fees
Clerk: Siren
Supervisor: Cemetery
Trustee Hayes moved to adjourn at 8:31 am.
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner
Clerk
May 15, 2012
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
May 15, 2012
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 pm. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the agenda
and explained the procedure for public comment.
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Williams, Trustee Wright, Supervisor Martin, Clerk Gaffner,
Treasurer Eyster, Trustee Hayes and Trustee Wilbrink
Public Comment
None
Supervisor Martin closed Public Comment at 7:03
Police Report
Sgt. Dawson from the Meridian Township Police Department added to the report:
An attempted break in of a Cherry Vale residence was not successful. A Live Oak
break in was successful, however suspects were identified. Appreciative
comments of how prompt the response was to the park incident and the recent
accident. Residents find it comforting.
Consent Agenda
Treasurer Eyster moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the Minutes of 4/10/2012 Township board meeting
Treasurer’s Report, April 2012
Building inspectors report – April 2012
General Fund Accounts Payable paid, check 19637 - 19664 for a total of
$$43,394.22
Police Account Payable paid check 1027 for a total of $1,495.50
Payroll Checks paid 41837 through 41862 and EFT 123-127 for a total of
$23,913.62
General Account Payable checks to approve 19665 through 19692 for a total of
$14,068.62
Revenue and Expenditures
Second by Trustee Hayes
Discussion: none
Motion Approved
Planning Commission
Chair Fielek reviewed the actions of the Planning Commission at the 4/17/12
meeting.
Reviewed the charge of the Board to look at licensing regulations. Heard from
East Lansing about their licensing procedures. Commission does not feel the
need to look at regulating rentals. Possible update of the Blight Ordinance
would be appropriate which was last updated in 1993. Enforcement of the blight
ordinance appears to be an issue. Review procedure for filing complaints. The
PC finished review of the zoning ordinance. Polishing up changes from the last
articles before calling for a Public Hearing.
The resolution presented to the Board expresses the findings and
recommendations of the Planning Commission regarding rentals and reviewing the
Blight Ordinance.
Unfinished Business
Siren
Installation crew was going to do a sight visit of the Township to mark a
location for the siren and tower. Prefer hard wiring to the building which
would cost the Township less. Will bring back a report to the next meeting.
Marijuana Ordinance
The Medical Marijuana Moratorium has expired. Supervisor asked for proposal
language from the planning consultant regarding Medical Marijuana as bills are
currently being considered by the Michigan legislature.
Clerk Gaffner moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve amending the Zoning
Ordinance with the addition of B to Section 2.02: Allowable & Prohibited Uses
B. Prohibited Uses: Uses for enterprises or purposes that are contrary to
federal, State, or local laws or ordinances are prohibited.
Seconded by Treasurer Eyster
Discussion:
Township Attorney has not reviewed this language.
Would have to do a new moratorium to extend to give time for attorney to
review.
Concern with limiting the use of Medical Marijuana by patients.
Does this language prohibit patient use?
Patient use would be a violation of federal law.
Still contrary to federal law.
Concern with restricting use by patients with passage of law.
Prefer legal counsel review prior to vote.
Motion approved.
It was the consensus of the board to have the language reviewed by the
attorney.
New Business
Senior Center – Resolution
60 year resident, Virginia Taschner, gave a brief history of the Senior Center.
Senior Center is celebrating 20 years of service. The Senior Center began as
part of the school district. Lost funding in 2005 from the Williamston School
District and the Tri-County Office on Aging (TCOA). There is currently enough
money to fund through 2013. The Senior Center Board decided to try for a
millage. The Senior Center is currently meeting at the community center owned
by the city. May need to find space in approximately 3 years if not sooner.
Served over 6200 lunches last year. Currently meet 3 days a week. Lunch comes
from TCOA. Funding would allow an increase of staff to accommodate the need for
future growth. Currently have fundraisers and generous donors that help support
the center. Asking Locke, Wheatfield, Leroy, City of Williamston along with
Williamstown Township to place on their respective ballots. The City of
Williamstown and Leroy Township have agreed to place it on the ballot. Need
approval by units of government to let the residents decide. Would like to be
able to help people participate in programs being offered with increased
funding. Currently cooperate with the library regarding programs. Active group
of participants.
Discussion:
The township has contributed over the years but has never been presented with a
budget.
Would like to see a budget presentation to see what will happen with monies
collected.
Millage would support:
   ·   Employing 2 to 3 part time staff.
   ·   Subsidize trips for those that struggle.
   ·   Plans to expand 5 days a week.
   ·   Assistant director.
   ·   Have own building.
   ·   Plan for growth.
   ·   Van to pick up handicapped individuals.
   ·   Need a new van to replace the old one.
   ·   Fair wage for those that work.
   ·   Co-director would work approx. 12 hours a week.
   ·   Kitchen help is currently by volunteers and would be by staff.
City is not under obligation to support.
Status of community center building is in limbo.
Further discussion:
   ·   First group that has asked for funds that are not a governmental unit.
   ·   Have worked with attorney, Bill Fahey, to create Resolution.
   ·   Board of directors would manage funds.
   ·   Tri County would not be involved.
   ·   Does the Board have directors and officers liability insurance
   ·   Object to funding cuts by state
   ·   Let the people decide by placing on the ballot
   ·   Approximately $55,000 would be collected by the city.
   ·   Would still be open to all seniors.
   ·   Approx $266,000 if all five units passed the millage.
   ·   Last year spent $30,000.
   ·   .5 mills may be excessive.
   ·   Consider asking for a one shot at .5 mills would be best.
   ·   Chose not to go with library due to layout and space of building.
   ·   Cannot use basement of library without an elevator.
   ·   Parking would be an issue.
   ·   Need dedicated space for 5 days a week.
   ·   Many communities have both a senior center and library.
   ·   Funds would be used to build a building and land.
   ·   Limiting options by staying downtown.
   ·   Library has only vacant land in the city.
   ·   Success is limited to justification with a budget.
   ·   Justification is needed for .5 mill request.
   ·   Create a budget.
   ·   Need to show a plan to convince voters.
   ·   If we can take money out of our budget then should be able to take to
voters on ballot.
   ·   Need to create a business plan.
   ·   Can the center have debt obligation?
   ·   Willing to call for a special meeting if a budget could be presented.
   ·   Pass by our legal counsel to get verification of legality.
   ·   Needs to be approved by May 29 th .
   ·   Approve as is and let voters decide.
   ·   Board has responsibility to the residents to not put something on the
ballot that is not sound.
   ·   Acts requires budget and approval of governing board. This covers
appropriations.
   ·   How is Senior Center board created? Elected by membership of the senior
center. 501c3 status.
   ·   Have By-laws. Structure is in place. Membership dues are $6.00 a year.
   ·   No age requirement.
   ·   Board members would feel better with more information provided.
   ·   Obligation to set forth something reasonable.
   ·   Would like to have independent opinion and budget.
   ·   Need to have someone experienced help with budget.
   ·   What about fund equity.
   ·   Will call for a special meeting to address the resolution.
Treasurer Eyster moved that we have a special meeting at 5:30 on the 22 nd to
discuss the senior center resolution.
Support by Trustee Hayes.
Motion approved.
Road Maintenance
Proposals were presented to the Board members regarding the township roads by
the Transportation Committee and the Ingham County Road Commission.
The proposal for Zimmer Rd. north of Haslett was presented by the
transportation committee and recommend the Board accept the proposal.
Treasurer Eyster moved that the Board approve the resurfacing Zimmer Rd. from
Haslett Rd. to Milton Rd. and sign the agreement for local road improvements
with the Ingham County Road Commission from designated road funds.
Support by Clerk Gaffner.
Discussion:
   ·   Subdivisions are not included in 7 year plan.
   ·   The seven year plan is not part of tonight’s discussion.
   ·   Zimmer was one of the recommendations.
   ·   Road committee and ICRC both agree that Zimmer Rd. should be done.
   ·   Will be presenting the 7 year plan to the Board in the future.
   ·   This is just for Zimmer Rd.
Motion approved.
Departments and Committees
   ·   Treasurer Eyster was approached about selling the income stream from our
tower. Would be a one time deal. Picked up by cities that are in need of money.
Board is not interested in pursuing this further.
   ·   Supervisor Martin was asked if the Township is interested in selling ads
on our website. More information would be needed to decide. Consensus is no.
   ·   Art tour was a success. Swing set is in due to past years art tours.
   ·   Park benches were on display during the tour. Bench party at the park to
celebrate the work done by the artist. June 23 rd . Saturday evening.
   ·   Clean up was successful. Filled almost two dumpsters. Collected a lot of
metals. Freon removal was provided. Great way to use tax dollars. Some
residents would like to see us collect hazardous waste and tires. 2 nd year
will continue improvements and expansion.
   ·   Recycling is going well with collection and reimbursement of approx 50%
of cost.
   ·   First garage sale of the season was held along with the recycling/clean
up day.
   ·   Drain commission will have soil erosion permits on line.
   ·   County Commission is exploring how to run the road commission.
   ·   Cable has switched over to WOW. Suppose to see an improvement in
service.
   ·   Historic committee has a presentation for June 14 th regarding historic
barns.
   ·   NEISA honored those for public service and life saving.
   ·   Clerk reviewed filings for elections for Township offices. Closed at 4:
00 today.
Public Comment for agenda & non-agenda items:
Ruth Templeton 1435 Epley Rd.: Concerns over ballot proposal from the Senior
Center
Public Comment closed at 8:36
Review
Clerk: Siren update
Supervisor: Medical Marijuana language will be reviewed by legal counsel.
Supervisor: Senior center resolution reviewed by attorney and special meeting.
Supervisor and Clerk: agreement for Zimmer Rd.
Clerk: Posting of Special Meeting
Trustee Hayes moved to adjourn at 8:40 am.
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner
Clerk
May 22, 2012
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
May 22, 2012
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 5:30 pm. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the agenda
and explained the procedure for public comment.
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Williams, Supervisor Martin, Clerk Gaffner, Treasurer Eyster,
Trustee Hayes and Trustee Wilbrink
Absent: Trustee Wright
Public Comment
None
Supervisor Martin closed Public Comment at 5:32
Senior Center – Resolution
Several representatives of the Williamston Senior Center were in attendance and
all deferred to Representative Dawn Marie Joseph, as their spokesperson for
this meeting with the Williamstown Township Board. A proposed Senior Center
Budget, based upon monies available, should a Senior Center millage vote be
successful in the City of Williamston and the townships of Wheatfield, Locke,
Leroy and Williamstown, was provided for each board member. The budget included
amounts for facility rental and maintenance as well as revised staffing and
money for a new building.
At present the Senior Center uses space, rent free, provided by the City of
Williamston, however, it is not known how long this arrangement will continue.
The Senior Center space is limited, the funds are very limited and the Senior
Center Board does not believe the Center will be allowed to continue without
the passage of the requested millage.
Some discussion centered on the possibility of the Senior Center and the
Williamston Library representatives working together to seek millage for one
facility to serve both entities. There was discussion about a lack of interest
between the two entities of working together but it was thought by some that a
joint effort would have a much better chance of gaining the required support
than to have each entity working individually.
The Township board voiced concerns on the timing of the Senior Center
Resolution and the fact that more time was needed. An additional concern was
about the amount of money being requested and just what amount may be needed to
continue the Senior Center with additional staff and more programs, without
additional funding for a new building. There were a lot of questions and
insufficient answers available to satisfy the Board at the present time.
Motion by Treasurer Eyster, that the Williamstown Township Board approve the
Senior Center Resolution 2012, To Adopt the following Millage Proposal in
Williamstown Township, Ingham County, Michigan
‘WHEREAS, the Williamston Area Senior Center is a private nonprofit corporation
providing senior citizen services, programs and activities in the Township; and
WHEREAS, the Township Board may impose and levy ad valorem property taxes as
authorized by the Michigan Constitution and laws, including providing senior
citizen services as
authorized by MCL 400.571, at seq, and other applicable statutes; and
WHEREAS, the Township Board proposes to levy ‘/2 roil for twelve (12) years
(2012
through 2023) to support the Williamston Area Senior Center.
NOW, THEREFORE, the Township Board resolves to approve the following millage
proposal and directs the Clerk to submit it on the August, 2012, election
ballot:
Williamstown Township
Proposal for Senior Center Millage
Shall the tax limitation imposed under Article IX, Sec. 6 of the Michigan
Constitution in
Williamstown Township be increased by 1/2 mil (50 cents per $1,000 of taxable
value) and
levied for twelve (12) years, 2012 through 2023 inclusive, to support the
Williamston Area
Senior Center, raising an estimated $111,532 in 2012.
Roll call vote:
Yes: Trustee Williams
No: Trustee Hayes, Supervisor Martin, Treasurer Eyster, Clerk Gaffner and
Trustee Wilbrink
The Supervisor declared the resolution failed.
Trustee Hayes moved to adjourn at 6:55 pm.
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner
Clerk
June 12, 2012
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
June 12, 2012
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 pm. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the agenda
and explained the procedure for public comment.
Motion by Trustee Wright to add to the agenda under New Business the following
items: dirt pile removal and office closure on July 3rd.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes.
Motion Approved
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Williams, Trustee Wright, Supervisor Martin, Clerk Gaffner,
Treasurer Eyster, Trustee Hayes and Trustee Wilbrink
Public Comment
None
Supervisor Martin closed Public Comment at 7:02
Police Report
Chief Hall stated that the East Lansing and Lansing dispatch is ready to
combine with a date for the switch to be set soon. Anticipated savings from the
combination is approximately 1 million dollars a year. The phone number will
continue being the same one currently used by residents. The department will be
reprogramming their radios and are part of a talk group with other police and
emergency responders for the outlying county area. The additional hours on the
billing were due to the suicide in the park last month.
Consent Agenda
Trustee Hayes moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the Minutes of the 5/15/2012 & 5/22/2012 Township board meetings
Treasurer’s Report, May 2012
Building inspectors report – May 2012
General Fund Accounts Payable paid, check s 19693 – 19699 & 19701 - 19714 for a
total of $60,245.27 with check 19700 marked void
Payroll Checks paid 41863 through 41902 and EFTs 128-132 for a total of
$27,965.52
General Account Payable checks to approve 19715 through 19744 for a total of
$15,398.26
Police Account Payable check to approve # 1028 for $2,613.50
Revenue & Expenditure Report
Budget Amendments
Increase 101-751-882.002 (Branch School Dedicated) by $1,000.00 for a total
budget of $1,000.00,
Increase 101-751-884.001 (Art Tour Playground Restricted) by $2,130.02 for a
total budget of $4,130.02,
Increase 101-751-884.000 (Art Tour Artist Fees Restricted) by $1,106.80 for a
total budget of $2,381.80,
Increase 101-751-881.000 (Park Lands) by $1,208.40 for a total budget of
$16,648.40, and
Decrease 101-890-965.000 (General Fund Contingency Fund) by $5,445.22 for a
remaining general fund contingency fund balance of $34,554.78.
Second by Treasurer Eyster
Discussion: none
Motion Approved
Planning Commission
There is no report as the Planning Commission did not meet in May.
Unfinished Business
Senior Center Millage (resolution request)
The Board received a letter from the Senior Center asking for a representative
from the Township to attend their Board meetings with the anticipation of
creating a ballot proposal for the August 2014 ballot. Treasurer Eyster has
agreed to be the representative as she is attending the Library foundation
meetings and these will complement each other.
New Business
Dirt pile removal   
The Mid-Michigan Demolition Committee is interested in the soil left over from
the installation of the swing at the Township Hall. They would move the soil at
no cost to the Township and it will be used for the Jubilee Demo Derby.
Trustee Wright moved the Williamstown Township Board approve removal by Mid-
Michigan Demolition and Excavation of the excess dirt from installation of the
playground equipment, at no cost to the Township.
Seconded by Trustee Wilbrink.
Discussion: none
Motion approved.
Office Closure
Due to July 4th being a Wednesday it was suggested to close the office on
Tuesday the 3rd.
Trustee Wright moved the Williamstown Township Board approve closure of the
Township Office on July 3, 2012.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes
Discussion: none
Motion Approved
Departments and Committees
·   Historical Committee: A barn symposium will be held at 7:00 this Thursday,
June 14th.
·   NIESA: Increased the fee for an ambulance loaded mile from $9 to $11 and
increased the refusal fee from $60 to $75. This is comparable with other
jurisdictions. NIESA does not charge for fire runs and the millage supports the
fire department. Some objections to the charge increase due to millage paid by
residents. A copy of the NIESA minutes will be forwarded on to board members.
NIESA generated $108,000 revenue by assisting at the MSU games. NIESA is
refinancing their debt to lower interest payments.
·   Cemetery roads will be having asphalt laid this week. Will extend capacity
at Summit Cemetery for 50 years.
·   Historical committee wants to do another historical 9/21 tour this year.
Very good response last year.
·   Joint meeting with the City of Williamston: Wednesdays: July 25th or June
27th. Thursday options would be June 28th and July 19th. Supervisor Martin will
set a date with the city. Area organizations will be invited to send a
representative to the meeting.
·   MTA: Supervisor Martin spent June 6th at the State Legislature to stress
the importance of Townships. Consolidation is an ongoing topic. Police is a
good example of how consolidation has been beneficial to both communities.
·   The elimination of personal property taxes was discussed. This will have a
major effect on the larger municipalities. State Legislators are not in favor
of the international bridge; however Governor Snyder is still working on
getting it through.
Public Comment
None
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:41.
Review
Treasurer Eyster: Senior Center
Clerk Gaffner: closure for 7/3
Supervisor: Soil removal.
Trustee Hayes moved to adjourn at 7:41.
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner
Clerk
July 10, 2012
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
July 10, 2012
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 pm. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Clerk Ernie Gaffner called the meeting to order. With the absence of Supervisor
Martin the consensus of the board was to have Clerk Gaffner run the meeting.
Clerk Gaffner reviewed the agenda and led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Williams, Trustee Wright, Clerk Gaffner, Treasurer Eyster,
Trustee Hayes and Trustee Wilbrink
Absent: Supervisor Martin
Public Comment
John Kane, 5170 N. Williamston Rd.: Concern with the monies spent by the
Township appealing a tax tribunal decision.
Clyde Smith, Candidate for Ingham County Sheriff: Introduction of himself and
outlined his policy plan if elected sheriff.
John Conity, 2728 Gould Rd. Onondaga: Retired County Deputy speaking in support
of Clyde Smith for Ingham County Sheriff.
Clerk Gaffner closed public comment at 7:16.
Police Report
Chief Hall stated that the East Lansing and Lansing dispatch were combined on
June 27th and is running smoothly. This should remedy some of the issues
experienced in the past by residents. Officer Aaron Linn is attending training
in Clare with the new K-9 officer, Magic. A survey result from a Township
resident was included in the packet. Approximately 25 surveys are sent out
randomly to residents that have requested service from the Department.
Consent Agenda
Treasurer Eyster moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the Minutes of the 6/12/2012 Township board meeting
Treasurer’s Report, June 2012
Building inspectors report – June 2012
General Fund Accounts Payable paid, check s 19745 – 19758 for a total of
$4,740.67
Payroll Checks paid 41903 through 41934 and EFTs 133-135 for a total of
$21,219.66
General Account Payable checks to approve 19759 through 19779 for a total of
$89,414.75 and
Police Account Payable check to approve # 1029 through 1031 for a total of
$47,382.75
Revenue & Expenditure Report
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion: none
Motion Approved
Planning Commission
The minutes were in the packet for review.
Unfinished Business
Library- Building Authority
Library Foundation representative, Marlene Epley and Tom Colis with Miller
Canfield, presented the request to the Township Board of a resolution to
establish a Joint Building Authority with the City of Williamston for a new
library. At this time, Wheatfield Township has decided not to participate
despite a petition request from area residents. Treasurer Eyster attended a
meeting along with the City of Williamston Mayor and city manager and
representatives of the Williamston Library Foundation regarding the formation
of a joint authority. The purpose of the authority would be to finance the
construction of a new building to house the library. A sample contract was also
included in the packet to facilitate discussion.
Discussion included:
·   Number of members in an authority is open.
·   By Statute, cannot be an elected official.
·   Each municipality would adopt the same resolution.
·   The purpose is only for financing the construction of the building.
·   An authority is the financing arm of the community.
·   Authority is filed with County Clerk and Secretary of State.
·   The authority brings forward to each municipality amount to be financed and
how to share the cost.
·   Can be based on whatever formula is agreed upon such as Taxable Value,
Population, Usage, etc.
·   Does not commit the Board until a contract is ratified by the three bodies;
the building authority, city and township.
·   Formation of the authority is the first step, second is contract and has to
be approved by the voters.
·   Township and city residents vote separately. If either says no then there
is no contract.
·   If contracts are approved, bonds can be levied for financing.
·   Treasurer Eyster attended the city council meeting when the Foundation
presented the resolution. She suggested the Township Board meet with City
Council to discuss pertinent items of the contract and be brought up to date on
the library plans. Would also like to garner input from residents.
·   Wheatfield Township: Foundation representative Jack Helder met with the
Wheatfield Board and presented a petition signed from residents. They are not
willing to go into the joint authority. The Wheatfield Board portion would be a
small portion of the funding.
·   Board must make decision regarding forming authority.
·   Vote by residents is for the contract and is the commitment to pay.
·   Makes sense to have a working group meeting with representatives, and or
boards and councils to answer questions.
·   Foundation is willing to supply any needed information needed for the
meeting.
·   Property is about 2/3 paid for.
·   Fundraisers are well attended. Received a $50,000 bequest from a will to be
applied toward the library. Conceptual plan is in place but will need
modification to meet CADL’s (Capital Area District Library) needs.
·   Reiterated need to meet with the city.
·   Elected officials cannot serve on the board.
·   NIESA was formed under a different statute.
·   Appointee of the board answers to the township board.
·   Steps include:
      1.      appointee
      2.      contract
      3.      city approve contract
      4.      twp. approve contract
   Per Act 31 of 1948.
·   The City and Township would jointly own the building.
·   What if one party wants out.
·   Issues could be addressed ahead of time in the contract.
·   CADL contract specifies communities.
·   CADL has original document.
·   Largest use of library by city residents.
·   CADL has the data regarding specifics as to use of the library.
·   Need to address future problems.
·   Separate endowment set up by foundation to maintain the building.
·   Details would be in place with the contract.
·   Approval of bond sales would need to be addressed with the city.
·   NIESA was developed under a different statute.
·   This statute is for building authorities.
·   The details are always built into the contract. Funding can come from
general fund or levy a tax. Vote is for contract. This allows the township to
be able to levy a tax.
·   Senior center should be participating in discussion.
·   Do not feel that the township can support two buildings.
·   Interest by community groups for use of a community room. Can be used when
the library is closed.
·   This is a government tax exempt building. Open to the public. Up to 5% can
be for private use. Need to make sure tax exempt status is maintained.
·   Need to have discussion while the Board can participate in the discussion
before authority is formed. Three way meeting.
·   Suggest meeting with the city in September.
·   Joint meeting is with all groups. Open meetings act.
·   Set joint meeting with city as soon as possible.
·   Could have small committee to work out some details before large group
meetings.
New Business
None
Departments and Committees
Treasurer Eyster suggested the Township explore the possibility of becoming a
cooling station. The Township office was able to remain open during the current
outage due to the generator and residents did utilize the Township to get
water.
Public Comment
State Trooper Carl Bowman introduced himself. The State Police can help with a
cooling station as part of Public Safety and Homeland Security.
Clerk Gaffner closed public comment at 8:16.
Review
Supervisor Martin to initiate a meeting with the City of Williamston to explore
forming a Building Authority for the library.
Trustee Hayes moved to adjourn at 8:17.
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner
Clerk
August 14, 2012
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
August 14, 2012
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 pm. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order reviewed the agenda and
led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Williams, Trustee Wright, Clerk Gaffner, Treasurer Eyster,
Supervisor Martin, Trustee Hayes and Trustee Wilbrink
Absent: none
Public Comment
Nancy Williams, 131 Bismark: Thanked the board for library and senior center
discussion at the joint meeting.
Randy Schaffer, 3149 Meadowdale: regarding lowering speed limit on Mitchell Rd
and presentation of petition from the Meadowdale residents.
Tom English, 2095 Mitchell Rd.: presented information on a state statute
regarding lowering a speed limit.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:09
Police Report
Chief Hall noted the format on the monthly report has changed and hope that
provides the Board with the desired information. Billable hours were up due to
calls for service. Two deaths: one on Barry Rd. and one in the Township park. A
serious accident on Grand River east of Zimmer was cause for additional hours.
K-9 Magic failed the training program. Hope to get another K-9 dog for the
upcoming September class.
Discussion:
Accident on Grand River resulted in serious injuries.
Mitchell Rd. speed limit: State Police did an assessment. Their assessment
showed it was appropriately marked at 45 mph. 35 mph is consistent with
adjoining speed limit. Will speak to state police about statute. Up to the
board to make decision.
Consent Agenda
Trustee Hayes moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the Minutes of the 7/10/2012 Township board meeting
Treasurer’s Report, July 2012
Building inspectors report – July 2012
General Fund Accounts Payable paid, check s 19780 – 19811 for a total of
$32,794.76
Police Account Payable paid, check 1032 for a total of $8,168.50
Payroll Checks paid 41935 through 41980 and EFTs 136-140 for a total of
$26,292.32
General Account Payable checks to approve 19812 through 19829 for a total of
$9,851.20
Revenue & Expenditure Report
Budget Amendments
      Move $523.80 from 101-890-965.000 to 101-851-714.001
      Move $580 from 101-215-728.00 to 101-191-728.00
Move $1,000 from 101-215-864.000 to 101-191-728.00
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Motion Approved
Planning Commission
The Planning Commission did not meet in August.
Unfinished Business
Office Hours
Supervisor Martin directed residents to the survey that is on the website
regarding office hours. Results to date are in the packet. Results confirm that
extended hours on Wednesday evenings are important to keep. Staff is keeping a
log of visitors/phone calls to gage activity at the office. The new website is
built and training will be in the near future. The projected date to upload the
new site is mid-September.
Discussion:
Will the reduced hours reduce personnel cost? The most popular response to the
Survey shows three days with the same hours.
Does the board desire more information-no additional or different information
requested.
Collect data for another month.
JBA Committee
The Township Board held a meeting August 5th with the Williamston City Council
to discuss creating a JBA (joint building authority). The Library Foundation
was present as well as representatives from the Senior Center. The city is
willing to request their council appoint two members to a committee to bring
back proposals to both municipalities. The Library Foundation has approached
the Township regarding the possibility of a millage for a building to house the
library as has the Senior Center. Discussion considered the possibility of
combining into one building that would serve multiple purposes. The city
purchased the community center which is currently housing the library, senior
center and food bank and is considering their options as to what they will do
with the building. Would like to appoint two board members to meet with
appointed city council members. This is the first step in a process that will
need voter approval of both municipalities as the final step.
Treasurer Eyster volunteered to serve as she has worked with both groups.
Supervisor Martin will also serve.
New Business
FreedomNet Agreement Extension
Communications chair Marvin Thompson reported that Kurt Guter, Supervisor
Mickey Martin and himself had worked on the agreement with FreedomNet. The
financial impact of the amended contract will increase rent payment from $1 a
month to $2 a month over the next 5 years. Internet will remain free for the
Township. Subscriber fees will be held at $39.95 a month for the next 5 years.
Basic install rate is increasing from $95 to $150. Insurance is available for
equipment if subscribers are interested. Fee of $1 for a paper bill. Will not
be able to provide VOIP for subscribers so this was removed from the contract.
Trustee Wilbrink moved the Williamstown Township Board approve AMENDMENT # 1 TO
THE NON-EXCLUSIVE AGREEMENT FOR BROADBAND WIRELESS INTERNET AND VoIP TELEPHONE
SERVICE
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion:
Is everything else the same as the original contract?
Legal counsel reviewed the contract. Recommended revisions were incorporated.
Motion approved.
PA116 release resolution
The PA 116 program is an agreement between the State of MI that individuals
keep land in agriculture from 10 to 50 years. A portion can be removed provided
the local municipality passes a resolution that it is permissible. This removes
2 acres so the remainder can be farmed.
Trustee Hayes moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the resolution for
Partial Termination of the PA 116 Agreement number 33-0110-123116 as it relates
to the Virginia Powell Trust.
Seconded by Treasurer Eyster
Discussion:
Has this split been approved by the Township?
This is based on a survey provided by the Trust.
An application for the split will have to be submitted to complete the process.
Motion Approved.
MTT MTA assistance for appeal
Supervisor Martin submitted a memo as part of the packet regarding the MTT
(Michigan Tax Tribunal). A resident can appeal the decision of the Tax Tribunal
to the Court of Appeals. As in the past, these can been appealed all the way to
the Supreme Court. It has been requested that MTA (Michigan Township
Association) become involved due to the impact this would have on other
communities. Legal Counsel, Fahey, Schultz, Burzych and Rhodes, PLC will move
forward asking for support from MTA.
Clerk Gaffner moved that the Williamstown Township Board approve requesting the
Michigan Township Association to join the Township with financial support,
regarding the Township's legal challenge at the Michigan Tax Tribunal, as the
outcome will affect all Michigan Townships.
Seconded by Trustee Wright.
Discussion:
Spent over $10,000 on legal fees without restrictions from board.
Suggest institute any further increase in spending be approved by the board.
Trustee Wilbrink moved to amend the motion that the board must approve
expenditures, before they are spent, for Tax Tribunal.
Motion died for lack of support.
Board has a fiduciary duty to residents.
Legal Counsel advised the Township in setting up assessment.
Cost is fair and equitable to residents.
Different interpretation to Public Act 33.
Need to follow through.
Money allocated to attorney fees to use.
Board has been aware of what is happening.
Assistance from MTA will serve all communities.
Question if the board should be appealing the decision.
Last two months attorney fees of $10,000.
When resident takes a MTT decision to the Court of Appeals the resident wins if
not appealed.
If board wants another way to deal with Tax tribunal issues then a policy needs
to be set.
In budget of general appropriations-Legal defense budget.
Notification of MTT issues but not approval from board is current policy.
Resident impacting other residents by appealing.
Need to defend tax base.
Implications are state wide.
Assessment can be based on other methods beside millage.
Farmland not affected.
Not just a matter of few dollars for one person.
Longer reaching implications if not appealed.
How much are we going to spend defending an issue instead of using for police
services?
To date a hearing has not been scheduled.
Motion approved
Business License fee Resolution
Supervisor Martin explained that when the Business License Ordinance was passed
a resolution was needed for the fees. The Board missed passing the resolution.
This will address fees and renewals.
Trustee Hayes moved the Williamstown Township Board approve Resolution 2012-49
Establishing Business License Fees applicable to Township Ordinance Number 49.
Seconded by Treasurer Eyster
Discussion:
Fees are effective from the date of Ordinance passage.
Resolution takes into account application for a license within 9 months will
cover 2 years.
Ordinance is not considered a money maker.
Provides the Township information as to who is where and what is involved for
public services, etc.
Roll Call:
No: Trustee Wilbrink.
Yes: Trustee Wright, Treasurer Eyster, Supervisor Martin, Clerk Gaffner,
Trustee Hayes, Trustee Williams.
Motion Approved.
Departments and Committees
The annual meeting between the City of Williamston and the Township went very
well. Both municipalities would like to work in cooperation and have more
collaboration. Supervisor Martin attended the opening of Forester Day Care for
the elderly. This is a great asset to the community as well as Crosaires, an
assisted living home. Do not have to be a Township resident to take advantage
of their service. St. Katherine’s wants to be part of the community and has
been very willing to assist the community.
Clerk Gaffner has a need for election workers. 20% of voters turned out for
primary. Anticipate good turnout for November election. A link is available on
the website for an application to be an election worker, or stop in to visit
the Clerk.
NIESA announcement: Public Hearing on the budget scheduled for September 6th at
the Fire Station.
Zimmer Rd. improvements have begun with surveying being done for work next
year. Will be inconvenient for a year. Improvements include bike shoulders, a
wider bridge. Will have meetings at the Township to review plans and timeline.
Trees will be coming down.
Public Comment
John Kane, 5170 N. Williamston Rd.: Regarding police assessment being equitable
to all by taxable value.
Daniel Davey, 1215 Wild Cherry.: Regarding expenditures for the Michigan Tax
Tribunal.
Kurt Guter, 4445 Cygnet Ct.: Supports the Township Board in fighting the appeal
regarding the police assessment. Need for other Townships to participate in
JBA.
Ruth Templeton, 1435 Epley Rd.: Regarding the 2009 MTT decision on her property
and Township staffing.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 8:16.
Review
Clerk- PA 116 resolution.
Clerk- Business License Fee Resolution
Supervisor- JBA meeting.
Supervisor-MTA MTT assistance.
Trustee Hayes moved to adjourn at 8:18.
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner
Clerk
October 9, 2012
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 pm. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order, reviewed the agenda and
led the Pledge of Allegiance.
The Board was in agreement with Supervisor Martin’s request to a change in the
agenda to allow the audit report to be given before the police report.
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Williams, Trustee Wright, Clerk Gaffner, Treasurer Eyster,
Supervisor Martin, Trustee Hayes and Trustee Wilbrink
Absent: none
Public Comment
None
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:02
Audit Report
Shannon Rodriguez with Layton and Richardson, PC reviewed highlights of the
audit report presented to the Board. The Township had an increase of total
assets that included increases in police and cemetery funds. There were no
expenditures greater than the budgeted amounts. Everything was in order and
looked good. There was approximately $302,000 added to the fund balances. A
letter was attached addressing the segregation of duties.
Police Report
Chief David Hall presented the monthly report to the Board. There were fewer
billable hours this month. Chief Hall met with the public safety committee. The
force has a new K-9 dog named Uby. Officer Erin Lynn will be working with Uby.
The department has requested a second K-9 dog as part of the proposed budget
before Meridian Township Board. There will be a Halloween Open House from 10-
1 on the last Saturday of the month. Equipment will be on display for residents
to inspect as well as child safety seat inspection. Three new marked Tauruses
have been purchased along with one new unmarked car for traffic enforcement.
Will be adding a new 2013 Explorer to the force for Supervisors. Supervisor
cars carry more equipment and are on the road 24/7. The force contracts with a
company out of Detroit for their cars.
Consent Agenda
Trustee Hayes moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the Minutes of the 9/11/12 Township board meeting
Treasurer’s Report, September 2012
Building inspectors report – September 2012
General Fund Accounts Payable paid, checks 19861 – 19882 for a total of
$54,483.54
Police Account Payable checks paid 1034 - 1035 for a total of $49,342.50
Payroll Checks paid 42029 through 42064 and EFTs 145-148 for a total of
$21,370.83
General Account Payable checks to approve 19883 through 19893 for a total of
$2,193.70
Police Account Payable check to approve 1036 for a total of $52.00
Revenue & Expenditure Report
Pending Litigation Report
Seconded by Trustee Williams.
Motion Approved
Planning Commission
Vice Chair Rex LaMore summarized the meeting for the Board. A Public Hearing
regarding wireless communications facilities was held. The Planning Commission
recommended adoption by the Board with minor changes. The Election Committee
formed and met to discuss the election of officers. There are major changes
this year with the election of Chair Fielek and retirements of Trustee Wright
and Commissioner Cook from the Commission and possibly more changes due to the
election in November. The Township has an excellent Planning Commission and
look forward to working with the new appointments by the board.
The Commission is also addressing an item requested by the Zoning Board of
Appeals regarding review of potential splits for parcels on Haslett Rd and
Shoeman Rd. The Commission is continuing review of the Master Plan. The
Economic Analysis chapter is being updated to establish the value of
agricultural use within the Township and the need for protection of this use.
Wireless Communication Facilities.
Vice Chair LaMore reviewed the reason for the recommendations. The State
changed the prerogatives of municipalities to regulate wireless facilities and
developed standards for by right use and special use along with changing the
review time for towers for both current and new facilities.
This could have an impact on the base of the tower footprint. These revision
recommendations are a result of this directive from the state.
The recommendation is to adopt the revisions with the removal of the word
option.
Trustee Wright moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the recommended
revisions to the Williamstown Township Zoning Ordinance Concerning Wireless
Communications Facilities in compliance with the new legislation signed by
Governor Snyder regarding Public Act 110 of 2006 with the removal of the word
“option”.
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion: none
Motion approved.
Unfinished Business
Mitchell Road Speed
Supervisor Martin reminded the Board of approach by Mr. English and
Commissioner Schafer regarding the speed on Mitchell Rd. Chief Hall met with
the Road Commission and Supervisor Martin contacted the Township’s legal
counsel for information on the precedence of the playground issue that Mr.
English had spoken to.
Chief Hall also checked with the State Police regarding the playground issue.
Neither the Road Commission, Legal Counsel or the State Police were aware of
precedence using the school athletic field as part of the definition of
playground as a means to allow the Township to control the speed limit. Though
the speed limit on Williamston Road and Vanneter Rd. is 35, an official
investigation may recommend that they be raised to 45 mph. Chief Hall stated
that from a law enforcement perspective, the department has not seen major
issues to date on Mitchell Rd. The speed limit is 30 mph during beginning and
ending school hours. The Police Department will continue to watch this area and
with good enforcement current speed limit should be safe.
Road Maintenance Proposal
Treasurer Eyster has put together a policy and proposal for budgeting.
Treasurer Eyster explained the report last month gave background information
that the road committee used for their recommendation. Need to look for
additional funds for resurfacing the other through and subdivision roads within
the Township.
It is highly recommended to address resurfacing as it is most cost beneficial
to resurface before needing reconstruction. The road commission will make a
recommendation which roads should be resurfaced each year.
Treasurer Eyster reviewed the funding proposal presented to the Board for
consideration. The proposal recommends that any adjusted fund balance over
$1,000,000 be allocated with 50% towards road capital outlay and 50% for
infrastructure. This would set aside funds for special projects. The amount set
aside would change yearly based on the adjusted fund balance. Anticipate having
funds over $1,000,000 to set aside yearly. Big expenditures are not typical.
This process sets asides the funds that will roll over at the end of the year
and promotes savings for future expenditures. This can be adjusted if it
appears too much money is accumulating in a fund. If put aside for
infrastructure now, the Township shouldn’t see a big draw down of general
funds. Policy can be changed if it is not working as anticipated. Road
committee would make yearly recommendations.
Discussion:
The draft proposal looks good.
Please review prior to the next board meeting.
New Business
Budget 2013-14
The budget approval process has begun. The proposed budget was added to your
packet without major changes. Most changes will be due to increase in grounds
maintenance at the park and cemetery. Please review for the next meeting. Clerk
will be working on insurance. Departments need to meet and look at their
respective budgets.
Anticipated timeline for budget review: Public hearing will be in February with
a vote in March. Revisions need to be complete by January for the Public
Hearing.
Meridian Police Contract 2013-15
Proposed two year contract was in the packet. Only changes are yearly and
hourly amounts were increased. Everything else remained the same. Police
committee met with Chief Hall and Lieutenant Fraiser to review the contract.
Overall comments were positive. The Committee looked at the budget allocation
and it was recommended to approve the contract and lower assessment to $120
residential and $200 for commercial. Trustee Hayes and Treasurer Eyster serve
on the police committee. The projected budget for police expenditures shows if
it was reduced to the suggested assessment and maximum expenses of cost that
would be covered. This did not include county funds at this time until the
audit is completed with the County. Suggest asking the county to do the audit
early next year. Thought Meridian would approve the contract at the November
meeting. Once county completes audit, county funds can be added back in to the
total fund amount.
Trustee Wright moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the continuation
of police services provided by the Meridian Township Police with a new two year
contract with terms to be the same as the past two years except for the dollar
amounts which will be $197,220 per year and $51.75 per hour for all 911 calls
outside of the normal patrol hours with a cap of $22,500 per quarter.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes
Discussion:
Section 5 second to last question. Clarification of the 15th of the month.
Contract based on calendar year.
Total of $90,000 was not used for billable hours. Approximately $16-$17,000 per
year.
Pleased with services received from the police department.
Outcome of ballot proposal has seemed to be the best case scenario for the
Township.
Original figures of $150 and $250 for assessment were taken from Sheriff’s
figures.
Will vote in November on the assessment roll.
Motion approved.
Next step will be approval from Meridian Charter Township Board.
Planning Commission Appointments
Memo from Supervisor regarding changes being made on the PC. Chair Fielek will
be leaving due to election. Ron Cook will be retiring. Annette Davis will
replace Ron Cook and Rick DeShon will replace Mike Fielek. Annette is active in
the community, very thorough and has attended PC meetings. Recommendation was
from Mike Fielek. Rick DeShon works for MSU. Currently serves on the
transportation committee and has shown an interest in serving on the PC. He has
shown a high level of integrity on the transportation committee. Recommendation
came from Kurt Guter. Dali Giese has requested reappointment to the Commission.
Trustee Hayes moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the appointment of
Annette Davis, Rick DeShon and Dali Giese to the Planning Commission for a
three-year term starting November 2012.
Seconded by Trustee Williams.
Discussion: none
Motion approved.
Departments and Committees
·   NEISA is hosting a pancake breakfast on Saturday at the Williamston
station.
·   Joint building authority is meeting on Thursday.
·   New hours have taken effect. Wednesday morning opening has been busy.
·   Will retrieve burn permits on Fridays for the month of October.
·   Recycle is this Saturday. Enclosure is being rebuilt around dumpster. Dart
picking up Styrofoam.
·   Dan Rhines has been hired as of October 1st to help with maintenance.
·   MTA Chapter meeting on October 24th.
·   Homeland Security siren will be set by the building. Will begin working
with the contractors after the election.
·   Zimmer Rd improvements plans should be done soon, waiting for final
engineer approval. Will have a public meeting, possibly in November along with
formal presentation. There will be 4 ft. paved shoulders on both sides. The 4
ft. shoulders increases the life expectancy of the roads. Similar to Haslett
and Williamston Rd. 300 trees may be removed from railroad to Haslett Rd.
Residents have been notified by the Township Supervisor of improvements. The
ICRC held a Public Hearing regarding the improvements and the Supervisor was
the only attendee from the Township.
·   Oct 17th road advisory committee for the County will meet (rep from each
twp.).
·   Garden club created a Memorial in town and had a ribbon cutting to honor
Blue Star Mothers.
·   Today was the last day to register to vote.
Public Comment
Nancy Williams on behalf of the Senior Center: Open house is being held this
Sunday.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 8:36.
Review
Clerk: publication of wireless amendments
Board: Review budget and road policies
Clerk: Swear in PC appointments
Chief Hall: Police Contract
Trustee Hayes moved to adjourn at 8:37.
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner, Clerk
November 13, 2012
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 pm. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order, reviewed the agenda and
led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Williams, Trustee Wright, Clerk Gaffner, Treasurer Eyster,
Supervisor Martin, Trustee Hayes and Trustee Wilbrink
Absent: none
Public Comment
None
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:02
Police Report
Chief David Hall presented the monthly report to the Board. Meridian Twp. Board
voted to unanimously approve the police contract with the Township. Meridian
Police participated as part of the task force to help track leads in the
shooting cases along M-52 and I-94. A suspect has been apprehended. The
department is looking to add a new officer to the force. There are two
prospects currently being interviewed. This would bring the force up to 39
officers. Enjoy working with the township serving the residents.
Consent Agenda
Trustee Hayes moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the Minutes of 10/09/2012 Township board meeting
Treasurer’s Report, October 2012
Building inspectors report – October 2012
General Fund Accounts Payable paid, check 19894-19921 for a total of $18,811.22
Payroll Checks paid 42065 through 42099 and EFT 149-151 for a total of
$20,859.92
General Account Payable checks to approve 19922 through 19937 for a total of
$7,285.48
Police Account Payable check to approve 1037 for a total of $2,869.50
Revenue and expenditure report 10/31/2012
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion:
Pending Litigation #1 has not been settled.
Motion approved.
Planning Commission
Minutes 10/16/12
Chair Fielek reviewed the minutes from the meeting. The Commission deliberated
per the ZBA request of the lot splits and reaffirmed the denial for waiver of
frontage on the two split applications submitted by Gregory Shannon. This will
be submitted to the ZBA for final review.
Reviewed the work that has been done on the Master Plan to date and the need
for the additional funds to complete a thorough review. McKenna has done a
thorough job to date and has added a lot of information. The Commission has
done a more thorough review than anticipated.
Trustee Hayes moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve extending the time
required by the Planning Commission for Completion of the Master Plan and
increase the Budgeted allowance for this process by an amount not to exceed
$4,400.
Seconded by Trustee Wright
Discussion:
Question need for additional funds.
PC has expanded its review.
These funds are dedicated to the MP review.
Has not exceeded budgeted to date.
What was bid and being done has been altered by the PC.
Motion Approved
Chair Fielek thanked the Planning Commission members that are retiring or
moving on to the Board for their dedicated service and also thanked the board
for their support of him as chair.
Unfinished Business
Police Assessment Policy revision
The Board set the police assessment on 1/10/12 however the Board did not have
legal counsel review prior to adopting. The Township’s legal council
recommended revisions to be in compliance with state law. This is the amended
policy. No fundamental changes just clarifications.
Trustee Wright moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve the recommended
revisions to the Police Services Policy Determining Tax Status, Board Policy
#11, per Township legal counsel, effective 11/13/2012.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes.
Discussion:
None
Motion approved
Police Assessment
Supervisor Martin explained that there have been two demolitions. Property
owners have submitted letters requesting removal so those have been removed as
they are now vacant land. After review by all departments, recommend the
current rates. This will still allow the Township to maintain the same service.
Treasurer Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve the police
assessment for the Winter, 2012 tax collection be set at $120.00 for a
residential unit and $200.00 for a business unit, which is approximately 75.4%
of the maximum allowable assessment of $159.14 for a residential unit and
$265.23 for a business unit approved by the Williamstown Township residents in
November 2010. And as part of this motion I move the Williamstown Township
Board amend Resolution 2012-98, confirming the 2012 Special Assessment Roll for
Police Protection within the Township with the Special Assessment Roll total of
$247,260.
Seconded by Trustee Wright
Discussion:
Good to be able to continue lowering the assessment.
Roll Call Vote
Yes: Trustee Wright, Treasurer Eyster, Supervisor Martin, Clerk Gaffner,
Trustee Hayes, Trustee Williams.
No: Trustee Wilbrink.
Motion Approved
Road Maintenance Funding
Clerk Gaffner moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve Board Policy #12,
allowing the Township to apply 50% of the adjusted fund balance above
$1,000,000 to be used for infrastructure capital outlay and 50% of the adjusted
fund balance above $1,000,000 be added to the next year’s road capital outlay
budget.
Seconded by Treasurer Eyster
Discussion:
Number 003 was the original policy setting aside 30,000.
This will be Policy 12. 3 will stand as is.
Infrastructure cap outlay includes: capital improvements to buildings, parks,
roads, etc.
Any use of funds will need to come to the board for approval.
This lays out a way for additional funds for road maintenance and prioritizing
more roads to be taken care of.
Still leaves a good fund balance for the Township.
Motion Approved
Road Maintenance Prioritization
Treasurer Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve Board Policy
#13, for the purpose of annually prioritizing the maintenance of Williamstown
Township roads.
Trustee Williams support.
Discussion:
This policy appears to limit the roads to be addressed, should include all
township roads as recommended by the road commission.
These roads would be top priority, then other roads.
Board would look at this annually
Road recommendation may change
Ask for recommendations from road committee.
Not neglecting other roads.
Should be general recommendations.
Road committee to prioritize which roads were a priority within the Township.
In line with what the county does.
This prioritizes the roads that were felt necessary to be done.
Committee looked at 7 year plan rotation for roads
This is a general framework.
If moneys are not needed for roads listed, monies could go to other roads in
the twp.
County takes care of certain roads that are not listed here.
Committee took into consideration traffic flow and count on the roads.
Took into account traffic type and flow.
Not enough funds to pay for all the road’s maintenance in the Township.
Committee will meet every year and will meet with Road commission to determine
priorities.
Motion fails
Will be brought back for consideration next month.
Budget 2013-14
Some changes have been made to the budget.
Have not gotten anything back from the Parks Committee or Planning Commission.
Clerk will have more info on election budget.
Insurance changes have been turned in.
Treasurer Eyster will meet with the new treasurer, Mike Fielek, to review the
budget.
Contact Supervisor with any comments or suggestions.
Roads will be added and police info will be updated.
With new policy there will be a larger gap between expenditures and revenue.
New Business
Donation Acceptance
A donation of $2000.00 for parks to help maintain and beautify the parks.
Clerk Gaffner moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve acceptance of the
$2,000 donation from Prime Housing Group, to help maintain and beautify the
Township Parks.
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion:
This could apply to hall grounds and GR Community Park.
Residents of Township
Business is rentals.
Motion approved
583 Haslett
Health department has determined that the condition of the property poses a
risk to the public.
This will require legal action. Taxes are current. Not sure if anyone is
currently living there.
The assessor met the owner at the property less than a year ago. Utilities
appear to be on.
Health department cannot condemn the property. Falls on the Township to enforce
action. Could be address under the blight ordinance. It has not been determined
if they have been in contact with the health department.
The township has not sent a letter.
Discussion:
Unsure if the Health Department letter sent certified.
Will need to expend funds to begin process.
The grounds seem to be the problem.
Abandoned boats, equipment, trees down.
Check to see if licenses are updated.
Porsche, trailer, boat and another car appear to be abandoned.
Option to address by the Township prior to turning over to the attorney.
Register letter coming back undeliverable provides more information.
Send letter first with proof of delivery.
Clerk to write letter.
1st step was contacting the county health department.
Departments and Committees
·   Supervisor thanked Trustee Wilbrink and Trustee Wright for all their work
and dedication to the community. Trustee Wright has 12 years of service and
extensive committee work. Trustee Wilbrink has enjoyed serving the residents.
Would be willing to continue service by serving on a committee.
·   NIESA- special meeting to do restructuring and define positions to work
cohesively within the department.
·   Request for Burn along Thatcher Rd. One resident needs notification for
burning due to allergies.
·   Twp. was recognized with the Gold award for environmental leadership. Will
be sending out press releases.
·   This is due to the EECBG Grant and Planning.
Public Comment for agenda & non-agenda items**
Sue Stiffler, 5620 Shoeman Rd.: Regarding 583 Haslett Rd. and volunteer effort
to help the family with issues faced by the Township.
Public Comment closed at 8:18
Review
Clerk Gaffner will update the policies.
McKenna will be advised regarding the Master plan approval.
Clerk Gaffner will write a letter to owners of Haslett Rd.
Trustee Hayes moved to adjourn at 8:20.
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner, Clerk
November 20, 2012
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 2:00 pm. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the agenda.
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Williams, Trustee Imhoff, Clerk Gaffner, Treasurer Fielek,
Supervisor Martin and Trustee Eyster
Absent: Trustee Hayes
Public Comment
None
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 2:02
Consent Agenda
Trustee Williams moved the consent agenda consisting of:
A Budget Amendment adding $2,000 to the Park Restricted fund and reduce the
General Fund Contingency fund by $2,000 for the donation by Prime Housing
Group.
Approve a five year contract with auditors Layton & Richardson, P.C. for $3,300
for year ending March 31, 2013, $3,500 for years ending March 31, 2014 and 2015
and $3,700 for years ending March 31, 2016 and 2017.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Motion Approved
Police Assessment Roll
Trustee Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve the police
assessment for the Winter, 2012 tax collection be set at $120.00 for a
residential unit and $200.00 for a business unit, which is approximately 75.4%
of the maximum allowable assessment of $159.14 for a residential unit and
$265.23 for a business unit approved by the Williamstown Township residents in
November 2010. And as part of this motion I move the Williamstown Township
Board amend Resolution 2012-98, confirming the 2012 Special Assessment Roll for
Police Protection within the Township with the Special Assessment Roll total of
$247,200.
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Supervisor Martin explained that 4 parcels on the original Assessment Roll
would have been over charged and this revision was necessary to correct the
Police Assessment Roll and lower the total assessment by $60.
Roll call vote.
Yes - Supervisor Martin, Clerk Gaffner, Treasurer Fielek, Trustee Eyster,
Trustee Imhoff, Trustee Williams No - None   
Absent, Trustee Hayes   
Motion Approved
Resolution # 72
Clerk Gaffner moved the Williamstown Township Board approve resolution # 72
Investment and Depository Designation Resolution.
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Roll call vote.
Yes - Supervisor Martin, Clerk Gaffner, Treasurer Fielek, Trustee Eyster,
Trustee Imhoff, Trustee Williams No - None   
Absent, Trustee Hayes   
Motion Approved
Resolution # 73
Trustee Williams moved the Williamstown Township Board approve resolution # 73
Bank Signatories.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Roll call vote.
Yes - Supervisor Martin, Clerk Gaffner, Treasurer Fielek, Trustee Eyster,
Trustee Imhoff, Trustee Williams No - None
Absent, Trustee Hayes
Motion Approved
Public Comment
None
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 2:36.
Treasurer Fielek moved to adjourn at 2:38
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner, Clerk
December 11, 2012
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
December 11, 2012
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 pm. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order, reviewed the agenda and
led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Williams, Trustee Imhoff, Clerk Gaffner, Treasurer Fielek,
Supervisor Martin, Trustee Hayes and Trustee Eyster
Absent: none
Public Comment
None
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:02
Police Report
Chief David Hall presented the monthly report to the Board. Transitioning to a
newer model of Taser to be used by officers as existing models need replacing.
Tasers have proven to reduce injuries to both officers and suspects. Have never
used one in WilliamstownTwp. Will fill two positions for new officers in 2013.
Officers are at the range for final low light range shoot this week and next.
Compliance check on liquor establishments were performed in the Township and
all establishments passed. May do one additional by the end of the year.
Burgdorf Winery is not listed through the liquor control commission.
Questions of Chief Hall:
·   Of the monthly arrest how many are twp. residents. Chief Hall will look
into this and bring back to the Board.
·   Tasers can be used for animal control. Recovery is within 5 seconds. May be
used on suspect attempting to run away. New Taser would allow for second shot
in case of a miss.
Consent Agenda
Trustee Hayes moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the Minutes of 11/13/2012 & 11/20/2012 Township board meetings
Treasurer’s Report, November 2012
Building inspectors report – November 2012
General Fund Accounts Payable paid, check 19938-19955 for a total of $15,119.44
Payroll Checks paid 42100 through 42147 and EFT 152-154 with checks 42126,
42136 and 42138 marked void, for a total of $22,399.60
General Account Payable checks to approve 19956 through 19976 for a total of
$13,892.84
Police Account Payable checks to approve 1038 through 1039 with 1038 marked
void for a total of $130.50
Revenue and expenditure report 11/30/2012
Pending Litigation
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion: none
Motion approved.
Planning Commission
Minutes 11/20/12
Chair LaMore addressed the Board summarizing the November 20th minutes. The
Planning Commission welcomed the new commissioners: Rick DeShon and Annette
Davis.
The PC held the Public Hearing regarding Earthcom’s Special Use Permit and Site
Plan. The Planning Commission recommended landscaping of the site on the NE
portion of the parcel, north of the office building and along Corwin Rd. and to
bring the site into compliance with the ordinance in regards to outdoor
lighting. Election of officers was held with the results being, Rex LaMore as
chair, Dali Giese as Vice-Chair and Gerald Eidt as Treasurer. Advised the PC of
charges from the Board on the Master Plan and appreciative of the support
regarding the review process. The PC was pleased regarding the Gold Award the
Township received for the sustainable efforts of the Township.
Supervisor Martin directed the Board to the information that was submitted
today.
Jon Chick representing Earthcom presented background information about
Earthcom. Earthcom builds cell towers and infrastructure of underground cable.
Currently 50 employees with anticipation of up to 75 next year. Currently 2
mature evergreens, one at the NW corner of the office and one closer to the
road.
Discussion:
·   Treasurer Fielek does not feel the landscaping along the north side is
needed.
·   Plans in future to fix or correct non-conformities.
·   Would continue to leave the bridge across the creek on the east side of
site.
·   Have not considered a buffer to control run-off to the creek. Hazardous
materials are not anticipated on the site.
·   Will be storing everything in existing buildings and repairing buildings as
needed.
·   Building on west is two sided.
·   Office staff will be using the west building for parking.
·   Recommendation was to screen along the west side adjacent to Corwin Rd.
·   Concern over amount of space for planting on the west side.
·   Consider making the front building more attractive in lieu of screening.
·   Stairs to the second floor are an additional exit. Does not house an
apartment and is used for additional offices.
Trustee Hayes moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Earthcom site
plan for the property located at 3424 Corwin Road, with the following
conditions: 1) No screening is required. 2) All improvements or alterations to
the land or buildings must be by permit and be in compliance with the Township
Zoning Ordinance in effect at the time of change. 3) All outdoor lighting to be
brought into compliance with Township Ordinance, as recommended by the Township
Planning Commission.
Second by Trustee Imhoff
Discussion:
None
Motion approved.
Trustee Hayes moved to approve the Special Use Permit as recommended by the
planning commission.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Discussion:
·   Non-conformities of the site are addressed on the site plan.
Motion Carried
Unfinished Business
583 Haslett
Clerk Gaffner apprised the Board of the removal of a boat, Porsche and trailer
from the front yard. Lisa McGivern with the Ingham County Health Department
said the Department does not have the authority to condemn the property at this
time.
Clerk Gaffner attempted to reach Sue Stiffler w/o success.
Road Policy
Trustee Eyster noted that there was not an update for the packet.
Discussion:
Question on the three roads determined as priorities and the rational used by
the road committee on selection of these three. Germany Road seems rural
compared to Barry Rd. These issues were addressed as part of the report.
Rational for Germany Rd. is its location half way through the Township and
primarily used by residents while Barry Rd. traffic is used by outside
residents. The report will be brought back to the January meeting for further
discussion.
·   Suggest clarifying the description of Church and Beeman Rd. in the draft
policy.
·   Current policy on road repair is $30,000 set aside each year for roads. New
policy would add 50% of fund balance.
·   Question the need for another policy on township roads. Additional funds
would be used to address the additional roads that need to be repaired.
·   This policy sets criteria for prioritizing the roads for repair besides the
ones that are a priority in the township.
·   Need for some sort of policy to set priorities.
·   Concern over list of roads that are always a priority.
Will continue discussion in January.
Budget 2013-14
Some changes have been made. Please contact the Supervisor with suggestions.
Third and final installment for BSA needs to be included in the budget.
Software has been updated and the payments for the updates have been spread
over three years.
New Business
Burn Permit request
Letter presented from the Hitchcock Bros. regarding the property along Thatcher
Rd. and Grand River Rd. Craig and Mark Hitchcock are requesting a variance from
the Board regarding size of burn piles due to amount of brush removed along
Thatcher Rd. Would like to make the numerous amount of 6x6 piles into two
piles to speed up the removal, burn time and amount of smoke. With creation of
two piles, piles should burn quickly. A few more trees need to be removed and
need different equipment to get them out. In order to tile the land the larger
trees need to come out. Trees will grow into tile unless they are removed.
Discussion:
·   Permit was needed from the Road Commission to remove trees from the right
of way.
·   Did not have permit, stated they were given verbal permission. Would get a
permit before removing more trees.
·   Cannot predict when they will be able to burn as it is dependent on the
prevailing winds in order to lessen the impact for the neighbors.
·   If the Twp. gave permit to burn the brush, maybe a letter from the
residents on Thatcher Rd. agreeing to burn on a certain day should be obtained.
·   Twp. is a representative of residents when granting a burn permit.
·   Would try to locate the piles so that it would be less concern to
neighbors.
·   Consideration needs to be given to the neighbors.
·   Will they insure the fires will be extinguished so they are not smoldering.
·   Would likely let trunks continue to burn. May create a small depression for
larger pieces that would continue to burn.
·   Township will need to approve the burning of these piles. Burn permit will
need to be specific.
·   May be able to make allowances on this permit for activation on days
closed.
·   Need to inform homeowners of this request and get feedback of Township’s
intention of permitting the burn.
·   Proposed pile locations were marked on the site plan.
·   Will dig depression on the day of burning for added safety.
Clerk Gaffner will meet with neighbors on location of burn piles and
anticipation of additional tree removal.
Trustee Imhoff moved to allow the variance regarding the burning to allow the
Hitchcock’s to create two piles as marked on the site plan with understanding
of the neighbors being acceptable to terms.
Trustee Eyster seconded.
Discussion:
·   Would like to see a more specific plan to take to the neighbors.
·   If this is agreeable, another meeting will not be needed.
Motion fails.
Trustee Williams left.
Discussion of how the motion should read to garner approval.
Trustee Williams returned.
Trustee Hayes moved that the board grant authority to Supervisor, Treasurer and
Clerk to review and issue a burn permit with appropriate conditions that are in
general agreement with the neighbors and applicant to be completed within 10
days.
Support by Trustee Imhoff
Discussion:
·   Prefer the burn be completed in the winter.
·   Suggestion that ag-c should have different requirements under the burn
ordinance.
·   Concern with the amount of residential uses adjacent to agricultural uses.
Motion approved.
Clerk Gaffner left.
Park improvements
Board reviewed conceptual material when the MDNR grant was submitted. This
would act as a demonstration site for sustainable building techniques as well
as service. Rotary awarded the Township a grant for $10,000 towards toilets.
$2,000 additional funds available from last month’s donation. Have not received
a bid yet on the toilets.
Clerk Gaffner returned.
Rotary would like a commitment from the board that they will support the
construction of the toilets.
Discussion:
·   This is a conceptual design.
·   Sanitizing liquid used for hand cleaning without water.
·   Water may be needed in the future.
·   Would like to wait until we see estimates before committing to the toilets.
·   Park Committee would like to get complete designs done and restrooms built.
·   Design includes winterized sides and fireplace.
Compensation Commission
Commission sets salaries for the elected officials.
Supervisor is requesting the Board to approve her recommendation of Joyce
Messing and Martin Wright.
Clerk Gaffner moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the appointment of
Martin Wright and Joyce Messing to the Township Compensation Committee.
Second by Treasurer Fielek.
Discussion: none
Motion approved.
Board of Review Appointments
Supervisor expressed her recommendation for board of review appointments.
Clerk Gaffner moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the appointment of
Gerald Eidt, Kurt Guter and Ed Timm to the Board of Review.
Second by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: none
Motion approved.
457 Plan revisions
State and federal laws mandate changes and 457 needs to amended. This will
bring the Township into compliance with Pension Protection Act of 2006.
Treasurer Fielek moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the two
amendments recommended by the Foster Swift legal firm, to bring the Township’s
Non-ERISA retirement plan into compliance with changes in the Federal Law
regulating this plan, commonly called a “457 Plan.”
Seconded by Trustee Williams.
Discussion:
·   Question on when benefits need to be taken.
Motion approved.
Departments and Committees
·   Board of review met with two poverty request along with clerical errors and
PRE’s.
·   Please sign up for MTA if haven’t as of yet.
·   NIESA working on DDA to pass on funds from the NIESA millage.
·   Fine for illegal burns is $500. Recommendation of township would be
considered regarding illegal burning. Fire chief makes final determination.
Financing obtained for a fire truck, ambulance and other equipment needs.
·   JBA will be meeting Thursday morning with the City, Library Foundation,
Township and Senior Center regarding the possibility of a new facility. Waiting
on the Senior Center if they want to continue being a part of the planning.
Public Comment for agenda & non-agenda items
Kenneth Donald.
Considering a purchase of the property between Hitchcock’s and the park on
Grand River.
Issues regarding burning. Would need to seek approval from board for a variance
to burn outside the parameters of the Ordinance.
Public Comment closed at 9:01
                  
Review
·   Earthcom approved with conditions.
·   Clerk- Haslett Rd property
·   Road Policy will be reviewed in January
·   Budget request into Supervisor. Public Hearing will be in March.
·   Clerk, Treasurer and Supervisor will work together on the variance request
for the Hitchcock’s.
·   Park improvements- Supervisor and Parks Committee
·   Amendments will be sent to Burnham and Flower-Clerk
Trustee Hayes moved to adjourn at 9:03.
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner, Clerk
2013 Meeting Minutes
January 8, 2013
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
January 8, 2013
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 pm. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order, reviewed the agenda and
led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Williams, Trustee Imhoff, Clerk Gaffner, Treasurer Fielek,
Supervisor Martin and Trustee Hayes
Absent: Trustee Eyster
Public Comment
Jessica Hudson 3920 N. Williamston Rd. Williamston, MI 48895: Regarding farm
animals in the R-1 District. Asked the Board to have the Planning Commission
review and consider similar amendments to the Zoning Ordinance as was adopted
by the City of Williamston and is being considered by Ingham County.
Police Report
The written report was presented to the Board. Clerk Gaffner, in discussion
with Chief Hall, suggested that it was unnecessary for the Chief or his
representative be present at the meeting for a report unless there was
additional information to present to the Board. The Board was in agreement that
a representative was not necessary, however would like a representative present
on at least a quarterly basis to present an update and allow for questions.
Chief Hall is also available to Board members to answer questions at any time.
Consent Agenda
Trustee Williams moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the Minutes of 12/11/2012 Township board meeting
Treasurer’s Report, December 2012
Building inspectors report – December 2012
General Fund Accounts Payable paid, check 19977-19996 for a total of $7,267.99
Payroll Checks paid 42148 through 42173 and EFT 155-158 for a total of
$18,767.04
General Account Payable checks to approve 19997 through 20015 for a total of
$3,894.69
Police Account Payable Paid checks 1040-1041for a total of $45,095.25
Revenue and expenditure report 12/31/2012
Pending Litigation
Seconded by Trustee Imhoff
Discussion: none
Motion approved.
Planning Commission
No report from the Planning Commission since there was not a December meeting.
Unfinished Business
Budget 2013-14
Supervisor Martin noted the budget comments and changes from Trustee Eyster
reflects the move of the life insurance as a line item to the trustees as this
is a benefit of elected officials.
Contingency set at 40,000.
Police assessment was reduced to reflect the last roll approved.
Communication Commission was moved to wages from consulting fees.
Added $62,215 for infrastructure and $62,215 for road improvement.
Discussion:
·   The budget reflects spending more than taking in. Additional funds spent
reflects the road policy and funding for infrastructure which will be taken
from the fund balance. There is also a fund balance for the police services
that is not reflected in the budget.
·   Still have $120,000 from the county that is not shown.
·   Would like to call for a public hearing for March on the proposed budget at
the next meeting.
·   Spread sheet will show the fund balances, cannot do in this software to
make it part of the budget report.
 
Road Policy
Supervisor Martin reviewed the Policy for prioritizing road resurfacing and
construction.
Clerk Gaffner shared that other municipalities use the PASER system, or
something similar for prioritizing road repair. If not used, then road
prioritizing can become a political issue.
Clerk Gaffner moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve Board Policy #11 ,
establishing a prioritization format for Township road resurfacing and
construction, using the Pavement Surface Rating (PASER) system.
Trustee Hayes support.
Discussion:
·   Desire to see Germany Rd. replaced with Barry Rd. as priority due to the
amount of usage as outlined in the Master Plan. The PASER scale does not
reflect usage.
·   The Road Committee is going to look at all roads in the Township every
year.
·   With a limited amount of funds, this sets a priority for the Board to
consider.
·   PASER is completed every three years.
·   Was the 2011 survey regarding existing condition of Township roads taken
into consideration? Survey of potholes was given to ICRC for road maintenance.
·   PASER system will dictate which roads should take a priority for
maintenance.
·   Priority can change.
Motion approved
New Business
Poverty Guidelines
Supervisor Martin explained that the guidelines must be set each year by the
Board.
Trustee Williams moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the 2013
amendments to the Township Poverty Guidelines Resolution #97.
Supported by Treasurer Fielek
Discussion:
·   The enclosed materials show the federal poverty guidelines. The committee
asked the Board if they felt the Board of Review should consider refund for
credits, etc. be included as income. Credits can be used for refunds on
individual returns.
·   Discussion:
·   Income tax returns are required as part of the application.
·   Board of Review can ask for any information they deem important.
·   Four applications were received this past December
·   Should loans received be considered?
·   Income on IRS 1040 to be deemed income.
·   Board of Review wanted input from Board on considering state & federal
earned income credits, property credits and education credits. Board concurs
they should be considered.
·   Board of Review has discretion between 0 and 100%.
·   The Township guidelines are higher than federal guidelines
Yes: Trustee Imhoff, Treasurer Fielek, Supervisor Martin, Clerk Gaffner,
Trustee Hayes, Trustee Williams
No: none
Motion Approved.
Committee List
Supervisor Martin presented the Committee appointments to the Board.
Discussion:
·   Trustee Imhoff asked that a past member of the Planning Commission remain
on the Commission due to the amount of change in the membership and a
representative of the farming community be appointed.
·   Did not place a representative on the Communications Commission as this is
now regulated by the state and a Communications Commission may not be needed.
Departments and Committees
·   Supervisor Martin reported the Ingham County Road Commission would like to
meet with the Board to present the plans for Zimmer Rd. Would like a couple of
options from the Board members to meet before the commission sets a public open
house for discussion with residents. Public hearings have already been held.
First choice of Wednesday the 16th at 3:00. Alternate: Tuesday after 2:00
Supervisor will send confirmation out to Board members. At this time, a time
line has not been set for work to begin.
·   4494 Beeman Rd.: Repairs have not been completed. Have not received a
response to the letters sent. The building inspector will be sent out to check
on progress. Owner will have to reapply for a building permit to complete the
work as the current permit has expired. Once work is complete an Occupancy
Permit will be granted.
·   Art tour meeting set for Wednesday, January 9, 2013.
·   583 Haslett Rd: Clerk does not have an update. Some improvement has been
made on the outside. Have not had a response to letter sent. Blight Ordinance
can be used to enforce cleanup of property . This is difficult during the
winter months.
·   Recycle is Saturday, January 12th, 2013.
Discussion regarding Ms. Hudson’s situation with the farm animals on her
property:
·   Can be placed on the agenda by the board for the next meeting.
·   This would be a use variance and the Township cannot grant a use variance.
·   Could ask for rezoning.
·   There is an application for a zoning amendment for the zoning ordinance.
Any proposed amendment would affect all R-1 properties.
·   Cannot be considered on a case by case situation as this would be
considered a use variance.
·   This property is near the city, just south of Mitchell Rd. adjacent to the
school property.
·   Zoning ordinance is clear. Help find a solution.
·   Others in 4H have worked with the farming community for raising animals on
appropriately zoned properties.
·   This is more than just a 4-H issue.
·   4-H is a valuable learning experience but need to be aware of the neighbors
and zoning ordinance.
         
Public Comment for agenda & non-agenda items
None
Public Comment closed at 8:02
Review
Supervisor- Poverty guidelines
Clerk- Speak with Chief Hall regarding quarterly review.
Clerk- Road Policy
Supervisor- ICRC
Treasurer Fielek moved to adjourn at 8:05.
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner, Clerk
February 12, 2013
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
February 12, 2013
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 pm. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order, noted a correction on the
agenda that Cable Commission should read Communications Committee, and led the
Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Williams, Trustee Imhoff, Clerk Gaffner, Treasurer Fielek,
Supervisor Martin and Trustee Hayes
Absent: Trustee Eyster
Public Comment
None
Closed at 7:02.
Consent Agenda
Trustee Hayes moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the Minutes of 1/08/2013 Township board meeting
Treasurer’s Report, January 2013
Building inspectors report – January 2013
General Fund Accounts Payable paid, check 20016-20039 for a total of $20,981.83
Police Account Payable Paid check 1042 for $38.00
Payroll Checks paid 42174 through 42211 and EFT 159-166 for a total of
$22,321.85
General Account Payable checks to approve 20040 through 20052 for a total of
$6,394.31
Revenue and expenditure report 1/31/2013
Reschedule March Board Meeting to 3/13/2013 due to conflict on 3/12/2013
Budget Amendment (Move $20 from contingency 101-890-965.000 to 101-851-714.001)
Pending Litigation
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion: none
Motion approved.
Planning Commission
Board representative to the Planning Commission, Rick Williams answered
questions from Board members regarding the minutes.
Discussion items included:
Contracting of road maintenance and improvements on County Roads
Community support and questions of additional access across the Red Cedar River
Unfinished Business
Budget 2013-14
Supervisor Martin reviewed the budget and reminded the Board that the Budget
needs to go to Public Hearing next month.
Discussion:
·   The budget reflects granting the senior center $5000. Questioned how other
communities support the senior center and the percentage of resident users of
the center. Nancy Williams, Senior Center Director, stated that Leroy Township
had contributed $1200 in the past as a onetime donation. She was unsure of the
percentage of users that are residents but that it was mostly city residents,
then Williamstown residents. The Board was in consensus to be in alignment with
other municipality support and to change the amount of support to the senior
center to $1200.00.
Treasurer Fielek moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve holding a public
hearing on the proposed 2013-2014 Williamstown Township Budget and the Police
Assessment Roll at 6:30 PM on March 13, 2013.
 
Seconded by Trustee Imhoff
Discussion: none
Motion Approved
New Business
Supervisor Martin stated the following properties were in non-conformance with
the zoning ordinance and to date had not made an effort or submitted a time
line to come into compliance.
3920 Williamston Rd.
Resident in the R-1 district with farm animals. The Township Zoning Ordinance
does not permit farm animals in this district as it does in other districts
within the township. This is the highest density residential district within
the township. Asked for a time line to come into compliance, however the owner
has not submitted one as of this date. The Board is in agreement to turn this
matter over to the Township Attorney. The Right to Farm Act only protects farms
that are in districts were farming is allowed.
Jessica Hudson, resident of 3920 Williamston Rd. addressed the Board. She was
not in agreement with the Board that the property needed to be zoned for Ag use
to permit farm animals and that the Right To Farm Act protected her right
within any district. Board will refer the non-compliance to the Township
Attorney. Supervisor Martin will keep the Board updated.
1235 Grand River Rd.
Photography studio has an apartment above the studio without the appropriate
permits or approval from the Board as required in the Zoning Ordinance. This
zoning district does not allow non-commercial use. Owner has not responded to
letters requesting compliance.
The Board was in consensus to refer the non-compliance to the Township
Attorney.
168 Haslett
Owner is out of compliance of the Zoning Ordinance with a non-commercial
kennel. Has been in contact with the Township, however at this time has not
submitted a timeline to come into compliance with the Zoning Ordinance. The
Board was in consensus to refer the non-compliance to the Township Attorney.
Communications Committee
Supervisor Martin explained that with the new state laws the Township no longer
has control over franchise agreements and negates the need for a Communications
Committee. Complaints need to go to the Public Service Commission. Residents
Kurt Guter and Marv Thompson have volunteered to help as needed.
Clerk Gaffner moved the Williamstown Township Board approve removing the
Communications Committee from the list of Township Committees.
Seconded by Trustee Imhoff
Discussion:
·   Extremely pleased with the efforts of this committee and appreciative of
the expertise provided in the past.
·   Concern over the wording of the motion. Clerk Gaffner and Trustee Imhoff
accepted a friendly amendment to remove the word approved from the motion.
Motion Approved.
Branch School Security
Supervisor Martin reviewed the quote from Central Security with options of
supplying security service at the Branch School. Central Security currently
provides the service at the Township Hall. This would provide protection for
the artifacts at the school.
Discussion:
·   Would be similar to the service provided at the Township Hall. Central
Security would contact Supervisor Martin first before dispatching Meridian
Police Department.
·   Incident of vandalism during the rehabilitation of the school, however
nothing since.
·   Motion lights have been installed outside.
·   Question whether this would provide fire alarm
·   Police can respond quickly
Consensus of the Board to send this to the Historical Committee for a
recommendation on the system to install and approval of budget funds to cover
the expense and to also request a quote for a fire alarm.
Board of Review Appointment
Supervisor Martin recommended Mike Rice as an alternate for the Board of
Review.
Clerk Gaffner moved approval of Mike Rice for an alternate to the Board of
Review.
Second by Trustee Williams.
Discussion:
·   Mike recently retired from the MSU police department and has been a long
term resident of the Township.
·   He had approached the Township about volunteering on a committee.
Motion Approved
Departments and Committees
·   Supervisor Martin reported on the Zimmer Rd. Improvements open house. The
landscaping is going to change with many trees being removed and utility poles
moved. The bridge will be replaced. Work on the bridge will commence around
July 1st, 2013 and will be completed in approximately 4 to 5 months. Planning
Chair, Rex LaMore expressed his concern over the design of the bridge as he
felt it did not reflect the rural character of the Township. The Ingham Road
Department is willing to work with the Township on design. The County plans to
have all improvements done as quickly as possible for the least disruption to
residents.
·   Treasurer Fielek stated the Township would be open from 9-5 on Thursday,
February 13th, for tax payments and again on February 28th. The 28th is the
last day to make payment at the Township before taxes are turned over to the
County for collection.
·   Assessment notices will be going out the last week of February. The
Township and the region have seen an increase in land values. The CPI for 2013
Taxable Value is 2.4%.
·   Supervisor Martin asked the Board to mark their calendars in May for the
Spring Clean Up and Art Tour. Volunteers are needed for both events held the
first two weekends of May.
·   Supervisor Martin, along with Treasurer Fielek, Trustee Imhoff and Planning
Assistant Bloomquist attended the MTA conference. This helps keep the Board up
to date on issues that concern the Township and what issues are affecting other
Townships.
Public Comment
Jessica Hudson, 3920 N. Williamston Rd.; Regarding MAEAP Verification for her
site is almost complete and questioned the use of Township funds regarding her
compliance with the Township Ordinance.
Public Comment closed at 7:38
Clerk: Swear in Mike Rice
Supervisor: Issues referred to legal counsel
Supervisor: Historical Committee
Trustee Hayes moved to adjourned at 7:45
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner, Clerk
February 27, 2013
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
February 27, 2013
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 5:00 pm. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the agenda,
consisting of one item, discussion of the proposed Zimmer Road bridge over the
Red Cedar River.
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Imhoff, Clerk Gaffner, Treasurer Fielek, Supervisor Martin and
Trustee Hayes
Absent: Trustee Eyster and Trustee Williams
Public Comment
None
Closed at 5:02.pm
Discussion
The original Zimmer road bridge railing design is standard concrete with
horizontal metal tubing. Members of the Township Board and Planning Commission
were interested in possible options that might be more aesthetically in line
with the rural character of the Township. The Ingham County Road Commission
provided three options for the Township Board to consider, in lieu of using the
original design.
1.   A tinted application sealer at an initial Township cost of $500-$1,000 and
continuing maintenance costs of $8,000-$10,000 every 5 years.
2.   “Form Liner” option, modifying the concrete railing walls with a pattern,
with a Township cost estimated between $20,000 and $50,000.
3.   A “Texas T Railing” with a Township cost of $30,000.
Board members, along with Planning Commission chair Rex LaMore, discussed the
three options presented and the costs associated with the options and decided
none of them really demonstrated the true character of the Township and the
costs associated with the options were more than the benefit provided.
Trustee Hayes moved that the board approve spending up to $10,000 for a bridge
railing design that would be more in line with the rural character of
Williamstown Township, so long as a desgn change did not delay the Zimmer Road
project. Any change in design would require approval of the Township Board.
Motion seconded by Clerk Gaffner
The Motion Passed
Trustee Hayes moved to adjourn at 5:45
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner, Clerk
March 13, 2013
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
March 13, 2013
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order, reviewed the agenda and
led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Imhoff, Clerk Gaffner, Treasurer Fielek, Supervisor Martin,
Trustee Eyster, Trustee Williams and Trustee Hayes
Public Comment
Frans Wilbrink, 4107 Zimmer: Regarding the bridge allocation funds of $10,000.
Recommends the Board to decline raises.
Nancy Williams, 131 Bismark St.: Grateful of support of the Township to the
Senior Center. 40% of attendees are Twp. residents. City provides the Senior
Center with a building, utilities and phone. Would like to see the $5000
reinstated.
Supervisor Martin closed Public Comment at 7:09
Police Report
Chief Hall presented the Annual and Quarterly Reports to the Board and felt the
year had started out well.
The Citizen Academy begins in the fall and runs for 9 weeks. Youth Academy
begins Thursday the 14th, with 3 Township students participating. The Academy
runs for 2 hours a night for 6 weeks. Most students participating are
interested in law enforcement. The department has activated on-line reporting.
There is a link on the Meridian Township site to allow a report to be submitted
on line which is then addressed by the shift Sargent. Provides an alternative
for callers that don't feel they need to see an officer. This is available to
Township residents. The Township can provide a link to the Meridian site for
this feature.
Chief Hall entertained questions from the Board:
"   Usefulness of social media: Has helped catch some criminals with posting of
photos. Residents can subscribe to Nixel news feeds. The Annual Report list
number of cases solved or identification made with social media. Has helped
solve between 20-35 cases a year.
"   January and February patrol hours have declined. The Township will receive
the minimum patrol hours per the contract. On-line reporting is factored in as
part of administrative cost. If this led to an investigation, additional
charges may be incurred.
"   Thank you to Meridian Police Department for the detailed report.
Consent Agenda
Trustee Hayes moved the consent agenda consisting of:
   Approve the Minutes of 2/12/2013 & 2/27/13 Township board meetings
   Treasurer's Report -January 2013 revised and February 2013
   Building inspectors report - February 2013
   General Fund Accounts Payable paid, check 20053-20068 for a total of
$10,615.09
   Payroll Checks paid 42212 through 42239 and EFT 167-172 with check 4224
marked void, for a total of $22,978.34
   General Account Payable checks to approve 20069 through 20086 for a total of
$3,827.70
   Revenue and expenditure report 2/28/2013
   Budget Amendment (Move $250 from contingency 101-890-965.000 to Building and
Grounds/Snow removal 101-265-704.000)
   Pending Litigation
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: None
Motion Approved
Planning Commission
Minutes 2/19/13
Trustee Williams entertained questions from the Board. After much discussion
the recommendation of the Planning Commission on the bridge design was to leave
it as originally proposed.
Budget 2013-14
Two corrections in the police assessment roll were noted with the corrected
amount $246,360. This is correct in the budget. Any further corrections will be
addressed in November.
Discussion:
"   Senior Center Grant: Once the budget is approved they are dedicated funds.
This amount can change yearly. The funds are for programming only and cannot be
used for administration per state statute. Would like to have the number of
Township residents that use the center, not just the percentage. Further
information as to other municipalities' donation besides the city was not
provided.
"   Capital Outlay under trustees of $62,615 would require board approval.
"   Publications: 101-209-002 has 0 and needs to have at least $150.
"   Budget addresses the Cemetery, General Fund and Police.
Police Assessment Roll
Clerk Gaffner moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve Resolution 2013-98,
Confirming the 2013 Special Assessment Roll for Police Protection Within the
Township with the Special Assessment Roll total of $246,360.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes
Discussion:
Should the minutes reflect publishing the amount of the special assessment and
what the maximum could have been. This is part of the resolution. Would like to
take paragraphs 4 and 5 from the resolution and make it part of the minutes.
Roll Call vote. Yea: Trustee Imhoff, Trustee Eyster, Treasurer Fielek,
Supervisor Martin, Clerk Gaffner, Trustee Hayes and Trustee Williams.
Motion Approved.
The 2013 Special Assessment Roll shall be levied and collected together with
the Township's 2013 winter tax collections, in an amount of $120.00 per
residential unit and $200.00 per industrial or commercial business in December
2013.
The amount proposed to be specially assessed in 2013 is less than the maximum
amount permitted by the Township voters, which was $163.91 per residential unit
and $273.18 for each industrial or commercial business in 2013. In future
years, the maximum special assessments may increase by not more than 3%
annually.
Budget
Discussion:
The compensation committee's recommendations will be included in the budget if
approved. There can be a separate motion to accept the recommendations of the
compensation commission if the Board desires.
Clerk Gaffner moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve the 2013-2014
Township Budget as presented in the Public Hearing on March 13, 2013 with a
beginning Township Total Fund Equity of $1,730,678 as of March 31, 2012
including the compensation commission recommendation.
Seconded by Treasurer Eyster
Discussion:
"   Compensation Committee's recommendation should be added to the budget
before the budget hearing.
"   Concern over the raise to officers when the office has fewer hours.
"   The work did not decrease due to decrease in office hours.
"   Salary has been unchanged for 5 years. The duties of the Trustees have not
changed while the duties of the officers have increased.
"   Officers are diligent in their duties.
"   Office hours have only reduced 3 hours.
"   5 % raise for the first year and 4% for the second year.
"   Board turned down the last raise recommended.
"   Duties change as state dictates.
"   Unsure if a roll call vote is needed.
Roll Call vote. Yea: Trustee Eyster, Treasurer Fielek, Supervisor Martin, Clerk
Gaffner and Trustee Hayes.
    Nay: Trustee Imhoff and Trustee Williams.
3920 Williamston Rd.
The Board has received a confidential letter from the Township Attorney
regarding the alleged zoning violations in the R-1 district.
The Board has the option of going into closed session or making the letter
public.
Consensus of the Board to move this to the last item on the agenda and to go
into closed session.
JBA funding
Supervisor Martin and Treasurer Fielek are the two members of the board serving
on the joint building authority. Since there will be expenditures, the Board
needs to decide how much they are willing to spend. It is proposed to split the
expenses with the City of Williamston. The Board will need to pass a motion and
the Township would then have legal counsel draw up an agreement to present to
the city council.
Discussion:
"   Estimation of cost: JBA authority documents for ballot language may run
approximately $27,000 total. Did meet with the library foundation and senior
center and they were not willing to share in the cost. The City and Township
feel it is a worthy project and that a building could be used by both
organizations. Both serve the residents of the area. Funding would come out of
the general fund.
"   Suggest looking at this in two phases. One with cost to come up with a plan
to bring to the board to decide if it should take to the voters for a decision.
Suggest authorizing this portion now.
"   Recommended outcomes could include:
   Senior center and library in two separate buildings.
   Both to stay in existing building renovated
   Use of the site the library is proposing for both entities
   Alternate site for both.
"   First part for feasibility study of the above alternatives, to procure a
consultant.
"   A lot of drawings have been done but need to find out more to bring details
back to boards for approval.
"   Suggest an allocation $10,000 to begin the process.
"   Could cost upwards of $25,000 to take a ballot proposal to the residents.
"   May be able to roll in the cost of ballot language if it is approved.
Possibility that this may not move forward.
"   Do we need a survey of residents? The Library Foundation has done some
research and may build on existing information.
"   Does not include other municipalities.
"   Obstacle from lack of participation from surrounding communities.
"   Would CADL look at participating in cost? They do not provide the building.
Will look at how CADL can help. The last millage proposal for buildings failed.
"   Concern over consultant cost and allocation in motion.
"   Considered using McKenna- not placing out for bids.
"   Up to $10,000.
"   $10,000 for engineers, consultant, possibly survey of area.
"   Could this come out of consulting fee which is already in the budget.
Trustee Hayes moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve up to $10,000 to
equally sharing expenses with the City of Williamston in establishing a Joint
Building Authority for the purpose of establishing the feasibility of building
a multi-use building which would include a public library and space for a
community senior center.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion:
"   Do we need to discuss where the funds would be allocated from the budget.
"   Wait until the city addresses the issue.
"   Concern of the funds coming out of the general budget.
"   Concern of taking money from roads.
"   Attorney would draft agreement.
Motion approved.
NEW BUSINESS
Internet Drop
Supervisor Martin explained that The living church of God uses the building
weekly and they would like to have a stronger signal here at the hall. Church
of God would be responsible for the cost of any improvements.
Discussion:
"   The need for a policy for board and planning commission.
"   The Township does not have a policy for other users.
"   Will look into this with freedomnet.
"   Use for residents during an emergency would be helpful.
Meeting Dates 2013-14
Discussion included:
December Board of Review is the 10th and in March it is scheduled the same as
the March Board Meeting.
Move March meeting date to Wednesday, March 12th due to Board of Review.
Change December meeting date to Wednesday, December 11th.
Trustee Hayes moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve the scheduled
meeting dates, as amended, for fiscal year 2013-2014.
Seconded by Trustee Imhoff
Discussion: none
Motion approved
REPORTS
Departments & Committees
Clerk Gaffner: The special meeting on the 27th it was decided to allocate up to
$10,000 for bridge design so long as the change did not delay the project.
However after speaking with Ingham County Department of Transportation and
Roads engineer, Rob Peterson, the options available would be costly and design
changes would cause delays. The bridge design is similar to one over the Red
Cedar River on Dobie Rd.
Supervisor Martin addressed the meeting of the MTA chapter held at the Township
and guest speaker Stacy Byers spoke about the farm land preservation program.
Have had farms accepted but not participate in the program.
There is a joint meeting Tuesday, March 19th, at Meridian Township and
encourage attendance by the Board.
Trustee Imhoff updated the Board regarding the Road Committee. Shoesmith Rd
will receive an overlay of asphalt. There are concerns of the Barry and Shoeman
Rd intersection and the plans to raise the intersection when funds become
available. Federal funds are not available for Sherwood between Williamston and
Zimmer Rd. The ICDTR will wedge, chip and seal at no cost to the Township.
Trustee Hayes moved to go into closed session for the purpose to consider
material that is exempt from discussion from state or federal statute.
Second by Clerk Gaffner.
Roll Call: Yea: Trustee Imhoff, Trustee Eyster, Treasurer Fielek, Supervisor
Martin, Clerk Gaffner, Trustee Hayes and Trustee Williams.
Board went into closed session at 8:40.
Board came out of closed session at 9:10.
3920 N. Williamston Rd.
Supervisor Martin asked Mrs. Hudson if farm animals are still being kept at
3920 N. Williamston Rd. Mrs. Hudson answered in the affirmative.
Clerk Gaffner moved that due to non-compliance with the Township Ordinance at
3920 N. Williamston Rd., that the Board authorizes the Township Legal Counsel
to take further action.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion:
"   Believe the resident is not in compliance and has been properly informed.
Motion approved
Public Comment
Megan Allen, Dietz Rd. Williamston: regarding making the correspondence with
legal counsel available to the public.
Frans Wilbrink, 4701 Zimmer Rd. Williamston: questioning the address of the new
website, Transparency of the Board with regards to the raises, the posting of
the date change for this evenings meeting with concerns to the open meeting act
and the posting of the agenda being available on the website.
Clerk Gaffner will continue posting the agenda on the web and at the Township
Hall.
Megan Allen, Dietz Rd. Williamston: Regarding the importance of residents being
allowed to raise their own food and understanding the issue with the farm
animals at 3920 N. Williamston Rd.
Supervisor Martin responded explaining the zoning districts and a resident's
option to live in certain districts. Farm animals are allowed in all of the
residential districts except two. The Board cannot violate the zoning
ordinance.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 9:30
Trustee Hayes informed the Board that NIESA is revising their billing system.
Concern over language being proposed. They are recommending a change regarding
a spill or clean up not involving a fire to enable NIESA to invoice. Need to
look at the agreement. Will bring this back to the board with further details.
NIESA purchased a new ladder truck for $300,000 with a portion of the cost
covered by Federal dollars.
Supervisor Martin pointed out an article in the MTA magazine that explained an
agenda is not required by statute and that an agenda remains a draft until the
board has adopted it. Board can make it a policy as to how to post the agenda.
Also, Township mail is to be received by the Clerk.
Review
Budget will be finalized.
Meeting dates will be posted.
JBA-Supervisor
Internet- Supervisor
Trustee Hayes moved to adjourn at 9:40.
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner, Clerk
April 9, 2013
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
April 9, 2013
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Mickey Martin called the meeting to order, reviewed the agenda and
led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Imhoff, Clerk Gaffner, Treasurer Fielek, Supervisor Martin,
Trustee Eyster and Trustee Hayes
Absent: Trustee Williams
Public Comment
Mike McCurdy 548 Okemos Rd. Okemos, MI : His belief that The Right to Farm Act
supports the Hudson's keeping of animals.
Public Comment closed at 7:03
Consent Agenda
Clerk Gaffner moved the consent agenda consisting of:
   Approve the Minutes of 3/13/2013 Public Hearing
   Treasurer's Report -March 2013
   Building inspectors report - March 2013
   General Fund Accounts Payable paid, check 20087-20113 for a total of
$141,080.57
   Police Account Payable Paid checks 1043-1044 for a total of $51,018.75
   Payroll Checks paid 42240 through 42271 and EFT 173-176 with check 4224 for
a total of $20,283.10
   General Account Payable checks to approve 20114 through 20122 for a total of
$10,971.08
   Revenue and expenditure report 3/31/2013
Pending Litigation
Seconded by Treasurer Fielek
Discussion: Board Minutes of 3/13/2013 will be discussed under Board and
Committee reports.
Motion Approved
Planning Commission
Minutes 3/19/13
Board representative Williams was not available for report.
Discussion:
"   Board report in minutes appears biased.
"   Questions regarding discussion of a tree ordinance.
"   Question regarding urban farming.
"   Would like to see the chair or vice chair at the meetings.
"   Will ask a representative of the commission to attend the Board meeting.
Branch School Security
Supervisor has explained that the historical committee has reviewed the
proposal and is in support of using funds from the budget for the school to pay
for the security.
Discussion:
"   Choice between alarm and surveillance system. Each were priced separately
and added together.
"   Comfortable with pricing compared to home system.
"   Better chance to recover property.
"   Historical Committee requested the surveillance system.
"   With police patrol the surveillance seems to be excessive.
"   Small investment compared to historical items at the school.
"   Fire and break in coverage necessary.
"   Surveillance can identify intruders.
"   Monitor would be at the school.
"   Question the need for a monitor.
"   Classroom use for educational purposes.
"   This would come out of historical budget.
"   Cameras are included.
"   Monitor both inside and outside.
"   Delay for questions. Suggest board members call Central Security with any
questions.
Treasurer Fielek moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve the installation
of the Central Security Alarm and Surveillance System at the Branch School at a
cost of $2,937 $3,935 and a monthly maintenance fee of $34 to be paid from the
Historical budget.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Discussion:
"   Monthly fee good for 1 year.
"   Maintenance contract included with pricing.
"   Alarm system in place at the Township Hall.
"   Is there a package deal with adding branch school?
"   Rentals almost weekly.
"   Board should form a security committee.
"   Historical committee waited for this budget year for funding.
"   Part of this comes from earmarked donation.
Motion approved
Internet Service
Living Church of God had requested the Township look into the internet service
for them to use when they are here. Supervisor Martin looked into their request
as directed by the Board.
Freedomnet would charge $275 to set up with $35 monthly charge. The church uses
skyping services and they would like a cat 5 access.
Discussion:
"   Need to make sure they are not connected to the Township network.
"   Need to research further. Not ready for a final decision.
"   Could offer this to other groups that rent the hall and could turn the
service on and off.
"   Planning Commission is desiring internet access at the Planning Commission
meetings.
NEW BUSINESS
Park Restroom
Packet of information for the proposed township restroom at the park. The
Rotary donation of $10,000 towards a restroom and $2000 dedicated funds to the
park for a net donation of $12,000 for a composting toilet. Proposal is for a
kit. Rotary Club has offered to volunteer labor for installation. Comes
standard with pine board and baton. The Township would choose a different
siding that would be maintenance friendly.
Discussion:
"   The board has looked at various ways to fund these improvements including
grants. These efforts have not been successful to date.
"   Would like the board to add the pavilion this year. Move forward with
pavilion as bare bones and add amenities as funds become available. Would like
to pursue.
"   The plan is to separate the restroom from the pavilion.
"   The pavilion at the Township Hall receives a fair amount of use.
"   Does the Township have a policy for dumping of human waste?
"   Toilet by the fields is paid for by the teams using the fields.
"   Location of toilet is concern.
"   Concern of cold weather and the effect on the composting issue.
"   Solar to run the fan.
"   Looking for board support to move forward with design.
"   Life span on building.
"   Cost of well and septic would increase the cost exponentially.
"   Cost seems expensive to replace port-a-john.
"   In keeping with Green Zone.
"   A great option for the park.
Consensus to move forward.
Road Policy Revision
Road committee met and reviewed the policy. Main three roads as outlined would
be focused on for review annually.
Beeman Rd. went to a rating of 5, however will stay a 5 for 4-5 years.
The changes in language clarify the review process of the roads.
Trustee Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve revisions to Board
Policy #12, Prioritizing Road Resurfacing and Construction, allowing for the
annual evaluation of Township Roads by the Township road committee.
Seconded by Clerk Gaffner
Motion approved
REPORTS
Departments & Committees
Minutes of 3/13/13
Trustee Imhoff suggested the following amendments: Remove "for the next three
years" because of the urban service boundary. Add: The Ingham County Department
of Transportation and Roads will wedge, chip and seal at no cost to the
Township.
Treasurer Fielek moved to approve the minutes as amended by Trustee Imhoff.
Supported by Trustee Hayes.
Motion approved.
The TriCounty Urban Service Management committee has worked on a boundary to
help regional growth and in fill the area. The Bus tour is to highlight the
farms preserved with the Ingham County Farm Preservation and the urban
redevelopment that has taken place. Recommended to board members to attend the
tour and see what is happening regionally.
The Homeland Security siren is installed, functioning and has been tested.
Nice letter from a resident regarding service received from the Meridian police
department.
Recycling information: Rebate price fluctuates monthly on commodities.
Commodity payment is deducted off the total of the bill. 3.4 months of
recycling fee is saved with the rebates received. Northwest out of Jackson is
providing the service to the Township.
Spring cleanup is next Month during recycling.
Need volunteers for the cleanup and art tour.
Spring cleanup: Would like to see any profits that are made off of the metal be
used for improvements to the ball field at the Township Hall. Proceeds would be
used for benches, backdrop, and field work. Still time to get the word out.
Board was in consensus.
Public Comment
Jessica Hudson 3920 N. Williamston Rd.: Regarding: Pending litigation.
Disappointed Township is using funds to pursue. Working with school to create a
visiting animal farm.
Megan Allen 2511 Dietz Rd. Webberville.: Disappointed the Township is
continuing litigation against the Hudson family. Lines on the zoning map do not
make sense. Movement in Lansing to allow farm animals.
The Zoning Ordinance should not apply with concern to the Hudson's.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 8:24
Review
School security- Supervisor/Clerk
Park Restrooms: Supervisor and Parks and Rec Chair
Road Policy: Clerk
Trustee Hayes moved to adjourn at 8:28.
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner, Clerk
May 14, 2013
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
May 14, 2013
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Clerk Gaffner called the meeting to order and led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Imhoff, Clerk Gaffner, Treasurer Fielek, Trustee Williams,
Trustee Eyster and Trustee Hayes
Absent: Supervisor Martin
Treasurer Fielek moved the Board appoint Clerk Gaffner to chair the meeting in
Supervisor Martin’s absence.
Seconded by Trustee Imhoff
Motion approved.
Clerk Gaffner reviewed the agenda.
Public Comment
none
Public Comment closed at 7:03
Library Report
Head librarian of the Williamston Library, Julie Chrisinske, handed out the
(CADL)Capital District Library Annual Report. The Williamston Library has seen
an annual increase of visitors for the 3rd consecutive year with the 2012
visits being 69,000. 500 youth participated in the summer program. Wireless
usage has increased as well as digital downloads of books. Reviewed some of the
programs that took place this past year and ways the library participated in
community activities.
2012 CADL changed their logo and tag line. CADL is a system of libraries
throughout Ingham County, not just one large library.
The Board of Directors adopted the following core services:
·   Community Involvement
·   Expert Assistance
·   Access to technology
·   Access to books, movies & more
·   Public gathering place
·   Events to inform and entertain
Friends hold book sales quarterly to help with programming. June 1st is the
summer book sale.
Julie reviewed the programs for 2013.
Questions:
·   Website information: CADL.org
·   Directions for digital downloads are on the website.
·   Number of visits is the Williamston Branch only.
Consent Agenda
Trustee Hayes moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the Minutes of 4/09/2013 Township board meeting including Branch School
Alarm and Surveillance System approved dollar amount of $3,935
Treasurer’s Reports –Amended March 2013 and April 2013
Building inspectors report – April 2013
General Fund Accounts Payable paid, check 20123-20157 for a total of $22,639.49
Police Account Payable Paid check 1045 for a total of $1,018.00
Payroll Checks paid 42272 through 42310 and EFT 177-184 for a total of
$23,297.12
General Account Payable checks to approve 20158 through 20167 for a total of
$2,940.93
Revenue and expenditure report 4/30/2013
Pending Litigation
Seconded by Treasurer Fielek
Discussion:
City pulse: art tour advertising
B&S: Park Equipment
Motion Approved
Planning Commission
Minutes 4/23/13
Chair LaMore addressed the Board and reviewed the minutes of the Planning
Commission meeting held on 4/23/13. At the request of the Board, the Planning
Commission will send a representative of the Planning Commission to the Board
meetings.
Pursuant to the State Planning Act, the Draft Master Plan is ready to submit to
adjoining jurisdictions, Tri-County Planning and the utility companies upon
approval of the Board. The Planning Commission will be holding a Public Hearing
on the review of the complete ordinance at the May 21st meeting. The Commission
formed a subcommittee that reviewed Woodhull Township’s Master Plan and a
comment letter has been sent to them on behalf of the Planning Commission.
Questions:
·   The Board can wait to authorize review if they would like more time to
review the Master Plan before distribution.
·   Planning Commission is ready for review.
·   This is not approval of the master plan- just authorization for
distribution.
Treasurer Fielek moved the board authorize distribution of the draft master
plan for review and comment to the appropriate agencies and municipalities.
Second by Trustee Imhoff
Discussion:
·   Very thorough review.
·   Caught a few typo’s
·   Law requires every 5 years, however may consider an intense review every 10
years after census data is received . Every 5 years look for major changes in
the community.
·   This year’s data shows a redirection of growth.
Motion approved.
Question on minutes:
Board would like to review the annual report. Planning Assistant Bloomquist
will send to the Board members.
NEW BUSINESS
Cemetery Civil War Veterans
Treasurer Fielek reported on the proposal from Patricia Shelly in conjunction
of the 150 year commemeration of the Civil War to recognize and identify civil
war veterans. There may be some that have not been recognized. Suggest looking
at funding for this project. If determined the township would like to put in
special markers then would look for grants for the markers. The Cemetery
Committee agreed to have her go forward with preliminary work on this project.
She will gather historical data and possibly find relatives, etc. This is part
of a national project.
The Township does not have a list of civil war veterans buried in the
cemeteries.
Trustee Williams will look into support from the American Legion for the
project.
Treasurer Fielek has a copy of her proposal to share with Board members if
interested
Parks and Recreation Plan
Motion by Trustee Eyster to authorize McKenna Associates to update the master
plan at a cost not to exceed $2000.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes
Discussion:
·   Every 5 years required by the state to update if applying for state grants.
·   Cost out of Parks and Rec Budget? Would come out of Consultants under
trustees.
·   Was this part of the approved Budget?
·   Can not put consulting fee under parks and rec.
·   PC does not review parks and rec plan or cemetery.
·   Is not part of the PC Consulting Budget.
·   Would like the PC to review and comment.
Motion approved.
REPORTS
Departments & Committees
·   Art Tour: Attendee numbers were up approximately 25%. Should be able to put
up more equipment this year. Artists seemed pleased with overall sales. Wrap up
meeting being held May 22nd.
·   Spring Clean-up: Successful event. Collection of refuse was up. 2/3 of a 90
yard dumpster of metal collected, tech items were hot as well as televisions,
reviews are positive. Money in budget to provide this service. Thanked everyone
for their help in the event. Good community support! Consider adding a second
time of the year to give people time to clean up more through the summer.
Better advertising would help. Weather cooperated.
·   Joint Meeting with the City May 30, 13 at 7:00 at City Hall.
·   Elections: school sinking fund millage failed to pass. Clerk viewed the
turn out. Question if the proposal was required to be by itself or can it be
part of other ballot proposals, general elections.
·   Tri-County Bus Tour: Trustee Eyster attended the bus tour. Began on farms
and ended at city market. Very interesting. Exposure to attendees from urban
areas was insightful. Reviewed what Delhi Township has done with the Urban
Services Boundary. The idea to infill where infrastructure is present. Suggest
they do again next year. Approximately 40 people attended.
·   Grand River Charrette: Trustee Eyster, PC Chair LaMore and Planning
Assistant Bloomquist attended different meetings throughout the week. Rapid
transit will go from Capital to Mall. Exercise was to look at what to see along
GR between Meridian and Webberville. This should do a lot for the region. Fast
corridor with dedicated lanes. Density development. Cata has a proposal in with
the Department of Transportation for funding. Infill could look like mixed use.
Time frame for realizing results.
·   Historic preservation is a valuable asset in the region. Nodes being
considered for further planning include: Frandor, Sparrow, Meridian Mall and
closer to the capital.
·   Police report was part of packet. Considerable savings over last year even
tho cost is more. Continue to hear positive comments on the service being
provided.
·   Budget with fund balance: BSA said this could be fixed and brought up only
for budget reports.
Public Comment
Frans Wilbrink, 4701 Zimmer Rd.; Regarding the publishing of the meeting dates
and posting on the website.
Trustees duty to oversee officers. Use of the projector and screen.
Clerk Gaffner closed public comment at 7:58
Review
Library report
Consent agenda was approved
Approved distribution of the Draft Master Plan
Cemetery project
Parks and Rec Master Plan update was approved.
New website is up.
Once Zoning Ordinance is approved, would like to see it on the website for
public access before it is codified.
Trustee Hayes moved to adjourn at 8:05.
Seconded by Treasurer Fielek
Motion Approved.
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner, Clerk
 
 
May 22, 2013
Williamstown Township
Special Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
May 22, 2013
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 2:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan by
Supervisor Martin.
Present: Supervisor Martin, Trustee Imhoff, Clerk Gaffner, Treasurer Fielek,
Trustee Williams and Trustee
    Eyster
Absent: Trustee Hayes
Trustee Eyster presented information concerning a recommendation from the
Ingham County Department of Transportation and Roads (ICDTR) for Germany Road.
Before any bids can be obtained for the recommendation, the Township Board
needs to approve having the ICDTR seek bids on their proposal for Germany Road.
The county recommendation is for 2 inch asphalt paving and CIPR on the half
mile east of Meridian Rd, and CIPR and single course chip-sealing the 1.1 miles
from west of Hart rd to Zimmer Rd which together totaled $190,000. This would
break down to $104,000 for the Hart to Zimmer Rd portion and $86,000 for the
half mile east of Meridian Rd section. The ICDTR has determined that if CIPR
and paving is done on the half mile east of Meridian Rd, there should be some
ditching and culverts in that area to improve the drainage. Most of the cost is
in labor by ICDTR to install the culverts and do the ditching. ICDTR requests
that the culvert pipe cost be included in the project cost, but it should be
less than $3,000 and does not raise the total estimate ($190,000) previously
given. This would include 8 new driveway culverts and a cross culvert (pipe
cost only) for the half mile east of Meridian Rd. All labor to be done by ICDTR
crews and is not included in the cost and will be provided by ICDTR, which
includes ditching and culvert installation in the half mile east of Meridian Rd
and labor for Chip sealing the 1.1 mile from west of Hart to Zimmer Roads. All
CIPR, and paving in the half mile east of Meridian Rd, must be done by a
contractor(s).
Trustee Eyster stated that the Township will not know the exact amount of funds
available until the audit for 2012-2013 fiscal year is completed in August or
September. According to board policy, $45,000 to $50,000 additional funds
should be available for road work in the summer of 2014. If the total cost for
the contract through the County is under $190,000 the Township could pay for it
by using the funds currently available ($159,449.50) with the remaining
$30,550.50 taken from road funds that would have been spent in 2014.
Clerk Gaffner moved that the Township approve having the Ingham County
Department of Transportation and Roads seek bids for the recommended Germany
Road repairs.
Second by Supervisor Martin
Motion approved.
Trustee Imhoff moved for adjournment
Second by Treasurer Fielek
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner, Clerk
June 11, 2013
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the agenda.
Supervisor Martin moved to place the police report on the agenda to follow
public comment.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes
Discussion: none
Motion approved
Supervisor Martin led the Pledge of Allegiance
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Imhoff, Clerk Gaffner, Supervisor Martin, Treasurer Fielek,
Trustee Williams, Trustee Eyster and Trustee Hayes
Absent: none
Public Comment
Frans Wilbrink, 4701 Zimmer Rd.: regarding his interest in Township matters and
the duties of Township Officials.
Supervisor Martin reminded the public to address public comment to the chair
and not individuals on the Board.
Public Comment closed at 7:06
Police Report
Chief Hall presented his quarterly report. Police departments from Williamston,
MSP, Ingham, Meridian and FBI all responded to the bank robbery at Independent
Bank and the events leading to the arrest of suspects in the case. Suspects may
be facing federal charges. Believed to be drug related.
Chief Hall continued with an incident regarding the property checks within the
Township. An officer noted a gas smell, called Consumers and met them at the
sight. The gas leak was fixed and a potential disaster was avoided due to the
diligence of the officer on duty.
An $18,000 grant was awarded from the State of Michigan for recording equipment
in interview rooms. The State will be coming up with standards for interviewing
suspects. The department is fully staffed with the swearing in of Jason
Klementz and Mike Brazier which brings the officer count to 39. Another officer
retirement is anticipated in September. Welcomed Frank Walsh as the new
Meridian Manager. Two Meridian positions opened: HR director and finance
director. The department has a second dog on the force. Yukon just finished his
training and found two separate incidents of marijuana.
Discussion:
Robbery: Fortunate that no one was hurt. The Township may likely see more
billable hours next month.
Consent Agenda
Trustee Hayes moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the Minutes of 5/14/2013 Regular Township board meeting and 5/22/13
Special Township board meeting
Treasurer’s Reports –May 2013
Building inspectors report – May 2013
General Fund Accounts Payable paid, checks 20168-20185 for a total of
$11,734.55 with Check 20183 marked void
Payroll Checks paid 42311 through 42337 and EFT 185-187 for a total of
$20,618.04
General Fund Account Payable checks to approve 20186 through 20212 for a total
of $15,065.13
Police Account Payable check to approve 1046 for $3,252.50
Revenue and expenditure report 5/31/2013
Pending Litigation
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion: None
Motion Approved
Planning Commission
Minutes 5/21/13
Chair LaMore addressed the Board and reviewed the minutes of the Planning
Commission meeting held on 5/21/13. Public Meeting was held for the Updated
Zoning Ordinance with no comments from the public regarding the draft
ordinance. The letter regarding the draft Master Plan has been sent to the
appropriate authorities with a 63 day comment period. Discussed attendance at
the future board meetings of a PC member to inform the Board of items addressed
by the Planning Commission and to answer any questions. Calendar of PC members
will be given to the Clerk to make sure they receive the Board Packet for the
meeting.
Chair LaMore asked the commission to consider the plus/ minus of a climate
change task force that may benefit the community. May be some actions the
community can take to be responsible to future generations. Actions that locals
can take would be planting trees, reducing transportation cost, education for
residents on how they can reduce impact on the environment, etc. in
anticipation or reducing the potential of climate change. Trustee Williams
briefed the PC on the art tour and recycling clean up. Planning staff addressed
the charettes that took place along the corridor. The Township has the
possibility of intern due to a special initiative for communities along the
corridor. Intern duties could include the Park Plan along with any other option
the Township would like to consider. The Urban Planning Student Coalition Task
Force is undertaking sustainability issues along the corridor.
Discussion:
·   Joint Meeting Date in the minutes should be corrected to May 30 th.
·   Feel the Township Zoning Ordinance is a good ordinance. Most important work
is consistency with interpretation and enforcement of the ordinance. Look
forward to having the ordinance on line once approved.
·   The Planning Commission has been sensitive to reflecting the Master Plan in
the ordinance. Collaboration is very good. The community is well served by with
the professionalism on the PC and Board.
Supervisor Martin reviewed her memo that was included in the Board Packet
regarding the Zoning Ordinance. Corrections can be made to the Ordinance. Would
like this to be brought back to the next board meeting to allow the Board
sufficient time for review. Codification does help with clarification.
Discussion:
·   Some words missing in the conversion to PDF from Word. Clerk Gaffner will
resend the Ordinance to the Board in Word format.
·   Please submit all review comments in writing to Supervisor Martin by June
28 th to be included in the next Board packet by the Clerk.
·   Chair LaMore shared the Ordinance with a colleague who is reviewing it and
will score in on sustainability. The Township’s is the first being reviewed.
Hope to get feedback on the review.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Park Improvements
Parks Committee provided information for review in the Board Packet.
Dan Demitroff, representative of the Parks Committee, reviewed the information
for the Board.
The park was flagged with the proposed lay out.
The enclosed site plan mapped out the proposed location for the volleyball
courts, pavilion, the restrooms, future playground, future possible pond site
and bridge.
Reviewed cost estimates: Explained savings and sustainability with toilets.
Future possible improvements to the pavilion, popularity of volleyball courts
and potential rental income.
Reviewed the use of Porous Pavement to the restrooms and pavilion. Product high
lights are low maintenance and sustainable using recycled materials.
Volleyball courts will need to be built up due to grade.
Reviewed the cost contingencies: This proposal does not include the value of
volunteer’s time.
Discussion:
·   Has the Health Department approved the restrooms?
·   The Health department deferred to the DEQ. The Eloo system is currently
used in Washtenaw County. A site visit is planned.
·   Material used for pathway is partially recycled tires, an aggregate and
binding agent.
·   Committee has been working on this for some time to come up with cost.
Clerk Gaffner moved the Board approve the funds for the Park Improvements not
to exceed $72,000 as outlined by Exhibit A with final plans coming back to the
Board for approval.
Seconded by Trustee Williams.
Discussion:
·   $12,000 of funds are from grants received by the Township.
·   $62,250 in capital improvements set aside by Township.
·   Difference of the structures proposed for the pavilion.
·   Concerns over using all of capital outlay for this expenditure.
·   Figure of 62% of residents responding in the survey have not visited the
park. This is not indicative of all Township Residents.
·   Potential cost of health department approval.
·   Have to get final approval from the Board for final design.
·   Consideration of benches near the volleyball courts.
Motion approved.
NEW BUSINESS
Office Hours
Supervisor Martin reviewed the policy being recommended.
Trustee Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board approve closing the
Township office at 4:00 PM on any Wednesday immediately preceding a Thursday
Holiday.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes
Discussion: none
Motion approved.
Employee Manual
Supervisor Martin covered the updates for the Employee Manual. This is the
first review by the Board. Discussion:
·   Important to update the Employee Manual.
·   Modeled after Coloma and Grayling Township’s employee manual.
·   Should have it reviewed by the Township legal counsel.
·   Don’t feel the need to have McKenna review.
·   Clarification Years of service and/or number of hours before benefits would
take effect. Time accumulates. Bring back next month for approval. Has been
presented to staff to insure it’s clear and covers all issues. No negative
feedback from staff to date.
Will have legal counsel review and have on the agenda next month.
Principles of Governance
Clerk Gaffner explained this came from the Michigan Townships Association.
Would like the board to sign and post in the lobby
Supervisor Martin moved the Williamstown Township Board, in an effort to
maintain the highest standards and traditions of Michigan townships, approve
the “Principles of Governance” drafted by the Michigan Townships Association
and that these principles be signed by the board and posted in the Williamstown
Township Office.
Seconded by Trustee Imhoff
Discussion: Similar to the last one presented to the Board.
Motion approved.
REPORTS
Departments & Committees
Joint Meeting with the City of Williamston: Supervisor Martin expressed
appreciation of Board attendance. The Township will host next year.
JBA: City and township met and separated duties. City is considering current
community center. Township looking at site designated by Library. Will meet to
compare information gathered. Trustee Williams attended the City Council
meeting and informed the Board of discussion regarding the Community Center.
Zimmer Rd. improvements: Improvements have begun. Construction Company in daily
contact with the Township. Wood chips being delivered at the park. Discussed
the procedure for tree removal. Replacement trees being offered in a few cases.
They are able to save more trees than originally anticipated.
Township Park is being used as a staging area for the contractor. Drive will be
improved, Stumps will be moved and covered. Bus stop stumps will be
consolidated, moved back, and bermed on the front side. Consider rope fencing
in the future. Possible buildup of soccer fields at the Hall. Looking into
drainage issues. End date Mid-November. Not sure when light will be completed.
The ICDRT (Ingham County Department of Roads and Transportation) has not done a
RFP (Request for Proposal) for Germany Road to date.
Memo regarding elections: The Township was audited by the Secretary of State.
Trustee Eyster will be compiling list of potholes to submit to the ICDRT.
Public Comment for agenda & non-agenda items
None
Closed at 8:40
Review
Zoning Ordinance- Comments to supervisor martin by June 28 th..
Employee manual: Will be submitted to the attorney for review.
Governance Document: Clerk will have posted
Holiday: Will be posted.
NEISA: NEISA wants to update the ordinance to cover cost of services to
residents. Millage should cover emergency services. Will send the proposed
ordinance out to the Board members. Articles of incorporation said there would
not be a charge. Consult with attorney if this being proposed is against
articles of incorporation. Would also charge for hazardous waste responses.
Over $2000 was invoiced for last spill.
Trustee Hayes moved to adjourn.
Clerk Gaffner seconded.
Meeting adjourned at 8:45
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner, Clerk
July 9, 2013
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
July 9, 2013
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the agenda.
Supervisor Martin led the Pledge of Allegiance
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Imhoff, Clerk Gaffner, Supervisor Martin, Treasurer Fielek,
Trustee Williams, Trustee Eyster and Trustee Hayes
Absent: none
Public Comment
None
Closed at 7:05
Consent Agenda
Trustee Hayes moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the Minutes of 6/11/2013 Township Board Meeting
Treasurer’s Reports –June2013
Building inspectors report – June 2013
General Fund Accounts Payable paid, checks 20213-20226 for a total of $7,862.36
Payroll Checks paid 42338 through 42362 and EFT 188-192 for a total of
$20,672.81
General Fund Account Payable checks to approve 20227 through 20250 for a total
of $25,542.39
Police Account Payable check to approve 1047-1049 for $52,333.44
Revenue and expenditure report 6/30/2013
Pending Litigation
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion:
·   Check #20239 to (ICDRT) Ingham County Department of Roads & Transportation
was for striping.
Motion Approved
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Zoning Ordinance
Supervisor Martin explained that the Board had adopted revisions through
Article 24. This adoption of the complete ordinance will correct references
with the adoption of the revisions to Articles 25 through 29.
Correction list has been provided noted as Review Comments 6/13.
Some clarification items to be addressed re: Ag uses, animal equivalents and
fencing.
It was recommended that the Township have the Ordinance reviewed and approved
by the Department of Ag.
Have started a tickler list with other items brought to the attention of the
Board that require review by the Planning Commission and a Public Hearing.
Treasurer Fielek moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the revised
Township Ordinance as recommended by the Williamstown Township Planning
Commission with recommended corrections from review comments dated 6/13.
Supported Trustee Hayes
Discussion:
·   Any other suggested revisions submitted have gone to a tickler list.
·   There will always be something that should be addressed.
·   6.03 B. recommended “strike 6’ off the ground.” Modification should only be
in Ag-not all non-residential districts. Suggest adding the district’s this
applies to. Consensus to add to Revisions for 6.03(B): “except in Ag-c where it
can be up to 6 ft.
Motion approved.
NEW BUSINESS
Donation approval
Trustee Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board approve accepting the
donation of $3,000 from Prime Housing Group to be used for enhancement of the
Williamstown Township Parks.
Support by Trustee Imhoff
Discussion:
·   Donation from Prime housing group. Randy and Lucy Baker on Meridian Rd own
several rentals. They have made an annual donation over the last few years.
·   Assessments on properties owned were decreased by the Tax Tribunal.
·   Can be used for park improvements.
·   Letter will be sent from Treasurer.
·   2012 donation amount was $1208.40
Motion approved
Mapleshade Drain Assessment
Mapleshade residents requested the meeting with the Drain Commission to improve
the drain issues. With substantial rainfall the current drain system cannot
handle the load. Drainfields are showing wear from the lack of drainage. Catch
basin was stressed.
Improvements include cleaning drains from Williamston Rd to end of Mapleshade.
May relocate some of the drains. Will install new drain across Beeman Rd to
creek so that it will drain properly. Affects Maple Shade, Sherwood Rd, Beeman
Rd. Portions of the drain heading west will be addressed. Township financial
portion is 25%. The Township is always involved in drain assessments. Township
portion of $75,000 can be paid in one lump sum to save on interest. Would get
percentage back if the total estimated cost of $300,000 is used.
County Commissioners needs to approve the borrowing of the project for the
Drain Commission.
Trustee Hayes moved the Williamstown Township Board approve payment of $75,000
to the Ingham County Drain Commission for the Maple Shade Drain Petition
Project.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion:
·   CD is up for renewal: less interest than what is currently being paid on
the CD.
·   At the next board meeting will review the appropriate way to cover funding.
Motion approved
Supervisor Martin spoke with the Drain Commissioner about the Township
financing the whole project and receive the interest that would be paid to a
lending institution.
This would be a better investment for the Township than the CD’s while doing a
service for the community.
Consensus of Board to move forward exploring this option. Pay the full amount
of the $300,000 and obtain an interest rate that is much better than what is
paid to the Township currently on investments.
Supervisor Martin will bring more information back to the next Board Meeting.
Trustee Eyster will review the Township Policies.
REPORTS
Departments & Committees
·   Roads: Trustee Eyster sent a copy of information to board members of what
was reported to the ICDRT on needed immediate attention. 33.8 miles of
centerline striping was completed on township roads. Clerk Gaffner will obtain
a record of what was done from ICDRT. Centerline on M-43 would be MDOT’s
responsibility. Trustee Eyster will check the roads once a record is obtained.
The Township does not need to be in a contract with the County.
·   Treasurer Fielek noted that the tax bills went out on July 1 st.
·   The June Police Report was presented to the Board Members.
·   Clerk Gaffner noted that an election is set for Aug 6 th for an increase of
the Haslett Schools sinking fund millage. 650 residents of the Township are in
the Haslett District.
·   The Township has the opportunity to opt out of participating with the polls
for some elections and did so with the Haslett Millage request.
·   Supervisor Martin attended an informative workshop on the RTF Act and Land
Divisions.
·   It is not necessary to obtain a building permit for Ag buildings but do
need to get a zoning permit.
·   Affidavit should be recorded for Ag buildings. Some Townships do not have a
land division ordinance.
·   When deeded off the parent parcel, a new parcel cannot create further
splits if it was not indicated on the deed. This took affect after 1997.
·   Divisions remain with parent parcel if not addressed.
·   Need to change the land division application to address the proof of parent
parcel
·   NEISA Board will be meeting this next Thursday. Supervisor Martin will
address the Billing Ordinance with the attorney.
Public Comment for agenda & non-agenda items
None
Closed at 8:00
Review
Treasurer- donation for parks
Clerk – zoning ordinance
Supervisor: NEISA Billing Ordinance and will set a meeting with the Drain
Commission regarding financing drain for Maple Shade.
Treasurer Fielek moved to adjourn.
Meeting adjourned at 8:05
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner, Clerk
August 13, 2013
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
August 13, 2013
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the agenda.
Supervisor Martin led the Pledge of Allegiance
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Imhoff, Clerk Gaffner, Supervisor Martin, Treasurer Fielek,
Trustee Williams, and Trustee Eyster
Absent: Trustee Hayes
Public Comment
None
Closed at 7:05
Consent Agenda
Treasurer Fielek moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the Minutes of 7/09/2013 Township Board Meeting
Treasurer’s Reports –July 2013
Building inspectors report – July 2013
General Fund Accounts Payable paid, checks 20251-20289 for a total of
$115,171.94
Payroll Checks paid 42363 through 42401 and EFT 193-198 for a total of
$5,757.66
General Fund Account Payable checks to approve 20290 through 20296 for a total
of $3,393.80
Police Account Payable check to approve 1051 for $824.00
Revenue and expenditure report 7/31/2013
Pending Litigation
Budget Amendments
Seconded by Trustee Imhoff
Discussion: none
Motion Approved
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Employee Manual
Supervisor Martin explained that there was input from staff, board members, and
legal counsel. No changes of substance came from the attorney.
Trustee Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Williamstown
Township Employee’s Policies and Procedures Manual effective immediately.
Seconded by Trustee Imhoff
Discussion: none
Motion approved.
Road Improvement-Germany Road
Clerk Gaffner moved the Williamstown Township Board approve accepting the bid
for improvements to Germany Road at a cost not to exceed $147,000.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion:
Trustee Eyster explained the bid came in much higher than originally approved.
Worked with County to get the total cost down to what was originally approved.
Supervisor Martin and Bill Conklin went to Jackson to look at chipped asphalt
for surface. Ditches will be put in place to allow for a place for water runoff
and to help keep the roads dryer. Recommend going with double chip sealing east
of Meridian Rd. instead of asphalt. Impressed with how well the roads looked
with a double chip seal after 7 years in Jackson. Water removal is an issue
that the County will deal with by installing the ditches. ICDRT felt strongly
that the road should be double chip sealed.
·   Hard to tell the difference sometimes between the asphalt and chip seal.
·   Will ditch and put in culverts.
·   County will do the chip sealing. Rieth-Riley will be tearing up the old
road.
·   ICDRT does not have a surveyor on staff.
·   Township will be purchasing the materials.
·   Reith-Riley’s cost is also part of the $147,000.
·   Includes the cost of chip seal for next year.
·   Bill Conklin, from ICDTR and Supervisor Martin surveyed the roads in the
Township.
·   General maintenance is needed on Lounsbury Rd and Barry Rd.
Motion approved
Park Improvements
the Township solicited bids from six parties and received one proposal and one
response that they couldn’t do it.
Trustee Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board approve accepting the bid
from LaFollette Homes for the design and construction management of a pavilion
and restroom facility at the Township Park on Grand River Road, at a cost not
to succeed $9,000.
Seconded by Clerk Gaffner
Discussion:
·   Supervisor Martin and Planning Assistant Bloomquist did a site visit to
Clark Lake Sanctuary of their eloo toilets. No odor, very little material. Have
retreats with 75 in attendance. These are the bathrooms of choice for visitors.
Evaporation works well. Proposal is for concrete restroom but realizes we may
not have a volunteer to construct. This is a private facility so they don’t
have to worry about vandalism. Frame construction may be cheaper but not as
durable. Design could include surfacing the exterior.
·   Health department has done a site visit to the park.
·   Steve has done a lot of work for the Township with the Branch School.
Sensitive to design and statement that the Township wants to make with the
pavilion and restroom.
·   Eloo’s had a solar panel to insure fans run continually.
·   Price includes all the design.
·   Will have foreman on site for construction to work with volunteers.
·   Total price will have to reflect the overall budget.
·   Options of type of block that can be used.
·   Would still like to see it done this fall.
·   Two restrooms plus storage.
·   Approval of the plans.
·   Up to board to decide if they want to approve the design.
·   Planning Commission to look at the design.
·   Parks Committee and three officers to approve.
·   Send to all officers for input.
Motion Approved
Design will be submitted to all members of the board with approval granted by
the 3 officers and parks committee.
Budget Amendment
Trustee Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board approve amending the 2013-
2014 budget by adding $31,000 to the Road Improvement/Maintenance budget 101-
441-814.00 from the Road Fund Equity account 101-000-390.001 and adding and
additional $8,585 to the Road Improvements budget from Township Contingency
fund 101-890-965.00 for Germany Road repair and striping.
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion:
·   8585.00 is for striping.
·   Done in 2012
Motion Approved
NEW BUSINESS
Code Enforcement
Supervisor Martin explained that a Code Enforcement Ordinance would allow for
ticketing and allow Meridian Police to help with code enforcement. The Police
Department would note violations when patrolling, inform the Township, and the
Township would send the standard 10 day letter out. If continued non-
compliance, a ticket could be issued. This then goes directly to court as a
civil infraction. Funds collected as a result of the tickets would go to the
Township. Chief Hall is agreeable to this service as part of the patrolling.
Meridian currently does a sweep twice a year for unlicensed cars,etc. in
Meridian Township and could provide the same service here.
Jerry Richards, past Meridian Manager is willing to help with the code
enforcement ordinance.
Discussion:
·   Would not be an additional cost of the police service.
·   Should the blight ordinance need to be updated?
·   Eliminates neighbors coming in to complain about the neighbors.
·   Should streamline the process.
·   Enforcement will depend on how the ordinance is set up.
·   Tall grass could be added to the tax bill.
Consensus to have supervisor Martin move forward for a proposal from Mr.
Richards.
REPORTS
Departments & Committees
·   JBA: Library board would like to take the board members on a tour of
libraries. Suggesting a Saturday from 9-5. Prefer during the week. Interested
in tour: Trustee Eyster, Treasurer Fielek, Supervisor Martin, and possibly
Clerk Gaffner. September 25th, October 9th or 16th are dates that work for
everyone.
·   Maple Shade Drain improvements have started. Supervisor Martin attended the
pre- construction meeting. Started on Monday, hope to be done before school
starts and totally done by October 9th. New drain going in with hook ups for
sump pumps directly to drain. Laundry is to go to septic. Township could not
fund the drain as it had to be a federally funded drain.
·   Grand River Charrette will be back during October 22-30 Future of what
Grand River Rd. is going to be like. Worthwhile investment for board members as
well as planning commission to attend.
·   Meridian Police attended the national night out with 6 organized
gatherings. Chief Hall was at 3 of them.
·   Looking at Mitchell Rd again to consider lowering the speed limit. Chief
Hall will come back with a recommendation. Ingham County will be doing the
study.
·   The Zimmer Road project is a bit behind due to rain. Trying to get back on
schedule. Germany Road north on Zimmer will be starting soon. Not sure when
light will be up. MDOT will be doing light.
·   NIESA fees: Attorney/client privilage letter. Will share with Board.
Public Comment for agenda & non-agenda items**
none
closed at 8:12   
Review
park: Supervisor and Planning Assistant
code enforcement: Supervisor
Employee’s Manual: Supervisor
Roads: Supervisor
Treasurer Fielek moved to adjourn.
Meeting adjourned at 8:15
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner, Clerk
September 10, 2013
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the agenda.
Supervisor Martin led the Pledge of Allegiance
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Imhoff, Clerk Gaffner, Supervisor Martin, Treasurer Fielek,
Trustee Williams, Trustee Hayes and Trustee Eyster
Absent: none
Public Comment
None
Closed at 7:04
Consent Agenda
Trustee Hayes moved the consent agenda consisting of:
   Approve the Minutes of 8/13/2013 Township Board Meeting
   Building inspectors report – August 2013
   General Fund Accounts Payable paid, checks 20297-20316 for a total of
$34,792.73
   Payroll Checks paid 42402 through 42432 and EFT 199-206 for a total of
$21,225.28
   General Fund Account Payable checks to approve 20317 through 20337 for a
total of $10,040.90
   Police Account Payable check to approve 1052 for $1,100.00
   Revenue and expenditure report 8/31/2013
   Pending Litigation
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion: The Treasurer’s report was not included due to inaccuracies.
Motion approved
Planning Commission
Minutes 8-20-13
Supervisor Martin thanked Commissioner Davis for serving.
Commissioner Davis reviewed the actions of the Planning Commission’s meeting on
August 20, 2013.
Highlights included:
·   Reviewed the goals and objectives of the parks and rec Master Plan.
·   The HUD grant and regional trail intern project.
·   Parks capital improvement plan of the pavilion and restrooms were presented
by the Parks and Rec Chair.
·   Looking forward to the Joint meeting with the Board on the Sustainability
review of the Master Plan and Ordinances.
·   Public hearing will be held on the 17th of September for the Township
Master Plan review.
Discussion:
The Planning Commission discussed the issue of significant trees that have been
removed due to the Zimmer Rd. project. Discussion included ways that
significant trees could be protected such as an Historic Tree Registration and/
or a possible Tree Ordinance.
Impressed by the work that Commissioner Davis has put forth in the effort to
learn the ordinance.
Master Plan Resolution
Trustee Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board approve Williamstown
Township Resolution #104 asserting the right of the Township Board to approve
or reject a proposed Township Master Plan.
Seconded by Trustee Imhoff
Discussion:
·   It is not an option of the Board to amend the submitted Master Plan.
·   Intended to give the board final review and approval or rejection.
Ayes: Trustee Imhoff, Trustee Eyster, Treasurer Fielek, Supervisor Martin,
Clerk Gaffner, Trustee Hayes and Trustee Williams.
Motion Approved
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Code Enforcement
Supervisor Martin reviewed the proposal presented from The Mannik Smith Group
regarding the development of a Code Enforcement Ordinance and review of the
Blight Ordinance. Jerry Richards is familiar with the Meridian Code Enforcement
program and will be the consultant working with the Township. This will allow
the Meridian Township Police the authority to assist the Township with
enforcement of the Blight Ordinance and Zoning Ordinance.
Clerk Gaffner moved the Williamstown Township Board approve accepting the bid
from the Mannik Smith Group to establish a code enforcement program for
Williamstown Township at a cost not to exceed $1,800.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes.
Discussion:
·   Should the Planning Commission be involved with the review?
·   Question having the police involved given knowledge of the Blight and
Zoning Ordinance
·   Mr. Richards will review the Zoning and Blight while developing the
program.
·   Township would still be initially involved with a letter before any
enforcement.
·   Enforcement of noise issues would fall under the Blight Ordinance and/or
the Zoning Ordinance.
·   The police would not be the only avenue for identifying compliance issues.
·   This would assist in the anominity of a resident complaining to the
Township about their neighbor.
·   This would allow ticket writing for non-compliance and be a savings to the
Township in attorney fees.
·   Residents would use the non-emergency number for Meridian Police when
making a complaint.
Motion approved.
Additional question:
·   Need for an end date on the contract.
·   Verification of payment coming out of the police fund.
NEW BUSINESS
Roads
Supervisor Martin provided an update on projects that are included ICDRT
between 2014 and 2017.
Sherwood Rd between Zimmer to Williamston Rd. will have a chip/seal as part of
the countywide chip seal. Shoeman Rd. will be completed in 2014 north to county
line. Thin overlay of 1-2” and intersection improvements at Barry Rd. due to
sight limitations.
2015, 16 and 17 does not show work done within the Township.
Will find out why work is being postponed on Meridian from Jolly to M-43. .
REPORTS
Departments & Committees
·   Clerk Gaffner included the minutes from the latest NEISA meeting for
review.
·   Treasury will have the office open Monday, September 16th from 9-5 to
accept tax payments.
·   Supervisor Martin provided an update on the current road Improvements:
o   Germany Rd.: Culverts are done. Some ditching yet to be done. Road grinder
will be back this week and the contractor is planning on grinding Germany Rd.
this week.
o   Complaints regarding road work. Have kept residents informed of the work
being done. Improvements are opening up the view shed.
o   Consumers Power will be digging and repairing the main transmission line.
o   Zimmer Rd.: Construction on schedule. Completion goal is end of October.
·   Master Plan Review: September 17th is the public hearing for final review
before adoption by the PC.
·   September 17th is also the joint meeting at 6:00 for review of
sustainability audit by MSU as part of the HUD Sustainability Grant.
·   County Police Grant: documentation has been provided as requested to
release funds. The Township already has the funds; however the Township needs
the County to release their right to withdraw the funds.
·   Liquor Control Decision: requires a portion of the licensing fee to fund
inforcement and goes to the municipality providing the police service. Notified
Ingham County that the funds will come to the Township. Meridian has been doing
the spot checking since it was awarded the contract. Rockies Party Store, D&J
Party Store, Spag’s and Brookshire are the establishments with a liquor license
within the Township.
·   There was a fatal motorcycle accident on Meridian Rd. where woman was
killed by a motorist crossing the centerline. She was not a township resident.
Public Comment for agenda & non-agenda items**
None Closed at 7:59
Review
Clerk Gaffner: resolution
Supervisor Martin: code enforcement.
Treasurer Fielek moved to adjourn.
Meeting adjourned at 8:02
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner, Clerk
October 8, 2013
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the agenda.
Supervisor Martin led the Pledge of Allegiance
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Imhoff, Clerk Gaffner, Supervisor Martin, Treasurer Fielek,
Trustee Williams, Trustee Hayes and Trustee Eyster
Absent: none
Public Comment
None
Closed at 7:01
Audit Report
Supervisor Martin reported that the auditor could not be here this evening to
go over the report and will be here next month to review with the Board. The
report has been forwarded to the State.
Police Report
Chief Hall reviewed the police report. Calls for service are down. Two officers
have been hired to fill vacancies and a third candidate is under consideration
for the third vacancy. Looking forward to Zimmer Rd. being completed. The light
at Zimmer and Grand River will be activated when road improvements are
completed. The police department will hold a Halloween open house. Last year
approximately 500-600 residents visited. The Citizen Academy has 13
participants. There was a vehicle arson in Baan Gan Aka on September 22 of a
car stolen from a home invasion in East Lansing. A Burkley Rd. home invader was
held at bay by a the homeowner’s dog and was apprehended.
Bank robbery suspects were apprehended in an Ann Arbor robbery believed to be
the suspects of the 5th/3rd bank robbery in Williamston and the PNC bank in
Okemos. There have not been robberies since the suspects apprehension.
Questions:
·   Meridian will be reimbursed for liquor control inspections from the state.
·   Park was trespassed with damage to the soccer fields and baseball fields.
·   Meridian has expanded the deer cultivation program during bow season. Has
not had an effect on the car/deer accident rate.
Consent Agenda
Trustee Hayes moved the consent agenda consisting of:
   Approve the Minutes of 9/10/2013 & 9/25/2013 Township Board Meetings
   Treasurer’s Reports – August 2013 & September 2013
   Building inspectors report – September 2013
   General Fund Accounts Payable paid, checks 20338 - 20353 for a total of
$7,894.87
   Payroll Checks paid 42433 through 42469 and EFT 207-212 for a total of
$21,505.40
   General Fund Account Payable checks to approve 20354 through 20368 for a
total of $11,886.83
   Police Account Paid check 1053 for $52,267.69
   Revenue and expenditure report 9/30/2013
   Pending Litigation
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: none
Motion approved
PLANNING COMMISSION
Minutes 9-17-13
Supervisor Martin thanked Jerry Eidt for his years of service to the Township.
Secretary Eidt submitted the recap of the Planning Commission
Four major items covered by the Planning Commission:
·   Public Hearing for a SUP for a sign.
·   Public Hearing for the updated Master Plan.
·   Reinstatement of the Natural beauty Roads language to the Master Plan.
·   Subcommittee appointment for the election of new officers.
Question of minutes: none.
Special Use Permit (SUP) sign application
PC Secretary Eidt reviewed the application of Stamprite Supersine’s sign
proposal.
Applicant is proposing to erect a sign of 143 sq. ft. that would display stock
quotes along with a panel for CG Financial. The primary concern of the
commission was the size. Maximum size of 48 sq. ft. is allowed per the
ordinance. There was sentiment of some Commissioners to work with the applicant
on a compromise of the sign size. During the Public Hearing Chair LaMore
pointed out the ordinance is reasonable, varying from the ordinance would
create a domino effect to increase size of signage, and does not fit the vision
of the Master Plan. The Planning Commission recommends denial of the
application.
Rob West of Stamprite Supersine addressed the Board: The property owner had
purchased the existing sign, felt it was too small for the site, and had
received comments that the size should be increased. This design is honoring
the customer’s request and would model the stone work of the pillars on Grand
River. Applicant does not believe there would be a domino effect due to the
cost of this size sign. The site does not have a clear area for site visibility
for the small size of the existing sign. The Planning Commission felt the
proposed sign was too large and the applicant/owner would consider a compromise
in the size.
Questions/Discussion:
·   Speed seems to a problem with reading the sign.
·   At the Public Hearing Mr. Peterson stated the ticker sign is a branding
method. The larger sign would allow more space to be able to read.
·   Maybe ticker not feasible for this site.
·   Suggest adding address number.
·   Speed and ticker sign combination seems to be a real hazard.
·   Another sign located in Haslett is larger and still not readable.
·   Moving sign seems to distract from the business name.
·   Board not in the position to negotiate the size of the sign.
·   Larger size would require a variance. Concern over questions that need to
be addressed with granting a variance for this proposal.
·   Current sign is at maximum size as allowed in the ordinance.
·   Meridian Township granted a request for a larger sign due to building
location behind other buildings. Larger lettering would allow it to be seen at
a glance. Valid concerns over size of sign.
Treasurer Fielek moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the September
17, 2013 Williamstown Township Planning Commission recommendation to deny the
special use permit request for a new sign erection at 148 E. Grand River Road.
Seconded by Trustee Imhoff
Discussion: none
Motion approved.
Master Plan adoption
The Planning Commission recommended the Board adopt the proposed Master Plan.
McKenna Associates provided excellent service and information in the
preparation of the master plan. Planning Commission has worked hard to take the
information from McKenna to tailor it to our community.
Discussion:
·   Against having the Natural Beauty Roads in the master plan.
·   Concerned with the process that is part of the designation.
·   Landowners along the proposed designated road don’t necessarily have a say
in the natural beauty designation.
·   Natural Beauty Roads do not accommodate farm equipment.
·   Concern of language that is part of the Master Plan.
·   Would like to see Natural Beauty roads as part of the master plan.
·   The state has a rigorous process for the designation
·   Enough questions about the language to postpone the vote.
·   Board members would like to see the state process.
·   Very pleased with the outcome of the Master Plan.
·   Master Plan approval needs to be an up or down vote.
Consensus to place on the agenda for November.
Supervisor Martin brought up the amount of donation containers being placed in
the Township. This is not addressed in the ordinance and would like to request
the Planning Commission look into language. The
Board was in agreement.
NEW BUSINESS
Policy #003 revision
Trustee Eyster realized while reviewing the audit that one of the calculations
was not correct. The calculation of the designated amount being set aside was
written poorly. The Board and Auditor should be able to figure out what that
number is based on the policy. Need to be able to calculate what is allowed in
the fiscal year.
Trustee Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board approve amending
Williamstown Township Board Policy #003, originally adopted on 2/09/2010 and
amended on 11/13/2012, to clarify the intent of the policy for implementation
by Township Trustees.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes
Discussion:
·   Calculations appear to be wrong on the example.
·   This could be tabled to correct the example.
Treasurer Fielek moved to table this motion.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster support.
Motion approved.
Planning Appointment& Reappointments
Trustee Hayes moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the reappointment
of Rex LaMore and Jocelyn Brown-Timm, and the appointment of Phil Korson to the
Williamstown Township Planning Commission.
Seconded by Treasurer Fielek
Motion carries
Road Striping contract
Supervisor Martin reviewed the Road Striping contract. The last contract was
for 20 years and this contract is for 10 years. The Board does not have an
option who they contract with.
Discussion:
·   ICDTR felt that the 10 year contracts were fairer to the Township Boards.
Additional roads had been added in the past.
·   All roads should be verified.
·   Suggest a timeline for when bills are submitted to the Township. The last
bill was a year and half after the striping was completed.
·   Suggest having the attorney review the contract.
·   Against allowing the contractor set the percent of interest.
·   Name of roads and distance needs to be corrected.
·   County primary roads are not included in the bill.
·   Looking for a board member to work on the contract language.
·   Trustee Eyster is willing to work on the contract and requested comments
from the board be sent to her to incorporate into the contract.
·   Would like to know the consequences if the Board does not sign the
contract.
·   The ICDTR determines which roads are the Township’s responsibility.
·   Suggest asking the attorney the ramifications of not signing the contract.
REPORTS
Departments & Committees
·   Supervisor Martin reminded the Board of the Library Tour for October 9th.
Trustee Eyster, Treasurer Fielek and Supervisor Martin will be attending.
·   Trustee Imhoff reported on the ICDTR meeting. Portion of Meridian Rd. to be
done along with Sherwood Rd. between Meridian and Zimmer. Still waiting for
proposed dates.
Public Comment for agenda & non-agenda items
None Closed at 8:33
Treasurer Fielek moved the Williamstown Township Board go into executive
session for the purpose of discussing Confidential Letters from the Township
Attorney.
Seconded by Trustee Imhoff
Discussion: none
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Imhoff, Trustee Williams, Treasurer Fielek, Supervisor Martin,
Clerk Gaffner, Trustee Hayes and Trustee Eyster.
Nays: none
Motion Approved.
Treasurer Fielek moved the Williamstown Township Board come out of executive
session.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes
Motion Approved.
Review
Planning Assistant: SUP
Trustee Eyster: Road Striping Contract
Supervisor Martin: Attorney question re: Road Striping Contract.
Trustee Eyster: Policy #003
Discussion:
Supervisor Martin advised the Township Board that all contingencies to the 2011
agreement between the Williamstown Township Board of trustees and the Ingham
County Board of Commissioners, provided for under Ingham County Commissioner’s
resolutions #10-377 and #10-409, providing a onetime funding for police
services to Williamstown Township in support of the policing agreement between
Williamstown Township and Meridian Township have been met. Having met the
contingencies specified in the agreement, the Ingham County board of
Commissioners has released the committed funds of $122,678 for use in providing
police services to Williamstown Township residents.
Trustee Hayes moved to adjourn.
Meeting adjourned at 9:02
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner, Clerk
November 12, 2013
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the agenda.
Supervisor Martin led the Pledge of Allegiance
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Imhoff, Clerk Gaffner, Supervisor Martin, Treasurer Fielek,
Trustee Williams, Trustee Hayes and Trustee Eyster.
Also present: Gary Bender, Murphy & Spagnuolo P.C., Township Attorney
Absent: none
Public Comment
Dali Giese, 726 Blossom Drive: Consideration for trees and landscaping with
future road projects
Discussion: Will not have another extensive job as Zimmer Rd. in the
foreseeable future.
Supervisor Martin closed Public Comment at 7:07
Audit Report
Mr. Dave Ryder, representative from Layton & Richardson, P.C. reviewed the
audit report.
Highlights include:
The assessment of the financial statements of the Township are clear and fairly
presented.
Picture of the Townships financial statement as of March 31st, 2013 shows a
healthy fund balance, assets are in excess of liabilities. Liabilities are 2%
of total assets showing strong financial health.
Page v addresses the statement of fund basis: Expenditures to revenues.
Expenditures were 75% of revenues, 70% for police fund and 80% of total
revenues overall. Addressed capital assets. Healthy balance. Reviewed the
budgetary comparison to actual numbers. The letter of recommendations and
comments was attached.
Discussion: none.
Consent Agenda
Trustee Hayes moved the consent agenda consisting of:
   Approve the Minutes of 10/08/2013 Township Board Meeting
   Treasurer’s Reports – October 2013
   Building inspectors report – October 2013
   General Fund Accounts Payable paid, checks 20369 - 20393 for a total of
$32,040.10
   Payroll Checks paid 42470 through 42501 and EFT 213-216 for a total of
$20,445.85
   General Fund Account Payable checks to approve 20394 through 20405 for a
total of $1,802.25
   Revenue and expenditure report 10/31/2013
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion: Neopost entry covered postage.
Motion approved
Budget Amendment
Question arose regarding the moving of dedicated funds. Explained that this is
required to be able to use the funds for the proposed purpose. Dedicated funds
do not roll over every fiscal year automatically and need to be manually
restored. Parks and Recreation is for the approved improvements, Historical is
for the security system that was installed, and the wireless internet is for
the improvements at the Township Hall.
Trustee Eyster moved the Budget Amendments, moving $11,800 from Capital Outlay
101-101-980.000 to Parks and Recreation 101-751-881.000, $2,000 from Branch
School Dedicated 101-751-881.002 to Historical 101-751-882.00, $20,000 from
contingency 101-890-965.000 to legal 101-101-802.000 and $245 from contingency
101-890-965.000 to wireless Internet 101-441-819.00.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes
Motion approved.
PLANNING COMMISSION
Minutes 10 15 13
Commissioner Schultink reviewed the minutes of the Planning Commission on
behalf of the Planning Commission.
The Commission elected new officers: Dali Giese as chair, Rex LaMore as Vice
Chair and Gerald Eidt as Secretary.
Supervisor Martin and Trustee Eyster presented to the Commissioners the
policies in place regarding road maintenance and improvements. Discussion
included the design elements of the Zimmer Rd. improvements.
Commissioner Schultink referred the Board to his statement that was included as
part of the Board Packet regarding the sensitivity of tree removal and road use
by multi modes of transportation. The Planning Commission proposes more diverse
recognition and designations for the roads to recognize the diversity of use
and beauty of the Township roads. Natural Beauty Rd. designation is one way for
a community to protect the scenic and rural characteristic of some of the
Township roads and the Planning Commission felt the inclusion of this in the
Master Plan outlined one of the tools that could be used by the community. Road
designation would help distinct certain roads for beauty roads.
Discussion:
Taking out some of the dead trees and brush widen the viewshed which is also
addressed in the Master Plan. Form follows function and design.
Sensitivity of the farming community in moving equipment.
Special value to critical assets.
Issue of mixed uses: Recognize different needs of use deserve specific uses and
designation.
Safety is primary concern.
ICDTR saved as many trees as possible with the Zimmer Rd. reconstruction.
The perceived loss of control by residents with a Natural Beauty Rd.
designation.
Reasonable compromise was made at Cornell Rd.
Lot of dialogue between Board members and County Road Department was made with
the Zimmer Rd. improvements.
Planning Commission would like to work on road designation.
Board continued the discussion regarding the language of the Natural Beauty
Roads recommended by the Planning Commission in the Master Plan.
Discussion:
·   Question the verbage addressing Public Act 150.
·   Suggested guidelines only.
·   Uncomfortable suggesting to the County they must adhere to special
practices regarding road maintenance.
·   Anyone can make petition to create natural beauty roads. A public hearing
is one step of the process.
·   Language was discussed that the Board would consider for substitution of
the Natural Beauty Road language.
·   Suggest leaving out the natural beauty language.
·   Cornell Rd. improvements were compromised due to natural beauty process.
·   Suggest sending back modifications for the planning commission to look at
and discuss. Certain roads are worthy of Natural beauty road designation.
·   Implied consent that the township would like natural beauty roads.
·   These are guidelines for the township and require input from residents of
the Township.
·   Clarification of the desires of the board what issues to address by the
Planning Commission. Guiding set of principles, strategy of growth,
preservation.
·   Not sure the board wants to advocate for PA 150.
·   Board divided on the language and would like to see the PC can come up with
compromising language. Consensus to send this back to the Planning Commission.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Policy #003 revision
Trustee Eyster reviewed the revised example to help the auditors understand the
intent of the policy.
Clerk Gaffner moved the Williamstown Township Board approve amending
Williamstown Township Board Policy #003, originally adopted on 2/09/2010 and
amended on 11/13/2012, to clarify the intent of the policy.
Seconded by Treasurer Fielek.
Discussion:
Still difficult to understand.
Separate a sentence; Place period after the word “budget”.
Conversion to PDF format created some editing issues.
Suggested bringing this back next month after edits are made.
Consensus to table for December to consider final revisions.
Code Enforcement
Jerry Richards, the representative from Manick and Smith, presented a draft
Code Enforcement Ordinance to the Board for review. Township Attorney, Gary
Bender, reviewed the draft with Mr. Richards and his additions are included in
the draft language. Civil infraction language was included for each category
along with language to give broad options for enforcement along with methods of
addressing violations, prosecution and enforcement. Mr. Richards requested
direction of the Board regarding addressing vegetation issues. Mr. Richards
raised specific areas of concern and articulated areas to address in code
enforcement. Code enforcement does not need to be limited to areas that are
addressed in the draft. Meridian Township Police can work with the Township on
uniformly enforcing the code. The current complaint basis for enforcement does
not work well, while the Police Department has the ability to canvas the whole
Township to ensure equal treatment of residents. A procedure policy would be
created to track progress.
Discussion included:
·   Junk cars: some can be abated and charged, while others would be given a
citation and proceed to court.
·   Blight ordinance was reviewed and is adequate. Could be uniformly enforced
without necessarily adding to staff or cost. The Blight Ordinance is similar to
Meridian Township’s. Propose a uniform process of enforcement. A draft policy
was shared with the members of the board and reviewed regarding the process
whether a complaint comes in over the phone or observed by the Police
department.
·   Could announce to residents a sweep of the Township for code enforcement.
This could be done a couple of times a year.
·   If the board chooses to have a vegetation ordinance this could be done
similar to Meridian. Meridian’s sweep occurs through the police department and
building staff.
·   Williamstown Township would be more involved with the police department.
Verification of the police finding would occur before a letter went out from
the Township. Communication would go back to the police department of when the
letter was sent so that they are able to verify that it was abated or proceed
to write a civil infraction.
·   A brief set of rules of the zoning ordinance would be provided for the
police to follow in enforcement.
Board Discussion:
·   Vegetation ordinance: Subdivisions such as Pebblebrook and Larkin Estates,
would appreciate a vegetation ordinance.
·   Concern over differentiating between large parcels, structures, footage,
etc. Can exempt certain types of vegetation. Consider heights and distances
·   Would like to see what other communities are doing regarding vegetation.
Consensus over having some type of vegetation regulations included in the
Blight Ordinance or as a Vegetation Ordinance.
·   Process of civil infraction: Some will be ignored and can still end up in a
court situation. Municipal violations bureau could be formed.
·   Suggest having a form that is used for complaints. Goal is for uniform
enforcement.
·   Advantage with police coverage.
·   Complaints can be made from outside the Township.
·   Make sure ordinance is in line with Township values.
·   Need to change the Ordinance to include the language addressed by the
attorney.
Next step: Mr. Richards will return with language regarding vegetation. Will
need to get other Ordinances updated with required language for enforcement.
Notification should go out to residents.
A Township official or their designee could determine if an infraction needs to
be turned over to the attorney for further action. .
NEW BUSINESS
Sawdon fee waiver request
Robert and Jean Sawdon submitted a letter to the board asking for the fee to be
waived for the expense of the rezoning. Mr. Sawdon explained that the site has
been operating as light industrial for 32 years when it was rezoned as Light
Industrial in 1981. At some point it was rezoned to R-1 residential. They are
requesting to have it rezoned back to the industrial zone from the residential.
Since he went through the process of rezoning in 1981 he does not feel he
should have to pay the required fee. The current zoning creates a hardship for
the current businesses located on the site.
Trustee Hayes moved the Williamstown Township Board waive the fee for rezoning
of the parcels commonly known as 2295 and 2299 E. Grand River Rd., Williamston.
Second by Trustee Eyster
Discussion:
·   Board has the ability to waive the fee but cannot waive the process.
·   In 1995 the Township Board notified all residents of the Township rezoning
adding the RE district and in that process tried to bring everything into
compliance. Everyone was notified in the Township at that time.
·   Process could take 3 months due to the public notification process.
Property cannot be rezoned without proper notice.
·   Even as a mistake, it needs to go through the process of approval through
the planning commission. Can not speed up the process for review.
·   The board cannot anticipate the fees that are going to be charged and want
to make sure the application is complete.
·   2 minute recess at 8:50
·   Meeting resumed at 8:56.
·   The rezoning process has to begin at the planning commission and can begin
when the application is deemed complete.
Motion approved.
Applicant was made aware that they need to have a complete application
including the site plan.
Branch Road Security
Security system has been installed that includes an alarming for fire and
burglary as well as video taping.
This policy addresses the allocation of keys for entry to the school.
Clerk Gaffner moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the proposed Branch
School Key Policy, limiting the number of keys to the school, in the interest
of preserving the school as an historical landmark. Seconded by Trustee Hayes.
Discussion: none
Motion approved.
Investment policy revision
Treasurer Fielek checked into the investment options and would like to update
the list of depositories.
Treasurer Fielek moved the Williamstown Township Board approve amending
Williamstown Township Resolution #55, originally adopted July 11, 2006,
updating the list of depositories of Township funds.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Discussion: none
Motion approved.
Roll Call: Ayes: Trustee Imhoff, Trustee Eyster, Treasurer Fielek, Supervisor
Martin, Clerk Gaffner, Trustee Hayes and Trustee Williams.
Nays: none
Police assessment
Clerk Gaffner moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve the police
assessment for the Winter, 2013 tax collection be set at $110.00 for a
residential unit and $185.00 for a business unit as approved by the
Williamstown Township residents in November 2010. And as part of this motion I
move the Williamstown Township Board amend Resolution 2012-98, confirming the
2013 Special Assessment Roll for Police Protection within the Township with the
Special Assessment Roll total not to exceed $247,260.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Discussion:
·   Amount is based on the history of the cost incurred for the police
·   Enough in the fund to pay for one year for the residents.
·   Does not consider possible future unknown expenses such as legal fees, etc.
·   Unencumbered the county funds.
·   Desire not to take down the assessment amount and then need to increase at
a later date.
·   This does not affect policy 003.
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Treasurer Fielek, Supervisor Martin, Trustee Hayes and
Trustee Williams.
Nays: Trustee Imhoff
REPORTS
Departments & Committees
·   Trustee Hayes: Questioned from a resident of the police sitting at D&G
equipment on Grand River. The police write their reports in their vehicles
throughout their shift.
·   Treasury: Tax bills will be going out December 2, 2013.
·   Supervisor: Library tour. City of Williamston needs to decide what they are
going to do with the community center before moving forward on the JBA. Some of
the libraries had community rooms that could be used after hours with the
possibility of a senior center. Several were multi-storied buildings. The tour
included Portland, Lowell, Hastings and Caledonia. Libraries were the focal
point of the buildings. Two were retrofitted old buildings. Can be a multi-use
building and still a showcase of the community. One was on a similar size lot
currently considered by the Library foundation. Presented two on a river and
buildings that were an asset to the community and were all multi-use. Lowell
has a community room that is used by the senior group and also by the city for
other purposes.
·   Supervisor: Cloyce Odell was honored as a veteran at the National History
Museum.
·   Supervisor: CPI is 1.6 percent this year. 14 point review will be completed
for every township in Ingham County. 20% of the township parcels are reviewed
each year by the Township. The 14 point review is comprehensive and the
Township strives to improve assessing to meet the 14 point review. Commercial
and industrial was reviewed this year.
·   Bridge will be done by Thanksgiving. Asphalt needs to be completed before
bridge rails can be done. Shoulder work still needs completion.
Public Comment for agenda & non-agenda items
None. Closed at 9:34
Treasurer Fielek moved move the Williamstown Township Board and its recording
secretary go into executive session for the purpose of discussing Confidential
Letters and Pending Litigation from the Township Attorney.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: none
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Imhoff, Trustee Williams, Treasurer Fielek, Supervisor Martin,
Clerk Gaffner, Trustee Hayes and Trustee Eyster.
Nays: none
Motion Approved.
Treasurer Fielek moved the Williamstown Township Board come out of executive
session.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Motion Approved.
Motion by Trustee Hayes to complete the process for the two special assessment
districts for Baan-gan- aka. Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Discussion: none
Motion approved.
Review
Audit has been completed.
Planning Commission will address language regarding the Natural Beauty Roads.
Trustee Eyster will bring back policy information for approval.
Code Enforcement will be reviewed by Mr. Richards and Mr. Bender
Police assessment will go on the 2013 December tax bill.
Process to be completed regarding the Special Assessment Districts for Baan-
gan-aka.
Trustee Hayes moved to adjourn.
Meeting adjourned at 10:18
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner, Clerk
December 11, 2013
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the agenda.
Supervisor Martin led the Pledge of Allegiance
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Imhoff, Clerk Gaffner, Supervisor Martin, Treasurer Fielek,
Trustee Hayes and Trustee Eyster.
Absent: Trustee Williams
Public Comment
None- Supervisor Martin closed Public Comment at 7:02.
Police Report
Police report will be made available to the Board once received.
Consent Agenda
Trustee Hayes moved the consent agenda consisting of:
   Approve the Minutes of 11/12/2013 Township Board Meeting
   Treasurer’s Reports – November 2013
   Building inspectors report – November 2013
   General Fund Accounts Payable paid, checks 20406 - 20427 for a total of
$11,952.00
   Payroll Checks paid 42502 through 42541 and EFT 217-220 for a total of
$22,143.29
   General Fund Account Payable checks to approve 20428 through 20447 for a
total of $11,364.26
   Police Fund Account Payable checks to approve 1054 for a total of $200
   Revenue and expenditure report 11/30/2013
   Pending Litigation
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: none
Motion approved.
PLANNING COMMISSION
Minutes 11/19/13
A representative of the Planning Commission was not available to attend the
meeting. Supervisor Martin solicited question of the minutes. None were noted.
Master Plan Approval
Supervisor opened up discussion of the master plan with the proposed language
for inclusion in the Transportation Chapter.
Trustee Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board approve Resolution #105
adopting the Master Plan and Future Land Use Map.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes
Discussion:
·   Road classifications were changed to reflect the Federal and County
standards.
·   Concern over Barry Rd. not being considered a collector road.
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Treasurer Fielek, Supervisor Martin, Clerk Gaffner,
Trustee Hayes
Nay: Trustee Imhoff
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Policy #003 revision
Trustee Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board approve amending
Williamstown Township Board Policy #003, originally adopted on 2/09/2010 and
amended on 11/13/2012, to clarify the intent of the policy. Seconded by Hayes
Discussion:
·   Change made to clarify language.
·   Suggest 75% to roads and 25% to other infrastructure.
·   Give this policy time to see how it works before reevaluating the
percentages.
·   Other infrastructure includes parks, buildings, acquiring land, cemetery.
·   Timeline to begin construction on park lands in March. $10,000 grant from
the Rotary for the park improvements.
·   Roads seem a priority over other infrastructure such as the park.
·   See positive aspects of the park and the benefit to the community.
Motion approved.
Treasurer Fielek moved the Williamstown Township Board approve amending
Williamstown Township Resolution #72, updating the list of depositories of
Township funds.  
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Motion corrects the mistake of the resolution numbering for consistency.
Ayes: Trustee Imhoff, Trustee Eyster, Treasurer Fielek, Supervisor Martin,
Clerk Gaffner, Trustee Hayes
Nay: none
NEW BUSINESS
2014-15 Budget
Supervisor Martin reviewed the most recent amendments since sending the
proposed budget before Thanksgiving. Request Board members review the budget
and submit changes. Several amendments include federal taxes, insurances, etc.
The budget reflects salary increases for elected officials and sexton.
Discussion included:
·   Parks committee reviewed the budget this evening addressing the annual cost
in relation to the park maintenance.
·   Increase to legal fees due to continued litigation.
·   Capital outlay increase due to recent approval of park improvements.
·   Sexton wages increased $3000. The Township is fortunate to have a dedicated
sexton who does not hesitate to be on call during weekends and holidays.
·   Question on the pension amounts. Trustee Eyster will review the numbers to
insure they are correct.
·   Health Insurance under the Clerk and Treasurer also covers the deputie’s
expenses.
·   This budget is more detailed to the departments to insure accuracy.
·   Supervisor Martin is willing to meet with all departments to discuss the
budgets and answer any questions.
REPORTS
Departments & Committees
Board of review was held December 10th. There were 11 petitions for review.
Most were for Principle Residence Exemption (PRE), Veterans, AG exemptions and
corrections.
Feb 27, 2013 will be an on-site workshop for planning: Making Bullet Proof
Decisions. This would be a good workshop for Board members to attend.
Neighboring municipalities will be invited.
Joint Building Authority(JBA) is waiting for the city to determine what they
are going to do with the community building. Supervisor Martin and Treasurer
Fielek met with the library foundation. They have asked for a commitment from
the Township and City regarding the use of the current site that is being
purchased. Foundation may decide to sell the property. The Community Center
currently houses the food bank, library and senior center. The city is
constructing a new addition/building for the police department.
Would like the Board to consider changing the meeting day to Wednesday as the
office is already open until 7:00 and consider changing the start time of the
meeting to 6:00. Dual purpose for residents visiting the Township to stay for
the board meeting. This would also help the Clerk’s office in preparing the
packets for the meetings.
Trustee Imhoff would like to add to next month’s agenda discussion of the road
striping contract with the County. Trustee Imhoff will bring data on County
Township’s participation. Supervisor will place on the agenda provided
information for discussion is provided for the packet.
Discussion included:
·   County budget for striping
·   Concern over the lack of a contract would affect the Township
·   Would like to see a formal statement of intent from the Board
·   Clerk agreed to draft a statement from the board and send for review.
·   Business decision to not sign the contract.
·   Imhoff to research which municipalities have contracts and especially those
that have recently expired and if they have renewed.
NEISA- Trustee Hayes reported an issue with a training program that NEISA
hosted and certification of the program by the state. Attendees have not been
able to receive the necessary credit from the state for taking the course.
NEISA is calling a special meeting the 19th to address the issue and asking the
trainer to come in and help figure out what to do. Training money cannot come
from the tax revenue. Current director is resigning and there is concern of
funding for a new director. Budget discussions have been difficult as the
information is not available before the meetings.
Public Comment for agenda & non-agenda items
None. Closed at 7:56
Review
Clerk: resolutions, policies and statement regarding County contract for
striping.
Imhoff: Data to Supervisor regarding road striping
Treasurer Fielek moved to adjourn.
Meeting adjourned at 7:58
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner, Clerk
2014 Meeting Minutes
January 14, 2014
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the agenda.
Supervisor Martin led the Pledge of Allegiance
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Imhoff, Clerk Gaffner, Supervisor Martin, Treasurer Fielek,
Trustee Hayes and Trustee Williams.
Absent: Trustee Eyster
Public Comment
Trustee Williams introduced City Councilman Kent Hall and his wife, Sheryl.
Supervisor Martin closed Public Comment at 7:02.
Police Report
Chief Hall presented an overview of department activities for the quarter and
presented calendars for residents that are provided as part of Homeland
Security. It was noted that the department did not see an increase of calls due
to the storm outages. The department did increase surveillance at the
intersection of Zimmer and Grand River due to the recent improvements and light
installation. There has been one accident at the intersection since
installation. There have been 8 home invasions in the last quarter with three
vacant homes having copper stolen. Suspect was apprehended for copper theft.
Increase of patrol hours was due to patrol request of the Zimmer/Grand River
intersection.
Discussion:
Chief Hall is unaware of tickets being issued for unleashed dogs in the park
and will confirm this with the Supervisor.
The department will be at the Gun Club for range practice.
There are currently two vacancies within the department and two officers are on
leave. One should be back on duty within the next few weeks.
Consent Agenda
Trustee Hayes moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the Minutes of 12/11/2013 Township board meeting
Treasurer’s Report, December 2013
General Fund Accounts Payable paid, checks 20448-20467 for a total of
$185,515.89
Payroll Checks paid 42542 through 42578 and EFT 221-225 for a total of
$22,658.12
General Account Payable checks to approve 20468 through 20480 for a total of
$5,433.89
Revenue and expenditure report 12/31/2013
Pending Litigation
Seconded by Trustee Imhoff
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Striping local roads
Supervisor Martin opened the discussion regarding the striping of roads. The
board had not made any decision regarding the contract. Trustee Imhoff
researched the renewal contracts with the County. Of the four Townships’ with
striping contracts that expired; Onondaga and Locke renewed, and Stockbridge
signed a new contract. Aurelius has not signed a contract and did not give a
reason. Ingham County Road Committee representative, Bob Peterson, stated this
was a shared expense with shared liability.
Discussion included:
·   Roads should be striped. Some Board members feel the county should cover
this cost.
·   Township attorney reviewed liability concerns as addressed in his
confidential letter.
·   Place back on the agenda for next month to allow time to review full
information.
·   Seven townships do not have an agreement with the County.
·   County is responsible for striping the county primary roads.
Budget 2014-15
Supervisor Martin opened discussion on the proposed budget.
Discussion:
Question on Communications Department.
Revenue: license fee: $22,500. Payment arrives the end of March.
Building Inspections: Should this be raised as activity as increased.
Planning Fees: $2500 activity and $6500 recommended: This is an estimate and is
based on activity. New budget takes affect the 2014-15 fiscal year.
Clarification of consulting fees in the Clerk’s Dept. is for ballot testing.
Bldg. dept. for Building and Grounds: Health benefits for sexton. Benefit’s
come out of two different departments.
Planning Commission: Consulting fees: for expenses for review.
Clarification of general and restricted funds in Park Lands.
Postage will be reallocated within departments.
Next month call for public hearing.
Cemetery: Considering raising fees to cover expenses.
Park Improvements
Parks Committee and officers have reviewed the proposed plans. Mark Steinberg
from the parks committee presented the revised plan for the park improvements.
Current plans are within the approved budget and address the sustainability and
reuse of materials desired by the Parks Committee. Working with Steve Eyke of
Lafollette Custom Homes, the restroom and pavilion are ADA compliant. The
fireplace and doors are shown but will not be part of the initial construction;
however the foundation will be installed for the fireplace. Labor will be
provided by volunteers. Excited to have this asset as part of the Township and
to showcase sustainability.
Discussion and questions included:
·   Doors would allow for future classroom or shelter. Hurricane style doors
would most likely be used.
·   Do not have the funds at this time for the construction of the fireplace.
·   Porous pavement for the walkway. Great exposure for use by residents in
other applications.
·   Center section of restrooms shows vinyl siding/cedar shake look.
·   Future lighting may be solar or wind in the pavilion.
·   Specific fundraising could take place for future improvements.
·   Post in the center of the pavilion is for the door application.
·   Suggest collapsible rings for securing tables.
Clerk Gaffner moved the Township Board approve the conceptual plan and site
plan for the pavilion and restroom design for the township park.
Seconded by Treasurer Fielek
Motion approved.
NEW BUSINESS
Poverty Guidelines
Supervisor Martin reviewed with the Board the guidelines that have been use to
set the Poverty Exemption. The Township has been 50% higher than the federal
guidelines.
Discussion included:
·   Lowering the exemption to a 30% or 40% increase over the Federal
guidelines.
·   Consider leaving at the 2013 level which is approximately 45% over the
Federal guidelines.
·   Consideration of what is considered income.
·   Average size of township family of 2.2. Income limit would be over $23,000.
·   Asset test was added to help curb misuse.
·   There were 5 exemptions for the 2013 year.
·   Board of review reviews the applications for poverty exemption.
·   The guidelines do not need to be the same for each family size.
Supervisor Martin reviewed the process from application to granting the
exemption.
Property taxes can be waived in part or whole. Special assessments cannot be
waived.
These are guidelines for the Board of Review and the Board of Review makes the
final decision.
Clerk Gaffner moved continuation of the 2013 poverty guidelines for calendar
year 2014.
Seconded by Trustee Williams.
Discussion:
Lowering the qualifications more than last year may do harm to some that are in
need.
More qualify at the higher number than the lower number.
Guidelines need to be approved on a yearly basis.
Feel the federal level is low for the Township.
Roll Call Vote.
Aye: Trustee Imhoff, Treasurer Fielek, Supervisor Martin, Clerk Gaffner,
Trustee Hayes, Trustee Williams.
Nay: none
REPORTS
Departments & Committees
·   NIESA (Northeast Ingham Emergency Service Authority): Trustee Hayes
reported on the past meetings of the NIESA Board. The Director position is
still open. Concern over the qualifications, hours, and duties for a new
director. NIESA currently does not have funding for a director as a paid
position. The State rejected the class that was held for certification as
approval of the class was not pre-approved by the State. NIESA is appealing.
Attendees lost certification. NEISA hired an accountant for 3 years with pay
increase of 3% each year. Ambulance revenue was $56,000 over expected revenue
with an average per call revenue of $375.00. Discussion included:
1.   Issues with EMT responses to calls.
2.   Township residents are not to pay for service. Concern how this is handled
if an outside service responds.
3.   Need to review original agreement to determine the ability of NIESA to
charge residents for service.
4.   Revenues to NEISA are based on Taxable value. Williamstown Township
generates the most funding for NEISA of participating municipalities.
5.   Concern regarding the service provided the Township and ability of NEISA
to function within their budget.
·   Treasurer and Supervisor to meet with DTE representative to address
resident’s concerns over clearing of lines.
·   The Board asked Mr. Hall to address the Township regarding the recent
Williamston City Council Meeting and the Council’s vote on the proposed Library
site. Mr. Hall stated that Sue Graff and Jack Helder came to the Council to ask
for the City’s support of the site owned by the foundation. The City Council
voted to say they would still consider the current site for the Library. The
Council is still waiting for information before determining what to do with the
current Community Center. Jim DeForest is Mayor and Noah Bellinger is Mayor
Pro-Tem. The action of the Council will affect the Township’s participation of
a JBA(Joint Building Authority) for a new library without the use for the other
community activities and the Senior Center.
·   A Vegetation Ordinance is being drafted for review and progress is being
made on a Code Enforcement Ordinance.
·   Supervisor Martin attended MDARD (Michigan Department of Agriculture &
Rural Development) meeting regarding GAAMPS (Generally Accepted Agricultural &
Management Practices) and has written to State Representatives and the
Department regarding the ability of Township’s to restrict farm animals in
certain districts.
·   Trustee Imhoff, Treasurer Fielek, Clerk Gaffner, Supervisor Martin and
Planning Assistant Bloomquist are attending the MTA (Michigan Township
Association) conference.
·   Recycle: The current Township provider, Northwest, has sold to Granger. The
Township will work with Granger on continued service. Granger currently
provides recycling services to the City of Williamston and collects recycling
twice a month in single stream everything except glass.
·   Feb 27th class “Making Bullet Proof Decisions” presented by Gerald Fisher
by the Township is recommended for Board members as well as the Planning
Commission and Zoning Board of Appeals.
·   Parks Committee is hosting a sledding party on January 25th from 2-4
Public Comment for agenda & non-agenda items
None. Closed at 9:15
Review
Clerk: poverty guidelines.
Supervisor: Budget
Clerk - striping
Trustee Hayes moved to adjourn.
Meeting adjourned at 9:16
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner, Clerk
February 11, 2014
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Martin called the meeting to order, reviewed the agenda and led the
Pledge of Allegiance
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Imhoff, Clerk Gaffner, Supervisor Martin, Treasurer Fielek,
Trustee Hayes and Trustee Williams.
Absent: Trustee Eyster
Public Comment
None. Closed at 7:02
Consent Agenda
Trustee Hayes moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the Minutes of 1/14/2014 Township board meeting
Treasurer’s Report January 2014
General Fund Accounts Payable paid, checks 20481-20505 for a total of
$12,849.10
Police Accounts Payable paid, check 1055 for a total of $53,742.56
Payroll Checks paid 42579 through 42607 and EFT 226-228 for a total of
$14,235.73
General Account Payable checks to approve 20506 through 20522 for a total of
$11,517.10
Revenue and expenditure report 1/31/2014
Pending Litigation
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion: correct MDARD under reports in the minutes of 1/14/14.
Motion approved
PLANNING COMMISSION
Commissioner DeShon introduced himself to the Board, presented his background
of service to the Township with 10 years on the Road Committee and 1 year on
the Planning Commission.
Sawdon Rezoning
Commissioner DeShon reviewed the first action of the Planning Commission at the
January 21, 2014 meeting regarding the Public Hearing and recommendation of the
Planning Commission for the rezoning request by Bob & Jean Sawdon for 2295 &
2299 E. Grand River Rd. After much discussion, the Planning Commission
determined that the Mixed Use Overlay District allows the Township to achieve
its planning goals for the Grand River corridor regardless of the underlying
zone. Mr. Sawdon is aware that the dealership would still be non-conforming
under the I-1 zoning classification. There was no opposition to the rezoning
submitted in writing or at the Public Hearing. The Planning Commission voted to
recommend to the Board approval of the rezoning request from R-1 to I-1.
Trustee Hayes moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Williamstown
Township Planning Commission’s recommendation to rezone 2295 & 2299 E. Grand
River Road from R-1 to I-1, effective immediately.
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion:
·   Mr. Sawdon spoke to the need of the dealership to come into conformance
with the Zoning Ordinance.
·   Discussion of the goal for a river trail as part of the Mixed Use Overlay
District.
·   Requirement of the dealership to take the necessary steps to become
conforming.
Motion Approved.
Donation Bins
The Planning Commission held a Public Hearing regarding the proposed language
regulating Donation Bins.
Discussion included modification of the language to cover all materials
collected and the non-profit status of the organizations collecting the items.
Clerk Gaffner moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Williamstown
Township Planning Commission’s recommendation to make the following revisions
to the Williamstown Township Zoning Ordinance: Under Article #1, Section 1.03,
add the definition of a “Donation Bin,” and under Article #2, Section 2.03,
Accessory Buildings and Structures , subsection E be added as recommended for
the regulation of “Donation Bins” with the additional wording “ and or their
designee” following the word Supervisor in Section 2.03, subsection E. 1.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes
Discussion:
·   Need for placement on a paved surface.
·   Concern over design and color.
·   Charging of permit fee to charitable organizations.   
·   Regulations cover maintenance and placement.
·   Permit required; insures proper placement and ability to monitor
maintenance.
Motion Approved.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Meals on Wheels
Supervisor Martin referred to the request by Tri-County Office on Aging for
support of the Meals on Wheels program.
Trustee Imhoff moved the Williamstown Township Board approve adding $225 to the
2014-2015 Township Budget, line item 101-751-883 supporting the Tri-County
Office on Aging Meals on Wheels initiative.
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion:
·   noted the letter states 8 adults from the Township are currently being
served. Feel this number is low.
Motion approved
Budget 2014-15
Supervisor Martin reminded the Board that a Public Hearing needs to be held in
March in order to approve the 2014-15 budget.
Discussion:
·   Would like to see the Senior Center Budget of $1200 be increased due to
operating cost of $36,000. Concern over the lack of involvement of the current
board to seek funds from surrounding municipalities. Rotary has grant money
available. More of an initiative by the Senior Center Board to obtain funds
from other areas would have more influence on this board. Senior center needs
to show more interest. Consensus to leave the amount at $1200.
·   Verified funding of capital improvements. $283,000 covers all budgets. Some
will come from fund balance. Fund balance will remain at $1,000,000.
·   PC to go on bi-monthly meetings with the completion of the Master Plan and
Zoning Ordinance updates. Did not change the budget.
·   Raised road improvements maintenance budget was due to policy change.
Trustee Hayes moved the Williamstown Township Board hold a Public Hearing on
the proposed 2014-2015 Township Budget, March 12, 2014 at 6:00 PM at the
Township Hall.
Seconded by Clerk Gaffner
Discussion:
·   Need for the Public Hearing to be part of the meeting. Meeting will begin
at 6:00 with the Public Hearing being the first item of business.
Motion approved
Striping local roads
The County charged the Township for striping Germany Rd. and was not included
in the road improvements.
Supervisor Martin moved to hold the check for striping Germany until confirmed
that it has been striped. Seconded by Clerk Gaffner.
Discussion:
·   Did not stripe roads in 2013. Last striping was done in 2012. Striped
Germany last fall when work was completed.
Motion approved
Clerk Gaffner moved the Williamstown Township Board decline the opportunity to
enter into an agreement with the Ingham County Road Department for the striping
of “Secondary Roads” within Williamstown Township.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes
Discussion:
·   Suggest adding to the language: Opportunity to enter into an agreement “at
this time”. Consensus that the current language would not limit the ability of
the Township to enter into an agreement with the County in the future.
·   Concern over the safety of not striping. Nine other Townships do not
contract with the County. Stockbridge did sign a contract for striping. Locke
and Alaiedon Townships are continuing to have the county stripe roads. County
will do primary roads. Aurelius Township did not express concern over the lack
of striping in regards to safety.
·   Ingham County Road Department is responsible for maintenance on all the
roads. There is a requirement for matching funds but they are not required to
come from the Township. It is not the responsibility of the Township to
maintain the roads. Roads in the Township are paved except for two miles.
Motion approved.
Police Contract
The contract was written for three years, however both Meridian and
Williamstown Township’s approved a two year contract. This will clear up the
inconsistency between the contract and board actions.
Trustee Hayes moved the Williamstown Township Board approve amending the
“Agreement for Law Enforcement Services” between Meridian Township and
Williamstown Township and approved by the Williamston Township board on 10/09/
2012 for two years, commencing on January 1, 2013 and ending on December 31,
2014 by revising the end date in the contract to December 31, 2014 from the
originally stated date of December 31, 2015.
Seconded by Treasurer Fielek
Motion approved
Park and Recreation Master Plan
The Board approved $2,000 to McKenna Associates for revisions to the Parks and
Recreation Master Plan.
The revisions incurred additional consulting fees of $1,140.00.
Hayes moved the Williamstown Township Board approve increasing the Parks &
recreation Master Plan Budget from $2,000 to $3,140.
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion: none
Motion approved
2014-15 meeting dates
Supervisor Martin asked for further discussion to the change in the Board
meeting date and time to the second Wednesday at 6:00 p.m.
Discussion:
·   Takes away time from the residents to meet with Officers during business
hours.
·   Clerk discussed the work that goes into the preparation of the board packet
and the extra day would be helpful.
·   Objection to starting at 6:00. Need to have time to coordinate arrival.
Would like to keep the 7:00 start time. Other townships begin at 6:00. Would
accommodate public. Have not had public in attendance. This allows coming to
the meeting straight from work.
·   If there is concern from the residents would consider moving back to 7:00.
·   Wednesday would be better for prepping as Board members are currently in
the office during the extra hours.
·   Resident can come to the board meeting to address concerns.
·   Appreciation of getting out a bit earlier.
·   Adopt and publish the time and day change for the yearly meetings. The
Board can vote to change the time back to 7:00 if the 6:00 start time becomes
an issue.
Trustee Williams moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the proposed
Township Board Meeting Schedule for fiscal year 2014-2015, with meetings
schedule for the second Wednesday of each month, with the meeting start time of
6:00 PM
Seconded by Clerk Gaffner
Discussion:
·   The Board is open to consideration of changing the time if it becomes an
issue.
·   Difficulty of starting the meeting at 6:00.
Motion approved.
REPORTS
Departments & Committees
·   Clerk has emailed the Meridian Township Police Annual Report to the Board
members along with the monthly report.
·   Treasury will open the Township office for tax payments on Friday, February
15th from 9-5
·   MTA (Michigan Township Association) Ingham Chapter meeting on February 26th
at 6:00 at the Township Hall. Bring a dish to pass.
·   February 27th from 6-8:30, the Township is hosting a workshop for the Board
and Planning Commission: Making Bullet Proof Decisions.
·   Parks Committee held a successful sledding day on February 8th.
·   Supervisor Martin, Treasurer Fielek, Clerk Gaffner, Trustee Imhoff and
Planning Assistant Bloomquist attended the MTA conference.
·   Drafting of the Code Enforcement is ongoing. Suggested posting information
on the website of the development of a Code Enforcement Ordinance to keep the
residents abreast of the Board actions. A Public Hearing is not required.
·   JBA: The City of Williamston posted draft meeting minutes that included the
proposed library site. The Township was not in agreement of consideration of
just one site. With the City’s approval of a resolution of the river site for
the library, the JBA will not move forward. The City has not discussed the
future plans of the Community Center.
·   Cemetery meeting February 12 at 1:30. The committee will consider changes
to the fee structure. Discussed services regarding grave placements. Can
ascertain where bodies are buried. Would have sections of the cemetery checked
that are in question. Pat Shelly’s cemetery project of locating Civil War
Veterans was featured in the Williamston Today.
Public Comment for agenda & non-agenda items
News.jrn.msu.edu/Williamston
Currently five MSU student doing stories on news in Williamston.
Closed at 8:14
Review
Clerk: publishing meeting dates, PH for the 2014-15 Budget, Police Contract.
Planning: Rezoning and Container Bins.
Supervisor: Parks Master Plan
Trustee Hayes moved to adjourn.
Meeting adjourned at 8:15
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner, Clerk
March 12, 2014
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 6:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Martin called the meeting to order reviewed the agenda and led the
Pledge of Allegiance
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Gaffner, Supervisor Martin, Treasurer Fielek,
Trustee Hayes and Trustee Williams.
Absent: Trustee Imhoff
Public Comment
None. Closed at 6:02
Public Hearing
2014-15 Budget and Police Assessment 2014
Supervisor Martin explained the process for the public hearing. The Township
Board gains input from the public. This is not a time for deliberation.
Budget for 2014-15 includes Police, Cemetery, and General Fund.
Supervisor Martin asked for questions from the Board. There were none.
Supervisor Martin addressed the adjustment of $4000.00 additional in the
assessing budget. There are 486 parcels that need to be reviewed this year and
there will be a need to hire additional help to complete. Commercial and
Industrial was completed in 2013.
Beginning fund balance of $1,288,091.
Last year’s calculation aimed to keep the fund balance at $1,000,000. The
Township historically has not utilized the full budget allocations, which keeps
the balance above $1,000,000.
No other questions or input from the board.
Police Assessment roll will total $227,015.00
Trustee Hayes moved to close the Public Hearing.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Motion approved.
No further discussion.
Public Hearing closed at 6:10.
Trustee Imhoff arrived.
Consent Agenda
Trustee Hayes moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the Minutes of 2/11/2014 Township board meeting
Treasurer’s Report February 2014
General Fund Accounts Payable paid, checks 20523-20547 for a total of
$142,995.92
Payroll Checks paid 42608 through 42635 and EFT 229-232 for a total of
$19,824.39
General Account Payable checks to approve 20548 through 20568 for a total of
$14,678.09
Revenue and expenditure report 2/28/2014
Budget Amendments – increase Road improvement 101-441-814.000 by $19,960,
Drains at Large 101-441-813.000 by $1,305 and Miscellaneous 101-851-995.000 by
$295 all from Contingency Fund 101-890-965.000
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: none
Motion Approved
2014-15 Budget
Trustee Hayes moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve the 2014-2015
Township Budget as presented in the Public Hearing on March 12, 2014 with a
beginning Township Total Fund Equity of $1,288,091 as of March 31, 2013.
Seconded by Clerk Gaffner
Discussion:
·   The prediction for beginning fund balance as the 13-14 budget predicted a
deficit. Does not reflect additional revenues or expenditures.
·   Activity through 3/31 includes what is written this month.
·   Belief of budget estimations are high given the amount used in this budget
cycle. The Township has not had a deficit but is shown as part of the budget.
·   Using figures from the audit.
·   Some fees are unpredictable.
·   PC does not utilize funds- seems like budget is too high.
·   Down side: Too large a deficit being shown when we don’t need to.
·   Does not require adjustments throughout the year if addressed at the start
of the budget year.
·   Unused funds go back into fund equity.
·   Comfortable with the budget.
·   Clerk: cost going up with 3 elections. Other factors include salary
increase and State discussing requiring different equipment.
·   Some items have been brought to actual cost to give realistic picture.
·   Budget has been reviewed by members of the Board.
Motion approved
Police Assessment Role
Trustee Hayes moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve Resolution 2014-98,
confirming the 2014 Special Assessment Roll for Police Protection within the
Township with the Special Assessment Roll total of $227,015.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion:
·   Copy of resolution for everyone’s review.
·   Contract with Meridian ends 2014 and the negotiations for the new contract
will begin soon.
·   Questions regarding several assessments were clarified.
·   Appropriations of 330,056 are shown on the resolution. The resolution will
be corrected.
Roll Call Vote
Yes: Trustee Imhoff, Trustee Eyster, Treasurer Fielek, Supervisor Martin, Clerk
Gaffner, Trustee Hayes, Trustee Williams.
Nays: none
Motion approved.
NEW BUSINESS
None.
REPORTS
Departments & Committees
NEISA Board: Spoke about action pending regarding service and FOIA request for
service within the Township
and looking out for interest of the residents. The Board is interested in how
many residents have been charged for the ambulance fee. The Township does not
feel that the request is in violation of HIPA as the Township did not request
the names of residents. Resident was charged twice and should be reimbursed.
Concern of NEISA why the Township is making this request.
The Township has concern over the amount of funds in a single account and
requested they redistribute to be covered by FICA. The Township also has
concern of the investment tools being considered by NEISA members as it would
appear that some of the Bond funds recommended are not legal for taxpayer
funds.
Treasurer Fielek reviewed the prospectus and provided letter to NEISA response
regarding adoption of procedure for investments. A governmental body is not in
the business of making money. Treasurer reviewed talking points of his letter.
There are legitimate funds that a government can invest in. NEISA needs to be
given the state statute on what is permissible as monies come from taxpayers
dollars.
The funds they want to invest are part of the active budget and projected to be
used throughout the budget year. There is no guarantee that the investment is
going to be there when funds are needed. The letter should come from the
Township and needs to stress the legality of the investment options being
considered and state statute.
The letter should come from the Township Attorney and address the State’s Law
regarding investments. The Township has an obligation to prevent them from
investing our taxpayer’s money in something that is illegal.
Still looking for a NEISA director and the need for someone with a financial/
business background and office management.
Treasurer: several cd’s rolled over and the Township reinvested with
Independent Bank at a higher rate.
Will be getting Credit Card (CC) capabilities soon. The Township is in the
process of getting quotes from several companies. Will be able to take CC’s for
building fees, rentals, etc. FOIA request could also be paid this way. Cost
would be charged to the user. Residents asking about deferment on taxes. Past
due taxes have been turned over to the Ingham County Treasury. Poverty
exemption can be applied for by residents.
Website: redesigning the website with online forms and payment. Will be user
friendly for residents. Burning permits will be online and able to activate on
line with 24 hour and receive an activation number. Project launch this spring.
Packets will be uploaded to website and will be accessed by password.
Content central- scanning documents for storage. Will make it easier to search
past documents. Features an automatic retention center and will delete
documents according to schedule. The data is backed up three ways to insure
retention of records.
Codification will be completed and will be linked from the website.
MTA Chapter board meeting: Treasurer, Clerk and Supervisor attended. Good
meeting turnout with discussion on roads and Right to Farm. Eight different
communities participated. Content Central-Document storage- was presented. They
are a locally based company out of DeWitt.
Making Bullet proof decisions by Gerry Fisher: Board and Commissioners attended
from Meridian, Williamston and Delhi Township which defrayed the cost of the
program. Treasurer, Clerk, and Trustee Williams attended along with the
Planning Commission and Zoning Board of Appeals.
The Township has received a Gold standing for environmental leadership.
The Park Improvements are moving forward. Volunteer list should be on line next
week. Steve Eyke and Wanda have been working together on duties, time line,
etc.
There will be a prairie burn this spring on the north portion of the park.
Trustee Hayes and Trustee Eyster would like to receive a call when the burn is
scheduled.
Clerk Gaffner moved the Williamstown Township Board go into executive session
for the purpose of discussing attorney-client privileged information.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Discussion:
·   Question to the Attorney regarding the need for closed session as noted
from the MTA handbook. Out of MCL section 15.68.
·   Pending litigation and/or claims that have been asserted or potentially.
·   Attorney client privilege can be asserted regarding a legal opinion
prepared by the attorney.
·   Communication is client/attorney privilege.
Roll Call Vote
Yes: Trustee Imhoff Trustee Eyster, Treasurer Fielek, Supervisor Martin, Clerk
Gaffner, Trustee Hayes, Trustee Williams.
Nays: none
Motion carries.
The Board came out of executive session at 7:56 pm.
The board discussed the minutes of the 3/06/2014 NIESA board meeting and their
board's discussion of possible short term investment opportunities available to
them, as tax revenues are received. The Township board agreed to send a letter
to the NIESA board with some suggestions the Township board believes the NIESA
board should consider.
Trustee Imhoff asked about the status of the Williamson sign, the Wallace
compliance with their site plan and he had heard about a Clay brewery near
Zimmer and Haslett Roads. Supervisor Martin advised the Board that the sign on
the Williamson property has been addressed by the Township attorney; she is
going to meet with Wallace representatives and the Ingham County Health
Department is presently investigating the Clay brewery situation.
Motion to adjourn by Trustee Hayes
Seconded by Treasurer Fielek
Meeting adjourned at 8:13 PM
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner, Clerk
April 9, 2014
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 6:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Martin called the meeting to order, reviewed the agenda and led the
Pledge of Allegiance
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Imhoff, Trustee Eyster, Supervisor Martin, Treasurer Fielek,
Trustee Hayes and Trustee Williams.
Absent: Clerk Gaffner
Public Comment
None. Closed at 6:02
Consent Agenda
Trustee Hayes moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the Minutes of 3/12/2014 Township board meeting
Treasurer’s Report March 2014
General Fund Accounts Payable paid, checks 20569-20588 for a total of
$106,710.99
Police Fund Accounts Payable paid, checks 1056-1057 for a total of $152,306.50
Payroll Checks paid 42636 through 42669 and EFT 233-238 for a total of
$20,495.58
General Account Payable checks to approve 20589 through 20603 for a total of
$5,057.00 with check 20589 marked void.
Revenue and expenditure report 3/31/2014
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: none
Motion Approved
Planning Commission
Rick DeShon represented the Planning Commission to review the minutes of March
18, 2014. The Planning Commission is excited about the possibility of a joint
meeting with the city of Williamston. Proposed discussion items included: GRGZ,
River trail, CATA, Road maintenance issues, Senior center, and proposed Brewery
update along with stewardship for the Red Cedar river and its potential. Other
items of interest from the recent Grand River Corridor Study would be the Urban
Service Management area, Grand River road design and possible road diet. MDOT
participation would be an important element. Suggestions from the Board
included looking at signage regulations and zoning along our respective borders
on Grand River to create cohesiveness between the City and Township.
The Commission discussed the quality issues associated with the Red Cedar, and
what departments are responsible for clean-up, pollution control, etc. Several
commissioners have contacts with different departments to possibly invite to a
meeting for further discussion and insights regarding stewardship of this
community asset.
NEW BUSINESS
Policy #5 Revision
Supervisor Martin stated that state law requires a policy for inspection of
public records. This is for general documents and FOIA request.  This policy
update incorporates state mandates.  MTA Legislative update just came up with
more potential changes.  
Trustee Hayes moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve Revisions to
Township Policy #5, revising the policy to include information for the
“Inspection of Public Records” as required by State law.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion:
·   Would like to see highlighted changes for future document revisions.
·   Suggest the Clerk place this policy on the website.
·   Use of a smart phone or other electronics can be considered part of a FOIA
if used for Township Business.
Motion carries.
REPORTS
Departments & Committees
NEISA: Trustee Hayes addressed the letter written by Treasurer Fielek to the
NIESA Board that was part of the packet. Supervisor Paul Griffith, from Locke
Township, was in agreement with the content of the letter. There was not a
motion to move forward the investment options being considered. Board
understood this to be public tax funds that would be invested and should be
safe investments. Financial policy stated banks within the city of Williamston
were to be used. The Board requested NEISA spell out their motions in the
minutes so that the public would have a clear understanding of what was
covered. Roger Pollock is chair of the board. Good policy to repeat the motion
three times. Robert’s Rules states the motion is repeated at least once.
Suggest the NEISA Board should adopt what meeting policy they intend to use.
CRAB (County Road Advisory Board): Trustee Imhoff reviewed budget cuts and
funds that have been obtained from the state to help offset cost along with
projects the County is currently working on or considering.
Sherwood Rd. should be moved to the top of the list for repairs this year.
Williamston Rd north of Haslett Rd. will be patched in 2014. The county has not
completed the list for 2014. The County Road Department has determined that
ditching should be done before road repairs are completed.
Police Report presented by Chief Dave Hall: Annual report was provided and is
on the Township website. Quarterly report provided to the Board. Highlights
include: using the gun club shooting range next week for training. The speed
trailer is available if there are locations the board would like to see it
placed, please make the department aware. It was suggested to place it on
Zimmer Rd. to see if the road improvements have increased speed. Grant was
awarded for extra patrols to apprehend drunk drivers. Meridian Township
property technician has retired and looking for a replacement. The department
is currently two officers short due to retirements. Officers were commended for
outstanding performance at an Awards ceremony in March. Chief Hall has been
working with Gerry Richards on code enforcement information. The officers will
receive a reference page for code enforcement guidelines.
Questions/Concerns:
Confirmed that a ticket was not issued at the park for a dog off-leash.
Deer/car accidents: Interest in comparison to deer/car accidents between
Meridian Township with control from year to year. Noted no difference from one
year to the next in number of car/deer accident reports. Meridian Township
expanded the program this year and Ingham County parks also participated at LL
park north.
Treasurer reported that spring clean-up is scheduled for May 10th from 9-3.
Need volunteers. Same format as last year. Fluorescent lights can be taken by
vintage tech. Batteries will be collected. Trustee Eyster would like to pursue
a grant regarding tire collection.
The Treasurer is exploring the consolidation of printing/mailing tax bills with
Meridian Township for potential savings and consolidation of services. Meridian
uses a different format of a tax bill that is more convenient. Our township
currently sends out 2400-2600 bills. Still investigating the use of credit card
options for payment of Township fees at the counter and on the website for
items such as the business license, hall rental, and building permits. New
website is up and this would help make it user friendly. Goal to have hall
rental, FOIA request, etc. for residents to use along with online payment. Burn
permit activation will also be able to be done on line. Security is a top
concern.
Art tour is May 3rd and 4th: Information was provided to the Board. Need
volunteers to sign up. Rick and Mike, Janet, and Bob are volunteering. The
Township is fortunate to have world renowned artists as residents that are
supportive of the tour and opening their studios. Studios of Lee and Nancy
Kronenberg, Gretchen Fielek, Paul Nilsson, Margabeth Cibulka, Mark Chatterley
and Mark Mehaffey will be open with their guests. St. Katherine’s will also be
hosting artist along with the raffle items.
Treasurer Fielek noted that longtime volunteer Wilber McNinch passed away. He
will be missed.
The Township Board will host the joint meeting with the City of Williamston in
May. Consensus on the date of May 14th directly after the regular meeting.
Tree limbs: Supervisor Martin noted that calls have been received from
residents regarding the collection of tree limbs. With the lack of a DPW, is
the board interested in exploring this for future storm damage.
Discussion included the possibility of a fee, the difficulty of collection,
past tornado damage was not collected and the possibility of leniency for brush
burning. The consensus of the board was to not get involved with assistance as
there are companies that provide this service within the Township.
Supervisor Martin opened public comment for agenda and non-agenda items at 7:
30.
Rick DeShon 4120 Goldfinch Lane on behalf of Williamstown Estate subdivision
accompanied by residents, Genova, Tebeau, and Bayshore, regarding the state of
the roads within the subdivision and the impact they feel this is having on
quality of life and property values. Residents are willing to be engaged in the
process to find a productive and positive way to resolve the issue and will
continue to address the Board at the meetings to find a solution. Residents do
not feel a special assessment district should be under consideration and feel
that contributions towards a solution should come out of taxes already
collected by the Township. There are three miles of roads within the
subdivision. The Board addressed the cost of repair per mile, the policy that
is in place to help cover the cost of road repairs/maintenance and the lack of
funding from the state and county for some of the Township roads. There was
agreement on the need of residents and board members to contact both local and
state representatives on the need for road funding and searching for possible
grant opportunities to aid in the cost of repair. Several townships have
special assessment districts for subdivision road repairs/maintenance.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:40.
Review
Contact legislature regarding roads.
Clerk: policy revisions.
Supervisor: Set meeting with City on May 14th:  
Motion to adjourn by Treasurer Fielek
Seconded by Trustee Hayes
Meeting adjourned at 7:45 PM
____________________________
Mickey Martin, Supervisor
May 14, 2014
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 6:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Martin called the meeting to order, reviewed the agenda and led the
Pledge of Allegiance
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Imhoff, Trustee Eyster, Supervisor Martin, Treasurer Fielek,
Clerk Gaffner, Trustee Hayes and Trustee Williams.
Absent: None
Public Comment
None. Closed at 6:02
Capital Area District Library Report (CADL)
Williamston librarian Julie Chrisinske, provided the annual report of CADL.
CADL has been in operation for 15 years and in August 2013 made available a new
Website and revised mission statement. CADL is working in local schools and for
the past few years has sponsored a “Book Battle” for 6th grade students,
encouraging the reading of books from the library. The library provides several
technology services, including use of computers, printing, scanning, and
downloading of books and instruction classes for those desiring to know more
about the use of technology. There is a proposal on the August 5th primary
election for the renewal of 1.56 mills to support the operation of CADL. During
the past 12 months there were more than 62,000 visitors to the local library
and Williamstown Township has 1,640 CADL card members.
Consent Agenda
Trustee Hayes moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the Minutes of 4/09/2014 Township board meeting
Treasurer’s Report April 2014
General Fund Accounts Payable paid, checks 20604-20627 for a total of
$20,294.49 with check #20607 marked void Payroll Checks paid 42670 through
42693 and EFT 239-242 for a total of $18,577.50 General Account Payable checks
to approve 20628 through 20643 for a total of $12,160.40 Revenue and
expenditure report 4/30/2014 Litigation
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion: Trustee Imhoff stated the minutes should show Sherwood Road and not
Shoeman Road in the minutes, under the report of the Ingham County Road
department.
Motion Approved
NEW BUSINESS
Township Road Improvement
Trustee Eyster, provided information on the roads within the Township and the
fact that over the past 7 years the Township has spent $500,000 in road
maintenance and during that same period Ingham County has spent approximately
$195,000. She advised the Board that there are 50.3 miles of County Secondary
roads in the Township and the cost to resurface these roads is $32,000 per
mile. If the Township were to establish a program for the resurfacing and
maintenance of the 50.3 miles on a 7 year program, it would require an
assessment of approximately 1 mill. The majority of Board members voiced their
opinion in support of holding public hearings to obtain information from the
Township residents and find out if there was enough support to put a road
millage proposal on the ballot at a near future election. It was agreed to
begin providing information to the Township residents concerning the condition
of the roads, the cost to maintain them and what could happen to the roads if
they are not maintained.
Township Parking Lot
Trustee Eyster, moved that the Williamstown Township Board approve restriping
the Township parking lot with the current design, at a cost not to exceed $425.
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion: None
Motion Approved
Burn Permits
Supervisor Martin stated that while working on making requests for Burn Permits
available on the Township website, she was made aware of the fact that the
Township burn ordinance does not allow the residents of a residential dwelling
located in an industrial zone to obtain a burn permit. The ordinance is
specific about not allowing for commercial burn permits but does not allow for
an exception for residence within the same zoning.
Trustee Hayes moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the granting of
burn permits to nonconforming residents living in industrial zones B-1, B-2 and
I-1, when residents make application and follow the guidelines set forth in the
Township “Burning Permit Application.” Burn permits will not be granted to
residents in these same zones if the residence parcel also includes a
commercial exposure.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: None
Motion Approved.
REPORTS
Departments & Committees
Art Tour: At present, the gross receipts are $4,335 but there may be more. A
final report will be available at the next Board meeting
Compensation Committee: Supervisor Martin advised the Board that two members of
the committee are deceased and she would like Board members to provide her with
recommendations to fill the vacancies.
Public Comment
Kurt Guter was accompanied by several residents of Williamstown Estates and
addressed the Board concerning the need to upgrade the roads in Williamstown
Estates. He stated they were in need of repair and the residents knew of budget
constraints but would assist the Township in seeking a dedicated millage
assessment for road maintenance within the Township.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:20 PM
Review
Motion to adjourn by Trustee
Seconded by Treasurer Fielek
Meeting adjourned at 7:25 PM
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner, Clerk
June 11, 2014
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 6:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Martin called the meeting to order reviewed the agenda and led the
Pledge of Allegiance
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Imhoff, Trustee Eyster, Supervisor Martin, Clerk Gaffner and
Trustee Hayes.
Absent: Treasurer Fielek and Trustee Williams.
Public Comment
None
Closed at 6:04
Police Report
Monthly police report was provided to the Board for review.
Consent Agenda
Trustee Hayes moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the Minutes of 5/14/2014 Township board meeting
General Fund Accounts Payable paid, checks 20644-20671 for a total of
$42,493.31
Payroll Checks paid 42694 through 42734 and EFT 243-246 for a total of
$22,611.29
General Account Payable checks to approve 20672 through 20680 for a total of
$3,836.42
Revenue and expenditure report 5/31/2014
Litigation
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Motion Approved
Planning Commission
Minutes 5-21-14
Zoning amendments
Commissioner Brown-Timm introduced herself as the representative for the PC
(Planning Commission) to review the minutes and answer any questions the Board
may have.
The Public Hearing was held to obtain public comment on the proposed ordinance
amendments for the municipal code. Since there were no public comments, the PC
moved to recommend the Board adopt the proposed amendments.
Trustee Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve the Planning
Commission’s recommended changes to the Zoning Ordinance, Ordinance to Regulate
Division of Land and the Subdivision Control Ordinance to add regulation,
concerning municipal civil infractions to the penalties and enforcement
sections of the ordinances.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes
Discussion:
The Board will determine the procedure for notification of violations.
Motion Approved
The PC also reviewed proposed regulations for Medical Marijuana, agritourism,
and microbreweries and brewpubs. A Public Hearing will be held on June 18 for
public comment on the proposed regulations.
Added to the Agenda for discussion was the discharging of firearms on private
property. It had been brought to the attention of some of the Commissioners
concerns from residents of this issue. The PC would like the Board to consider
further investigation into the issue and if regulations would be advisable.
The Parks and Rec Master Plan was approved by the PC and was then going to the
Parks and Rec Committee for approval before presentation to the Board for
adoption.
Discussion regarding firearms:
·   State Law stipulates a distance of 150 yards.
·   Would like more information before deciding if this issue should be
addressed further.
·   Issue is principally enforcement and knowledge of state laws by residents.
·   Need for backstops for target practice, minimum acreage, and distance from
adjacent property owners.
·   Suggest a link to state regulations on the website.
·   Police could enforce.
·   PC feels there is warrant for further investigation.
·   A synopsis of what the State Regulations are and aren’t on the website
would be helpful.
·   Preference for a link to the State site as regulations change.
·   The Board would like to see the information that was reviewed by the PC.
·   Consultant’s concern over material distributed was dated material.
OLD BUSINESS
2014 Township Road Improvement
Trustee Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve the road repair
estimate from the Ingham County Road Department to do asphalt wedging and
single course chip-sealing of Beeman Road, from Brookshire Court to the
Williamston City Limit, a distance of approximately 0.6 miles at a cost not to
exceed $30,000.
Seconded by Clerk Gaffner
Discussion:
Point out that the $30,000 is split between the county and township. $15,000
will be rolled over into the next year for future projects.
Language is more specific to include wedging.
Clarification on project cost. The Board will need to approve any cost
overages.
Motion approved
Road millage
Board is looking at putting a road millage on the ballot for road maintenance
and repairs.
Supervisor Martin stated the Board is considering a ballot proposal for a
millage dedicated to road maintenance and reviewed the report. There are four
classifications of roads: State Roads, County primary, County Secondary, County
Secondary Subdivisions. Twp. funds are not used for State or County primary.
Act 51 requires a match for secondary county road improvements, which the
Township has provided.
There are three types of road preservation: Reconstruction, Hot in place
recycle, (typically in subs and is contracted out) and micro-surface over chip
seal. In the past seven years the Township has spent $500,000 and the County
$195,000 on Township secondary roads. Cost affiliated with each type of
preservation was reviewed along with the recommended maintenance schedule and
the possibility of some roads converting back to gravel.
The Board road policy was reviewed as well as funding for road improvements.
The amount of money the Township may receive from new state funding may provide
approximately $8,000. At this time the Township cannot maintain the roads in
acceptable repair without further funding.
Trustee Eyster reviewed the tables in the report showing the initial cost to
bring roads up to standard, maintenance cost of secondary subdivision roads and
secondary roads, the sources of funding and potential new funds from a millage
over a 10 year period. The report is fairly detailed so that when it is
finalized, residents will have a clearly written detail of the Township’s
needs. Without funding the Township would need to revert some roads back to
gravel. There are roads that are currently in need of reconstruction.
Clerk Gaffner requested residents sign up to receive a copy of the report and
excused himself to make additional copies.
Supervisor Martin addressed the amount of property taxes that are collected for
the Township is 2 %
(Approximately $182,000). Over 5 years the total collected from residents of
Williamstown Estates totaled approx. $19,500. The board would like to hold a
Town Hall meeting sometime in July to review a potential ballot proposal.
The Board welcomed comments from those in attendance:
Kurt Guter: 4045 Cygnet, Williamston Estates along with other residents of the
subdivision.
(Crawford, Genova, Cooper, Hillard, and Tebeau) They noted their support for
funding measure to be placed on the ballot. Suggest simpler information that
can be shared on the website with the detailed report available.
Possibility of subdivision millages being dedicated to subdivision roads.
Residents will advocate for passage.
Discussion: Road Committee would determine which roads were to be scheduled for
maintenance. Non primary road deteriation means lower property values for
residents. County determines signage.
Tim Brady, 5795 Shoeman Rd.: Requested clarification of the pacer rating. 0-
9 pavement asset evaluation system used throughout the state with roads re-
evaluated every two years. A millage would be held in a dedicated account only
to be used for roads. Concern over ballot language being proposed by the state
overlapping with Township language and over taxation. The Board would only ask
for what is needed and would lower amount collected if monies are not needed.
Policy has not been discussed.
Marv Thompson 1480 Epley Rd., Concern paved roads should remain paved and the
effect of unpaved roads on property values.
Brian Bird: 167 Germany Rd.: Transportation committee member. 2013 master plan
road map shows different road classifications used by county and state. The
information breaks down the responsibility of maintenance from state, county
and township and funding. The Township currently does not have the ability to
fund maintenance on a 7 year cycle.
Donna Tocarchik, 9065 Deer Trail: Curious as to next step if millage does not
pass and the ability of the Township to maintain core roads.
Joscelyn Brown-Timm, 122 Haslett: Clarification of county’s responsibility to
maintain gravel roads.
Trustee Eyster confirmed that the issue of road maintenance has been building
up for some time and the Road Committee felt it was time to ask the Board to
address funding with a ballot proposal for a millage.
Trustee Eyster provides a yearly report to the County of pothole areas that
need to be addressed.
The Board appreciates resident’s questions and concerns.
Please sign up for weekly emails on the website if not already receiving
notices.
NEW BUSINESS
Trustee Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board approve accepting the
$3,000 donation specified to assist with the preservation and maintenance of
Williamstown Township Parks.
Seconded by Trustee Imhoff
Discussion: none
Motion Approved.
REPORTS
Departments & Committees
NEISA: Trustee Hayes reported the new fire chief has taken over and has been
responsive to concerns of the Township and following the Burn Ordinance.
Question of enforcement responsibilities of the Ordinance. Rights to burn under
the Ordinance have been suspended for repeat violators. Concern of NEISA
operating under original agreement. New chief is reviewing and working with the
two departments.
Planning Commission: Trustee Eyster expressed her concern over the relevance of
the information provided regarding the discharging of firearms due to dates of
passage and wants to make sure the Board is reviewing the most current
information available.
Hudson animal case: Animals were removed. Emergency stay for removal of animals
was denied by the appellate court. Discussion of the new category under the
Right to Farm Act to allow for local control under certain requirements. Will
link the MDARD site to the Township website.
Request from Lansing Oar and Paddle Club to help facilitate authorization to
clean up the Red Cedar River with the Ingham County Drain Commission. The club
would follow the State woody debris removal guidelines. This would allow
navigation of the river for paddlers.
The History Tour will take place in October with participation of the Branch
School.
Pre audit was done last week.
Ingham County Road Department would like to have a session with the Board to
review projected cost. Please advise of availability to attend a meeting.
Public Comment
Brian Bird, 167 Germany Rd.: Re: target discharge for firearms. Concern over
the 150 yd. rule pertaining to hunting activities which is different from
discharging a firearm. Does not feel it applies to both.
Tim Brady, 5795 Shoeman Rd.: Re: firearms. Concern over additional regulations
and cost of enforcement. Regulations are not always the answer.
Board discussed the feasibility of a flat assessment vs. a millage for road
funding. Supervisor will investigate further.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:52 PM
Review
Clerk-Synopsis
Motion to adjourn by Trustee Hayes
Meeting adjourned at 7:55 PM
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner, Clerk
July 9, 2014
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 6:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Martin called the meeting to order reviewed the agenda and led the
Pledge of Allegiance
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Imhoff, Trustee Eyster, Supervisor Martin, Clerk Gaffner
Treasurer Fielek and Trustee Williams
Absent: Treasurer Hayes
Public Comment
None
Closed at 6:04
Police Report
Chief Hall stated that a corrected written report would be provided to the
Clerk. Three new officers have been hired along with a new property manager for
the evidence room. The chief has also met with the new director of NEISA to
discuss the Township burning regulations. The department is currently working
on the new budget. Also reported on activities for the past month that included
home invasions, dog bites, an auto accident, and a fight.
Chief Hall entertained questions from the Board. There were none.
Consent Agenda
Trustee Eyster moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the Minutes of 6/11/2014 Township board meeting
General Fund Accounts Payable paid, checks 20681-20697 for a total of
$30,265.51
Payroll Checks paid 42735 through 42767 and EFT 247-250 for a total of
$22,027.63
General Account Payable checks to approve 20698 through 20716 for a total of
$12,736.39
Revenue and expenditure report 6/30/2014
Treasurer’s Reports for May & June 2014
Building Inspector’s Report
Litigation
Seconded by Treasurer Fielek
Discussion:
Payroll checks paid: $22,521.51 is the corrected amount.
Motion Approved
Planning Commission
Minutes 6-18-14
Zoning amendments Marijuana
Commissioner Schultink introduced himself as the representative for the
Planning Commission.
The action item before the Board is the amendments addressing Medical
Marijuana.
Supervisor Martin addressed proposed amendments to the Planning Commission
recommendations which include adding Compassion Clubs to prohibited uses,
adding Day Care to distance location requirements, amendments to inspections,
consumption and Care giver occupancy.
Commissioner Schultink stated that the proposed clarifications meet the spirit
of the amendments.
Clarification of PC discussion of Compassion Clubs was provided.
Treasurer Fielek moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve the Planning
Commission’s recommended revisions to the Williamstown Township Zoning
Ordinance to Permit Medical Marijuana Use, as amended.
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion:
·   Definitions: not include medical marijuana facilities
·   Qualifying patient may grow marijuana for their own use.
·   Caregiver can dispense to other patients.
·   Only caregivers would be inspected.
·   Patient would not be subject to inspections
·   Inspections seem excessive
·   Compliance with inspections regarding NEISA
·   FOIA request for license and permits to know who is growing
·   Notification of SUP in residential neighborhoods
·   Cannot refuse SUP if they meet all the requirements
·   Sets parameters for protection of both applicant and neighbors
·   Similarity to home occupation
·   Could cause more opportunity for break-ins with the requirement of SUP
·   Error on the side of caution with the requirement of the SUP
·   Reviewed definition of a facility
·   Motion Carries
Commissioner Schultink continued his review of the Planning Commission meeting:
The Public Hearing was also held for amendments regarding Brewpubs and
Microbreweries along with Agritourism. Both were tabled for further discussion
and information.
Cortis Special Use application for Used Car Sales was reviewed. The PH will be
held on July 16th.
Commissioner Schultink distributed additional information to Board for review
and to be presented to the PC regarding target practice on private property and
informed the Board of his conversation with Chief Hall and .
Meridian Twp. Planner; Gail Oranchek, and asked for Board approval for the PC
consideration of regulations.
Suggested consideration of size of property, nearness of adjacent residents,
backstops, caliber of gun may be items to consider in regulations for safety of
nearby residents.
May be other ordinances within the state to review.
Discussion:
·   This excerpt from Frank Kelly is all that was part of the original document
dealing with target practice.
·   Check with other Townships and how/if they regulate target practice.
·   DNR has made some changes to caliber of rifle that can be used in hunting.
·   DNR limitation only deals with hunting.
·   Enough rules already.
·   Fiduciary responsibility for safety.
·   Research more what other communities are doing and review to assist police
in response to complaints.
·   Board wants to review further before referring to the PC.
·   Definition of Agri-tourism: wide scope of uses. More emphasis on the
tourism portion.
·   Intensity, noise, etc. are considerations in addressing regulations for
Agri-tourism.
OLD BUSINESS
Road millage Proposal
Trustee Eyster reviewed the tables presented to the Board for consideration.
Suggested adding definitions to the four tables to aid in explanation. Also
suggested a link to this info on the website so that residents can see what the
Township needs are. Additional funding from the state could reduce the millage
collected.
Discussion:
Question what the millage request is for the city.
Timeline for proposal: July 29th is deadline with Aug 12th for final proposal
language
Need to have more public input before placing on the ballot
Still need something easier to understand to supplement tables.
Hold town hall meetings in August and October.
1.5 mills for 10 years for road preservation are the Recommendation from the
Road committee and ICDRT. County cannot fund anything but primary roads. At
this time the Township cannot expect any more than $30,000 from county per
year. The Township cannot fix the roads within the present budget.
Absence of residents on such an important issue
Need for good communication on the subject to residents
Millage vs Assessment
Special Assessment is available in subdivisions however do not believe you can
Special Assess on thorough roads.
Special Assessment is usually by parcel road frontage
Delhi will not do improvements unless special assessment in Subdivision.
Consensus to move forward with putting language on the ballot for a millage
proposal
The Board Cannot be involved in lobbying for passage.
Trustee Eyster and Treasurer Fielek will work on wording for the ballot
proposal
Trustee Eyster will re-work on the tables.
Clerk Eyster will create an explanation document for residents.
Goal to have completed by the July 17th.
NEW BUSINESS
None.
REPORTS
Departments & Committees
Planning Commission meeting on the 16th
Saturday: recycle
IC chapter meeting on July 23rd in Mason
Audit is July 22&23
Supervisor Martin has been asked to serve on a committee to develop regulations
for urban farming by MDARD.
July 28th is fair board 100th anniversary.
Election on Aug 5th
Look at calendar for extra time in Sept/Oct for Town hall meetings to answer
questions.
Treasurer Fielek: Has signed a contract with Govolution for computerized
support for internet and at the office. They will handle separate accounts and
calculate fee for user. Also have e-check with a 1.50 charge. Will bring a
resolution to the Board next month for approval.
Treasurer Fielek also reported on the Township Cleanup day. Income from the
metal recycling was approximately $521.00 Electronics collection was free.
Batteries still need to be recycled/sold.
Cost of $1545 for the trash dumpsters. There were 327 trips through recycling
that day.
Cost was approximately $1000 for recycling day.
Supervisor Martin reported that the burn permit is just about ready to go live
on the website.
Password will be given to residents the first time they call in.
Original application will need to be done in the office.
Packets can now go on the website with a User name and password for Board and
Commission to gain access to the packets. The Board will have access to the PC
packets.
Public Comment
None. Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 7:30 PM
Review
Clerk Gaffner-Synopsis and Medical Marijuana amendments
Treasurer Fielek and Trustee Eyster- Ballot language
Motion to adjourn by Clerk Gaffner
Seconded by Treasurer Fielek
Meeting adjourned at 7:33 pm.
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner, Clerk
July 24, 2014
Williamstown Township
Special Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 10:30 a.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan by
Supervisor Martin.
Present: Supervisor Martin, Trustee Imhoff, Clerk Gaffner, Treasurer Fielek,
Trustee Williams, Trustee Hayes And Trustee Eyster
Public Comment:
None
Discussion of Placing a Proposal to raise funds for Township road preservation,
reconstruction and maintenance.
Board Comments:
      Due to continuing inflation, is 1.5 mills enough to preserve the Township
Roads?
      It is understood the money being sought is for secondary roads, including
subdivision roads.
If the County receives taxes from Township residents, and the county
commissioners cut back on the amount of funds allocated for specific budgets,
such as police and roads, why should the Township have to increase taxes to
take care of those areas and not put pressure on the County to use the taxes
the Township gives them, in the Township?
The proposal should designate what amount of the tax increase will be used for
secondary roads, and what amount will be used on subdivision roads.
Can the proposal specify an amount to be used on County Primary Roads and not
just secondary and subdivision roads?
Motion by Clerk Gaffner: Moved the Township Board approve placing a proposal on
the November 4th ballot for Township Road preservation, reconstruction and
maintenance with a 1.5 mill limit as presented and amended.
   Second by Trustee Eyster
   Motion Approved
Williamstown Township Ballot Proposal November 4, 2014
Shall the limitation on the amount of ad valorem taxes which may be levied by
the Township of Williamstown, Ingham County, Michigan, against taxable property
in the Township be increased by up to 1.5 mill ($1.50 per $1,000 of taxable
value) for a period of ten (10) years, 2014 through 2023, inclusive, for the
purpose of providing funds for secondary road preservation, reconstruction and
maintenance, and shall the Township levy such millage for these purposes? If
approved and levied in its entirety, the estimated revenue that the Township
would collect from this 1.5 mill is $328,342 in 2014.
11:38 Trustee Fielek moved for
adjournment                                        Second by Trustee Eyster
                                    
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner, Clerk
August 6, 2014
Williamstown Township
Special Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 6:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan by
Supervisor Martin.
Present: Supervisor Martin, Trustee Imhoff, Clerk Gaffner, Treasurer Fielek,
and Trustee Eyster
Absent: Trustee Williams and Trustee Hayes 
Public Comment:
Concern by attendees, wanted to make sure the resolution was received by the
County Clerk and approved in time to be placed on November ballot.
Agenda – Board Resolution Placing Millage Proposal on November 2014 Ballot
Motion by Clerk Gaffner: Moved the Township Board approve the Board Resolution
placing the following proposal on the November 4, 2014 ballot. .
Shall the limitation on the amount of ad valorem taxes which may be levied by
the Township of Williamstown, Ingham County, Michigan, against taxable property
in the Township be increased by up to 1.5 mill ($1.50 per $1,000 of taxable
value) for a period of ten (10) years, 2014 through 2023, inclusive, for the
purpose of providing funds for secondary road preservation, reconstruction and
maintenance, and shall the Township levy such millage for these purposes? If
approved and levied in its entirety, the estimated revenue that the Township
would collect from this 1.5 mill is $328,342 in 2014.
Second by Trustee Eyster
There was opportunity for discussion but none was offered.
Roll Call Vote: Yes – Trustee Eyster, Treasurer Fielek, Supervisor Martin and
Clerk Gaffner           No – Trustee Imhoff              Absent – Trustee Hayes
and Trustee Williams
Motion Approved
Public Comment: Glad to see the proposal go on the ballot.
6:12 p.m. Trustee Fielek moved for adjournment   - Second by Trustee Eyster
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner, Clerk
August 13, 2014
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 6:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Martin called the meeting to order reviewed the agenda and led the
Pledge of Allegiance
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Imhoff, Trustee Eyster, Supervisor Martin, Clerk Gaffner,
Treasurer Fielek, Trustee Hayes and Trustee Williams
Absent: none
Public Comment
None
Closed at 6:04
Consent Agenda
Trustee Hayes moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the Minutes of 7/09/2014 Township board meeting and Special Board
Meetings on 7/24/2014 and 8/06/2014.
General Fund Accounts Payable paid, checks 20717-20750 for a total of
$73,035.27
Police Account Payable paid, check 1058 for a total of $52,759.31
Payroll Checks paid 42768 through 42824 and EFT 251-258 for a total of
$26,526.89
General Account Payable checks to approve 20751 through 20773 for a total of
$14,191.53
Police Account Payable check to approve check 1059 for $76.00
Revenue and expenditure report 7/31/2014
Treasurer’s Reports for July 2014
Building Inspector’s Report
Litigation
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion: Check 2065 is for reimbursement of cost associated with the park
project.
Motion Approved
Planning Commission
Minutes 7-16-14
Secretary Eidt, representative for the Planning Commission began his review of
the meeting with the Public Hearing for the Special Use Permit application
submitted by Charlotte and Rick Cortis for Used Car Sales at 1099 E. Grand
River Rd. The Planning Commission reviewed the consultants recommendation and
heard from the applicant. There was no one that spoke against the application.
The Planning Commission recommends Board approval of the SUP and approval of
the Site Plan subject to the issues addressed in McKenna’s review letter dated
June 24, 2014. The conditions of site plan approval included:
·   Subject to a variance for the required front setback.
·   Provide performance guarantee for landscaping.
·   Provide a floor plan.
·   Modify lighting.
·   Further signage to insure compliance.
·   Barrier free parking.
·   Entire lot must be restriped.
·   Remove landscaping and update site plan to show planting.
·   Update detailing info and number of vehicles.
The Planning Commission also reviewed a Site Plan Review application submitted
by Mr. Brian Ruh for 684 E. Grand River Rd. The Planning Commission will hold a
hearing for the proposed site plan on August 20th, 2014.
The Planning Commission completed their review of proposed language for
Brewpubs and Microbreweries and have recommended board approval of the proposed
regulations.
The Planning Commission also discussed the means used of determining need that
is addressed in the application for SUP request: consider more of an analysis
of economic need and guidelines and policy for basing decision. Other
discussion items included: Access to internet and firearm regulations.
Discussion of minutes:
Determination of economic need within the community is the responsibility of
the applicant. Part of the discussion should include how many of one type of
business is appropriate within the community. The responsibility of success
relies on the applicant. This should not be the only reason for turning down an
application.
SUP application 1099 E. Grand River
Supervisor Martin opened the floor for discussion regarding the Special Use
Permit Application for the Used Car Sales at 1099 E. Grand River Rd.
The Township is in receipt of a Variance Application for the Setback, the
Performance Bond to cover the landscaping, floor plan showing areas of the
building being used by the applicant, and an updated plan addressing the number
of cars, signage, and the detailing information as requested. The applicant has
already addressed the parking concerns.
Discussion:
·   Responsibility of items on the site plan are both the applicants and
owners. The landscaping requirements have not been fulfilled since the original
approval. The applicant assumes responsibility for fulfillment through the
application process even though some of the items are the landowners
responsibility.
·   Maximum number of cars for sale is 12. This is what was approved by the
Planning Commission.
·   Concern of use following the Master Plan. This parcel is not part of the
Green Zone.
Greg Basore spoke on behalf of the Cortis and Wallace Storage. Additional
information was passed out by applicant. He has spoken with applicant,
consultant and Planning Assistant regarding the issues needing to be address.
Feels this request for a SUP should be separate and distinct from any previous
approval. Mr. and Mrs. Cortis are residents of the area. They have taken upon
themselves to satisfy all conditions as outlined by the Township Consultant.
The applicant has satisfied the conditions subject to minor revisions needed on
the site plan.
Further Discussion:
·   The PC recommended approval subject to items that needed to be addressed.
·   Supervisor Martin confirmed receipt of the latest memo from the consultant
addressed to the Board.
·   Aware that the Wallace storage sign does have lighting that is not shown on
the site plan.
·   If the applicant owns more than 12 vehicles they will be stored off site.
·   Performance bond has been received by the Township for the landscaping.
·   Bulb replacement, where needed, will be done by applicant
·   Setback can be addressed with either option of outside 45’ setback with the
understanding they can apply for a variance closer to the roadway subject to
approval.
·   Has submitted check and application for Variance for siting of cars.
·   Reviewed amount of space being rented.
·   Donated materials for the school science and math academy and also to the
park.
·   The applicant has been pro-active with the clean up of the Wallace site.
·   Need a completed site plan by engineer.
·   Applicant did make some changes on the engineers site plan with the wells
and proposed buildings.
·   The dedication of the applicant to meet the requirements of the PC.
·   These items needed to be completed on Wallace property and site plan had to
come into compliance before approving the SUP. Mr. Cortis was very willing and
helpful in getting site plan updated
·   There is an understanding that the GoMinis will be moved off site.
·   This site plan is a combination of the landscaping plan and site plan.
Completion of the building phases for additional storage buildings were added
back into the plan at the request of the property owner.
·   Board does not see any deficiency in the SUP items that needed to be
addressed. Applicant is willing to take on responsibility of the owner to
insure site plan is updated and Kebs reevaluates the wells, and current
conditions of site. Anything left on this plan would need to be completed.
GoMinis need to be removed and are not part of SUP.
·   Understanding of concept for internet sales and car sales. The state has
requirements for used car sales. State has tightened requirements and do an on-
sight inspection of premises. Tag will display information needed for sale.
·   Applicant and family will be running the business. Used car sales are not a
permitted use on this site, only by special use.
·   Delivery of vehicles will be by a car hauler with loading and unloading in
the back.
Clerk Gaffner moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the application for
a SUP for Used Car Sales at 1099 E. Grand River and approval of the Site Plan
subject to the conditions outlined in the memorandum from Chris Doozan, dated
8/12/14 and either: 1)obtaining a 45 foot front setback variance to allow
vehicles for sale to be parked on the south side of the parking lot, or
2)parking the vehicles for sale on the north side of the parking lot with the
applicant providing Township with an updated sealed engineer site plan.
Trustee Eyster support.
Discussion:
·   It is up to the board if they want to see the revisions before approving.
·   Does not appear that the Health department checked the wells sited on the
site plan.
·   Older drains and well need to be addressed on the site plan.
·   Previous owner may have drilled these wells as test wells. All wells and
test wells were suppose to be recorded with health department.
Motion approved.
Microbreweries and Brewpubs
Treasurer Fielek moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve amending the
Township Zoning Ordinance, permitting brewpubs and microbreweries under certain
conditions in Williamstown Township as specified in Section 8.02. .
Support by Trustee Imhoff
Discussion:
·   With the popularity of micro-breweries and brewpubs, it is important to
address the uses in the Zoning Ordinance.
Motion approved.
Clerk Gaffner moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve the requirement of
a $10,000 performance guarantee be deposited with the Township to ensure
faithful completion of the improvements required by the Township, in compliance
with Section 2.18 of the Williamstown Township Zoning Ordinance.
Seconded by Trustee Imhoff
Discussion:
·   This will insure the placement of landscaping at 1099 E. Grand River.
Motion approved.
Parks and Rec Master Plan
Treasurer Fielek moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve the Adoption of
the Williamstown Township Parks & Recreation Master Plan as recommended by the
Township Parks & Recreation Committee.
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion:
·   Suggest removal of the pond from the plan. Concern over safety and
potential hazards, along with the additional cost and maintenance. Location of
the pond is in a high traffic area.
·   Use of pond for ice skating and wildlife feature. Feel it is in the wrong
place for a wildlife feature.
·   Removal of the pond should be addressed by the Parks and Rec Committee and
the Planning Commission
·   Consensus on removal of pond from the Master Plan.
Treasurer Fielek moved to amend the motion with the addition of the language:
with the exception of all mention of the pond. Seconded by Trustee Williams.
Discussion:
·   Would not like to see the expense of the review process due to sending back
to the PC and Parks and Rec Committee, however the motion could be tabled to
allow for comment from the Commission and Committee.
Amendment passed.
Trustee Imhoff provided the Board with information regarding the existing land
use map included in the plan as well as the revisions that would result to the
Table A-6 that he feels is incorrect based on his observation of use of the
land. Some of the suggested changes are residential properties and some
agricultural land. Need clarification of how and what data was used subject to
the accuracy of the table and existing land use map being confirmed. Do not
believe it would make a difference to the P&R plan. The Existing Land Use plan
should be reviewed for accuracy.
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: none
No: Trustee Imhoff, Trustee Eyster, Treasurer Fielek, Supervisor Martin, Clerk
Gaffner, Trustee Hayes, Trustee Williams.
Treasurer Fielek moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the resolution
for adoption of the Williamstown Township Parks and Recreation Master Plan with
the following revisions:
removal of all reference to construction of the pond at the park and removal of
the existing land use plan and chart map 1 and all reference to map 1.
Seconded by Trustee Imhoff
Discussion: None
Roll Call
Ayes: Trustee Imhoff, Trustee Eyster, Treasurer Fielek, Supervisor Martin,
Clerk Gaffner, Trustee Hayes, Trustee Williams.
No: none
NEW BUSINESS
Financial Transaction Device Resolution
Trustee Hayes moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve the Board
Resolution for Accepting Payments by a Financial Transaction Device.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion:
·   Suggestion of adding type of devises, fees, etc. These items should not be
addressed in the resolution.
·   The Township holds no liability for default of payee to financial
institution.
Roll Call
Ayes: Trustee Imhoff, Trustee Eyster, Treasurer Fielek, Supervisor Martin,
Clerk Gaffner, Trustee Hayes, Trustee Williams.
No: none
OLD BUSINESS
Ordinance Amendments
Supervisor Martin reminded the Board that the amendments to the Zoning
Ordinance, Subdivision Control Ordinance, the Wetlands Ordinance and the Land
Division Ordinance have been reviewed by the Planning Commission and approved
by the Board. The Board is responsible for the amendments to the Burn, Blight,
Sidewalk, and Business License. These amendments are necessary to establish
procedures for the management and enforcement of the Township Ordinances.
Clerk Gaffner moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve amending the
Township Burn, Business License, Blight and Sidewalk Ordinance.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Clerk Gaffner left
Discussion:
·   Feel residents should be able to burn household waste.
·   Clarification on title of Municipal Code.
Motion approved
Clerk Gaffner returned
Municipal Code
Treasurer Fielek moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve establishing
procedures for the management and enforcement of the Williamstown Township
Ordinances.
Second by Trustee Hayes.
Discussion:
·   Clarification of 2.2: The bureau at the Township Hall is located at the
Township. Definition of Bureau is addressed in Section2.
·   Policies should be approved by the Board. Any procedures would be
administrative.
·   Clarification of the title for Meridian Police Department.
·   Minicipal Code language has been reviewed by the Planning Consultant,
Township Attorney and Police Chief.
Motion approved.
Farmland Preservation Program Approval
Trustee Imhoff moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve the applications
for Ingham County Farmland and Open Space Preservation by Daniel K. Goodnoe and
Jo Ann Goodnoe of 726 East Sherwood Road and Russ L. Stickle and Julia E.
Stickle of 5271 North Williamston Road.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
The county will be purchasing the development rights to the properties and they
will be permanently preserved and protected from development.
Roll Call:
Aye: Trustee Imhoff, Trustee Eyster, Treasurer Fielek, Supervisor Martin, Clerk
Gaffner, Trustee Hayes, Trustee Williams.
No: none.
REPORTS
Departments & Committees
·   County Road Committee: Trustee Imhoff reported on actions of the committee.
Report provided in packet. Sherwood Rd. will not get a chip/seal this year. The
2012 chip sealing is not performing as well as expected. Shoeman Rd
improvements came in over budget so is out for rebidding.
·   Trustee Eyster would like the board to address the funding of the roads
based on request of millage and would like to see a policy amendment to support
the millage with $90,000. Concern with perception that this would be construed
as swaying votes if it is contingent on passage of the millage request.
·   Treasurer Fielek stated audit report will be presented in September.
·   Town Hall meeting dates set for September 24 and October 15th at 6:00 for
explanation of millage and to answer questions. County representation will also
be present. Presentation of facts on estimates, pacer system policy and the
method of prioritizing will be covered.
Public Comment
Gerry Eidt, 4115 Vanneter: Commended the Board members for the spirited debate
on topics, that they look out for the best interest of the Township, and proud
to be part of the Township.
The Board thanked Secretary Eidt for his years of service on the Board of
Review and Planning Commission.
Public Comment closed at 8:25.
Review
Clerk Gaffner-Publication of Synopsis and Ordinance Amendments
Supervisor Martin-Municipal Code and Farm Preservation
Motion to adjourn by Treasurer Fielek
Meeting adjourned at 8:30 pm.
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner, Clerk
September 10, 2014
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
September 10, 2014
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 6:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Martin called the meeting to order reviewed the agenda and led the
Pledge of Allegiance
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Imhoff, Trustee Eyster, Supervisor Martin, Clerk Gaffner,
Treasurer Fielek, Trustee Hayes and Trustee Williams
Absent: none
Public Comment
None
Closed at 6:02
Audit Report
Shannon Rodriguez, representative of Layton & Richardson reviewed their
responsibilities under accepted auditing standards as well as recommendations.
Of particular note on page 16: pension funding: the Township will now have to
report the liability for pensions.
The requirements for reporting will be provided to the Township.
There were no expenditures over budget this year.
Comments and recommendations: Two prior year recommendations that have not yet
been implemented include segregation of duties of bank account reconciliation
from cash receipts and/or cash disbursements; the cash receipts log should be
reconciled to the deposit slip before the deposit is taken to the bank; along
with recommendation for the Supervisor to review reconciliations after
completion.
The firm appreciates the preparedness of the Township for the audit.
Consent Agenda
Trustee Hayes moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the Minutes of 8/13/2014 Township board meeting.
General Fund Accounts Payable paid, checks 20774-20789 for a total of $5,404.17
Payroll Checks paid 42825 through 42855 and EFT 259-264 for a total of
$20,294.23
General Account Payable checks to approve 20790 through 20806 for a total of
$20,109.64
Revenue and expenditure report 8/31/2014
Treasurer’s Reports for August 2014
Building Inspector’s Report
Litigation
Budget Amendment – increase Health Benefits 101-265-714.002 by $1,500 and
reduce Contingency Fund 101-890-965.000 by $1,500 also increase Art Tour
Playground 101-751-884.001 by $2,900 and reduce Contingency Fund 101-890-
965.000 by $2,900
August Police report
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Motion Approved
Planning Commission
Minutes 8-20-14
Since there was not an action item for the Board this month, there was not a PC
representative for the meeting. The Board did not have any questions for
Trustee Eyster, PC Board representative.
NEW BUSINESS
Branch School
The Historical Committee put together rough drafts for the Board’s
consideration.
Discussion:
·   Concern that a docent isn’t there for the whole period of use.
·   Concern over damage with food/drinks and damage to items at the school.
·   Possible to remove some items of value during use to prevent damage.
·   Feel use should be available to more than just school groups. Should be
able to be used as a community meeting place. Use may be outside the school
with access to restrooms.
·   Other non-school events could be case by case and vetted for appropriate
use.
·   The Historical Committee is working towards the school being placed on the
National Historic Registry.
·   Questioning the parking for events at the school. The PC has discretion
regarding parking. Need to address handicap parking. History tour parking
utilized Branch Road.
·   Any security breach should be responded by staff or a township official.
·   Should be prepared for unforeseen issues at the school.
·   Historical Committee deemed appropriate to recommend having three docents.
·   There will need to be a policy for key release for use.
Clerk Gaffner will take comments back to the Historical Committee for review.
OLD BUSINESS
SUP Car Sales Grand River
Supervisor Martin reviewed the approval of the Cortis application with
conditions. At this time the conditions have not been met and the applicant is
requesting to withdraw his application for the SUP.
Trustee Imhoff moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve rescinding the
Special Use Permit for 1099 E Grand River Road approved by the Board on 8/13/
2014, as requested by Charlotte & Richard Cortis.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion:
Once accounting is complete, whatever funds are remaining will be returned to
the applicant.
Concern over contamination should have been directed to DEQ. The DEQ is the
regulatory authority that would address contamination. It was suggested that
the Township report the possible contamination to the DEQ and let them make the
determination if any further action needs to be taken. Have asked the Township
Attorney to weigh in on the process. The Board was in agreement to have the
Clerk forward the information provided by Mr. Cortis to the DEQ.
Motion Approved
Millage request/Town Hall meeting
Dates set for September 24th and October 15th, 6:00 pm to 7:00 pm at the
Township Hall.
Will answer question as to the policy of how the Committee addresses which
roads receive priority.
All roads will be given attention with policy for prioritizing.
Key fact is that all roads will be attended to within 10 years.
Map will be available to show primary and secondary roads.
Residents of Williamstown Estates are interested in promoting the millage.
Yoga will be cancelled for the town hall meetings.
REPORTS
Departments & Committees
·   Art Tour Playground Equipment: Supervisor Martin shared the equipment that
is being purchased for the playground near the pavilion. The equipment will be
installed by provider. Staff will be responsible for wood chips.
·   NEISA: Trustee Hayes reported for Joyce Messing who attended the meeting on
behalf of the Township. The NEISA Budget was approved. There was discussion on
organizational structure of NEISA. Burning Ordinance is being reviewed by NEISA
attorney and who is the responsible enforcement authority. Treasurer Fielek
will be the new alternate replacing Joyce Messing. Addition of Mr. Harper is
good for NEISA. Organized and reviewing the organizational structure. Clerk has
not been able to obtain numbers at this time for billing of residents on
ambulance runs and will contact Mr. Harper with new request for information.
·   NEISA will be holding a 9-11 ceremony in honor of the victims and public
servants that died from the attack.
·   Treasury: Open Monday, September 15th for tax payments from 9-5.
·   Supervisor reported issues with phone system being destroyed from storm.
New system is in and there are new issues with the last storm. Frontier is
working on correcting them. Training on the new system will be Thursday.
Public Comment
None
Public Comment closed at 6:56.
Review
Clerk Gaffner will contact the DEQ.
Letter to Mr. Cortis on granting of rescission of SUP
Clerk will review comments with the Historical Committee and bring back
proposed revisions to the policy.
Motion to adjourn by Trustee Hayes
Meeting adjourned at 7:00 pm.
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner, Clerk
October 8, 2014
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
October 8, 2014
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 6:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Martin called the meeting to order reviewed the agenda and led the
Pledge of Allegiance
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Imhoff, Trustee Eyster, Supervisor Martin, Clerk Gaffner,
Treasurer Fielek and Trustee Hayes
Absent: Trustee Williams
Public Comment
None
Closed at 6:03
Police Report
Chief Hall was present for the police report and reported on the hiring of 3
new officers with another vacancy yet to fill. Recently promoted another
officer to sergeant which brings the total to 7. This makes a total of 39 sworn
officers for the department. Procedures for interrogation and eye witness
identification are changing. Since the activation of the light at Grand River
and Zimmer there have been two accidents at the intersection.
Citizen Academy has two Township residents of the fourteen participants. Three
to four neighborhoods participated in this year’s National Night Out.
Consent Agenda
Trustee Hayes moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the Minutes of 9/10/2014 Township board meeting & 9/24/14 Town Hall
Meeting.
General Fund Accounts Payable paid, checks 20807-20823 for a total of
$16,602.83
Police Fund Payable paid, check 1060 for a total of $52,138.31
Payroll Checks paid 42856 through 42889 and EFT 265-270 for a total of
$20,294.23
General Account Payable checks to approve 20824 through 20840 for a total of
$15,945.13
Revenue and expenditure report 9/30/2014
Treasurer’s Reports for September 2014
Building Inspector’s Report
Litigation
September Police report
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: none
Motion Approved
Clerk Gaffner moved the budget amendment– increase Park Lands 101-751-881.000
by $10,000 and reduce Contingency Fund 101-890-965.000 by $10,000 – increase
Park Lands 101-751-881.000 by $42.00 and reduce Infrastructure 101-101-980.000
by $42.00 – increase Park Field Fees 101-751-881.002 by $10,580 and reduce
Contingency Fund 101-890-965.000 by $10,580 also increase Art Tour Playground
101-751-884.001 by $14.00 and reduce Contingency Fund 101-890-965.000 by $14.00
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion:
·   Some carry over fees need to be addressed yearly and moved out of the
Contingency fund into Expenditures.
·   Suggested that budget amendments should not be part of the consent agenda.
·   Park land fees is for the use of the fields. This is an expenditure that
mirrors the income. Moving out of contingency into expenditures.
Motion Carries
Planning Commission
Minutes 9-17-14
Ms. Davis was unable to attend this evening as PC representative. Board
Representative, Trustee Eyster, entertained questions of the Board regarding
the minutes. There were none from the Board members.
Agricultural tourism zoning amendment
Trustee Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board the Planning Commission
recommendation adding Agricultural Tourism Regulations to the Township Zoning
Ordinance, as presented but with one change under the Agricultural Tourism
operations provisions in Section 1.03 #10 Hours of Operation, changing the
closing time from 10:00 PM to 9:00 P.M.
Clerk Gaffner second.
Discussion:
·   Don’t believe regulations are necessary for Agri-tourism.
·   Does not affect Wineries or any other use that is addressed in Article
8.02.
·   Would not need a SUP for each event but for the use.
·   Meant for the orchard this is going to have tours, corn mazes, Uncle John’s
type of business.
·   Different uses require different regulations.
·   A U-Pick orchard would need a Special Use Permit
·   Concern over Nature Centers
·   This protects the use and permits agri-tourism and has guiding framework.
·   Impact on neighbors and how to minimize while allowing the use to promote
agri business.
·   Clarification on the application of the acreage between major and minor
operations
·   Need for clarification on language.
·   Send back to planning commission.
Motion fails.
Send back to the Planning Commission for language clarification.
NEW BUSINESS
Budget
Formal budget will be sent out to the board members for review so that there is
ample time for review and provide substantial discussion at the November Board
Meeting. Please get questions to the Supervisor before the November meeting.
PC Appointments
Supervisor explained that there were more applicants than open seats.
Trustee Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board approve appointing the
Supervisor’s recommendation of Gerald Eidt, Phil Korson and Tobin Weston to the
Planning Commission for a three-year term starting November 2014.
Seconded by Clerk Gaffner.
Discussion:
·   Would like to see Ger Schultink remain on the PC as his wealth of knowledge
is invaluable. Attendance may have been an issue in the past.
·   Number of Commissioners is limited.
·   Wish more openings to be able to seat interested parties.
·   Ger Schultink has been invaluable in the past and appreciate his service.
Motion approved.
Manik & Smith
Supervisor Martin reviewed the services that have been provided to the Township
by Manik and Smith and the scope of services they can offer.
Treasurer Fielek moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the General
Engineering Services Contract with the Mannik & Smith Group, Inc. for
consulting services on an as needed basis. Seconded by Clerk Gaffner.
Discussion:
·   Feel this should be bid out on an as needed basis.
·   Many good firms that are smaller and lower cost.
·   This is an engineering firm.
·   This would accommodate renovations/engineering concerns that the Township
can call upon as needed without bidding the project.
·   Can always be included in bid process.
·   County does not address excess material when roads are being done.
·   Suggest creating a short list of consultants or engineers that can advise
the Township.
·   More job specific.
·   Feel the office should have someone to go to for advice.
·   The knowledge base is needed to be able to turn to when needed.
·   Suggest obtaining bids for being the Township engineer on call.
·   Concern with locking into one firm.
·   Have 3 or 4 firms that are on the short list with a fee schedule.
·   Need to make a relationship with one firm.
·   Do not feel this is best pricing.
·   Can still bid out projects.
·   Will use the best firm in the interest of the Township.
·   We will not bid every project out.
·   Relationship building is important and helpful.
·   Would like to see pricing before deciding.
·   Have township interview several firms to be as a go-to ahead of time and
make a determination with an understanding of fee schedule.
·   If looking at other firms, make sure they can address a large number of
issues to be sure the Township is not limited.
·   Committee to interview potential firms: Trustee Hayes, Trustee Imhoff, and
Clerk Gaffner.
Motion Fails
OLD BUSINESS
None
REPORTS
Departments & Committees
A $500 grant from the Rotary was received for the civil war markers at Summit
Cemetery. Pat Shelley located all the civil war veterans and the high school
will be making them for placement at the cemetery.
The road millage info is up on the website. Next Town Hall Meeting is October
14th.
NIESA: Treasurer Fielek is the alternative and will attend the meetings if
Trustee Hayes is not able to make it.
Park: Park Improvements are coming along well.
Public Comment
None
Public Comment closed at 7:14.
Review
Agri-tourism is being sent back to the Planning Commission for further review.
PC appointments will begin at the November meeting.
Committee will interview firms for engineering services.
Treasurer Fielek moved to adjourn.
Meeting adjourned at 7:16 pm.
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner, Clerk
November 12, 2014
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 6:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Martin called the meeting to order reviewed the agenda and led the
Pledge of Allegiance
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Imhoff, Trustee Eyster, Supervisor Martin, Clerk Gaffner,
Treasurer Fielek, Trustee Hayes and Trustee Williams
Public Comment
None
Closed at 6:03
Consent Agenda
Trustee Hayes moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the Minutes of 10/08/2014 Township board meeting
General Fund Accounts Payable paid, checks 20841-20864 for a total of
$27,958.27
Payroll Checks paid 42890 through 42938 and EFT 271-275 for a total of
$22,342.25
General Account Payable checks to approve 20865 through 20879 for a total of
$9,198.84
Revenue and expenditure report 10/31/2014
Treasurer’s Reports for October 2014
Building Inspector’s Report
Litigation
October Police report
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: none
Motion Approved
NEW BUSINESS
SUP Removal
Trustee Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board approve removal of the
Special Use Permit for 4180 Beeman Road, as requested by the new owner.
Seconded by Trustee Imhoff
Discussion:
Applicant is aware they would need to go through the process again for a SUP if
they wished to use the apartment.
Motion Approved
Police Contract
Trustee Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the continuation
of police services provided by the Meridian Township Police with a new two year
contract from January 1, 2015 through December 31, 2016 with terms to be the
same as the past two years except for the dollar amounts which will be $207,988
per year and $53.91 per hour for all 911 calls outside of the normal patrol
hours with a cap of $22,500 per quarter.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes
Discussion:
·   Changed “to” to “through” on page 4 to confirm coverage of December 31st.
·   The possibility of exceeding the capped amount of $22,500 is unlikely given
the history to date. Monitored closely. Catastrophic event would justify
exceeding the amount. This amount is on a quarterly basis.
·   Code enforcement will be handled during the 80 hours of patrol.
Motion approved
Police Assessment
Trustee Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve amending
Resolution 2014-98, confirming the 2014 Special Assessment Roll for Police
Protection within the Township with the Special Assessment Roll total
increasing from $227,015 to $227,345.
Seconded Trustee Williams
Discussion:
Duplex would be taxed as two units. Property on Epley Rd. is a two unit.
Roll Call:
Yea: Trustee Imhoff, Trustee Eyster, Treasurer Fielek, Supervisor Martin, Clerk
Gaffner, Trustee Hayes, Trustee Williams
Nay: None
Motion approved
Tree cutting
Insurance company recommends removing the dead trees and limbs to avoid
potential responsibility for damage to headstones.
Trustee Williams moved the Williamstown Township Board approve contracting with
Ayles Tree Service for tree service required at Summit Cemetery at a cost not
to exceed $1,950.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion:
∙   Difference in price is due to maintenance cleaning up the wood.
∙   Trees at the Township Hall will be trimmed by maintenance staff.
Motion approved
OLD BUSINESS
Millage ballot proposal
Township Road Millage proposal did not pass on November 4th, with 1,159 yes
votes and 1,359 no votes. Supervisor Martin facilitated discussion of any next
step for consideration by the Board.
Discussion:
∙   Future options include: Sticking to the current policy or place the millage
request on a future ballot for reconsideration.
∙   Special assessment by request of residents for road repair.
∙   Wait for grass roots efforts
∙   Board recommended to the residents what they considered had to be done for
the Township and let the voters decide.
∙   Roads will get worse without additional funding.
∙   Wait and consider actions of the state to see if additional funding will be
made available.
∙   Eaton County passed a millage. Concern that Ingham County will ask for a
millage and will not have control of how these monies are spent.
∙   Consider having another town hall meeting.
∙   Described the situation at the previous meetings.
∙   63% turn out for election.
Barbara Guter, 4045 Cygnet: The residents of Williamstown Estates worked hard
to get the information out to residents by delivering flyers to residents and
distribution of yard signs.
∙   Most reliable way to provide information to residents in the past has been
in conjunction of the tax bill mailing.
∙   Presidential election would have the largest turn out for voter
consideration of another ballot proposal.
∙   Do not believe county millage would support the township.
Kurt Guter, 4045 Cygnet: Thanked the Board for putting the millage request on
the ballot for voter consideration. Anxious to hear what the state is going to
consider for funding roads and how it would affect the Township.
∙   Agreement that 2016 would be the time to ask the voters to consider
additional funding based on additional information for state funding is known.
∙   Important to keep residents informed of road news.
Budget
Supervisor Martin noted that she did not receive many questions regarding the
budget and opened the floor for comments from the Board.
∙   Senior Center grant: Would consider more money for the Senior Center if
there was a commitment of the Center to relay what and how the funding is used.
There is a new Board and President: more energetic and better reports should be
provided. Items that would be nice to see addressed include: cost of programs,
membership, etc.
∙   Trustee Eyster and Supervisor Martin looked at the Medicare, social
security, etc. to verify accuracy.
∙   Clerk Gaffner will be looking into the insurance.
Engineering firms search update
Trustee Hayes reported that they are hopeful to obtain the fee schedule from
the consulting firms under consideration. Would like to have three firms to
choose from.
Municipal Code
Letter and complaint form in your packet for informational purposes.
Complaint form will be an online fillable form that would be submitted to the
Township. Would forward to Meridian Police to have an officer sent to verify
the complaint. 10 day letter would go out once verified. If there was continued
non-compliance, municipal code ticket would be issued.
Discussion
∙   Suggest having the Township attorney review both forms.
∙   Remove sentence of confidentiality completely.
∙   If they request a response they need to fill out their contact information.
∙   Form does not need to require signature of complainant.
∙   Unaware of cost of District Court process.
REPORTS
Departments & Committees
∙   Resident has expressed interest in organizing a 5K run at the park to raise
funds for the park. Concern over trail conditions and injuries. Participants
would sign a waiver. Hospice did a winter run this past February as a
fundraiser at the park.
∙   With the passage of the County park millage for trails, it is recommended a
representative of the Township should be attending County Park Meetings. The
millage was for existing and development of new trails and maintenance of the
trail system. Trustee Eyster agreed to represent the Board by attending
meetings.
∙   Cemetery is going to do ground imaging to find unknown graves. Should be
scheduled in the next couple of weeks.
∙   Due to changes with office personnel, the Board will relook at the policies
regarding Aflac benefits, etc.
∙   Trustee Eyster submitted a grant application for up to $3000 for recycling
tires.
∙   NIESA is updating their bylaws addressing the two departments. Outstanding
loan payment was made on the Williamston station. Chief Flynn is retiring from
the Webberville department. An evaluation for water resources is being
completed. Need sources in Locke and Williamstown Township for water such as
ponds, river access, etc. The new director is willing to work with the Township
to create a plan for emergency services. Red Cross could use this facility for
an emergency shelter. The Board was in agreement that an emergency plan would
be useful.
∙   Trustee Imhoff expressed how informative the recent tri county bus tour
was. A Meridian Township Planning Commissioner expressed interest in a joint
meeting with the Township Planning Commission. Proposed sub at the corner of
Meridian and Haslett is back up for consideration at Meridian Township.
∙   Tax Bills go out December 1st. Should have ability to take Credit Cards at
the Township this month.
Public Comment
None
Public Comment closed at 7:36.
Review
Clerk Gaffner will take care of the resolution.
Treasurer Fielek will be sending the tax bills out Dec. 1st.
Supervisor Martin will move forward on the Cemetery tree removal.
Supervisor Martin will also move forward on the Code Enforcement.
Trustee Hayes moved to adjourn.
Meeting adjourned at 7:40pm.  
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner, Clerk      
December 10, 2014
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 6:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Martin called the meeting to order reviewed the agenda and led the
Pledge of Allegiance
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Imhoff, Supervisor Martin, Clerk Gaffner, Treasurer Fielek,
Trustee Hayes, Trustee Eyster, and Trustee Williams
Public Comment
None
Closed at 6:01
Senior Center report – Susan Cockerill, Interim President
Supervisor Martin introduced Susan Cockerill, she has volunteered for the past
four years at the Senior Center, and is now serving as interim president.
(Trustee Eyster arrived)
The center is celebrating their 22nd anniversary. The Board is working on
developing growth and stability for the center along with establishing
committee structure to aid in reaching goals. Looking to increase growth of 60-
75 year olds with programs. The only paid staff is the programs director, all
others are volunteers. A new Enhanced fitness class is going to be offered 3
days a week. Instructor will be able to work with participant’s health provider
if desired. The report included the financial summary for the last 5 years.
Susan is schedule to present the report to Locke, Leroy and Wheatfield
Townships along with the City of Williamston.
Discussion:
∙   List of various members and residency status was requested.
∙   Numbers showing contribution of Williamstown Township is incorrect. Clerk
will provide correct information.
∙   Not sure of active membership and membership. Advantages of membership are
not evident in fee structure.
∙   Meals come from Tri-County Office on Aging. Same meals that are distributed
by Meals on Wheels. Cost is $3.00 for meals. Sign up and reservation procedure
is utilized. Suggest a method to track residency.
∙   Staffing expense is only for staffing of programs director.
∙   Senior benefit fund~separate fund to write grants from.
∙   Currently not affiliated with any association. Do utilize services from Tri
County Office on Aging.
∙   Income data may help with qualifying for grants.
∙   Parks and Rec Associations may be a resource for help with the Senior
Center.
Please email any further questions to Susan Cockerill.
Consent Agenda
Trustee Hayes moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the Minutes of 11/12/2014 Township board meeting
General Fund Accounts Payable paid, checks 20880-20905 for a total of
$212,551.30
Payroll Checks paid 42939 through 42969 and EFT 276-279 for a total of
$19,356.45
General Account Payable checks to approve 20906 through 20912 for a total of
$1,730.38
Revenue and expenditure report 11/30/2014
Treasurer’s Reports for November 2014
Building Inspector’s Report
Litigation
November Police report
Budget Amendment, increasing Capital Outlay Account 101-294-980.00 by $8,834.00
and Reducing the Contingency Fund Account 101-890-965.000 by $8,834.00
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion:
Police contract: minutes need to include Trustee Hayes seconded the motion.
Motion Approved
Planning Commission
Minutes 11-19-14
The minutes were in the packet for review. There were no action items for Board
consideration this month.
NEW BUSINESS
Gaming resolution
Mr. Todd Gardner of 1861 Rowley Rd. presented the desire for a gaming license
to raise funds for the non-profit organization “Making the Turn Against
Parkinson’s”. Mr. Gardner provided the Board with statistical information
regarding Parkinson’s and the impact that it has on those afflicted and their
families. Mission is to positively impact those that are affected by
Parkinson’s. They have hosted an annual golf outing at the Brookshire the last
two years as a fundraiser. The gaming license requires a resolution of local
municipality which would qualify the non-profit for a raffle license.
Discussion:
∙   Nonprofit is ran out of their personal residence.
∙   Charity poker is ran by the Charity Control Board. Residences are not an
approved location. No gaming activity will take place at the Rowley street
address.
∙   License will allow them to apply for bingo and raffle licenses. Currently
have donated funds to the Michigan Parkinson’s Foundation. Mr. Gardner is a
board member of the Foundation. Funds will help with updating the foundation
website. They will begin on line webinars to allow for those affected to
participate in forums. Would like to provide a mentor program to match newly
diagnosed patients to seasoned patients to give support.
∙   Resolution certifies that this is a legitimate charity.
∙   Intent is to do two raffles a year.
∙   It is the board’s responsibility to review the information. Officers have
reviewed Articles of Incorporation and confirmed legitimacy.
Trustee Williams moved the Williamstown Township Board approve Board Resolution
#106 as required by the Michigan Gaming division recognizing “Making the Turn
Against Parkinson’s” as a nonprofit organization operating in Williamstown
Township.
Seconded by Trustee Imhoff
Discussion: none
Aye: Trustee Imhoff, Trustee Eyster, Treasurer Fielek, Supervisor Martin, Clerk
Gaffner, Trustee Hayes and Trustee Williams.
Nay: none
Compensation Commission
Supervisor Martin reviewed the need for new members.
Martin Wright and Jim Conroy are current members and she is proposing adding
Janet Kranz, Todd Walter and Kurt Shoecraft. Supervisor Martin gave background
information on the proposed members.
Clerk Gaffner moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the appointment of
Janet Kranz, Todd Walter and Kurt Shoecraft to the Williamstown Township
compensation committee.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion:
Anticipate a good working group of individuals.
Motion approved.
McKenna contract
Supervisor provided information regarding the increase of McKenna’s fee
schedule. Fees have not been raised since 2007. New fees will become effective
January 1, 2015.
OLD BUSINESS
Budget
Supervisor has met with Trustee Imhoff, has spoken with Trustee Hayes, and
Clerk Gaffner has reviewed and updated the insurance information.
Discussion:
∙   Budgeted amount for roads is currently incorrect. Question of carryover for
14-15. This carryover was used in previous year. Total amount will also be
reduced. Discussion of how fund was adjusted.
∙   Please contact Supervisor Martin with any questions.
Engineering firms search update
No update at this time. Awaiting fee schedule for consideration from
engineering firms.
REPORTS
Departments & Committees
NEISA: Trustee Hayes reported on the recent meeting. The Clerk will forward
minutes to all trustees when received. Please with the great job performance by
the new Director. Have noticed a difference in NEISA personal with reports and
participation.
Treasury: Receiving 1% on short term investment guaranteed through March.
Now accepting Credit Card for property taxes and other fees in the office. Can
pay property taxes through BS&A on the website.
Trustee Eyster attended Transportation meeting on asset management of roads.
Suggestion to implement: condition of roads on the website showing pacer
ratings and general information. Information was provided on how to select
roads for maintenance to minimize how much is needed to be spent to maintain
roads. An abundance of material was presented and Trustee Eyster will plan on
presenting a report after review of the materials provided. Township has been
on the right track for the plan that was put forth on maintenance of roads.
Prioritize roads ahead of time before asking for millage. There were140 ballot
proposals across the state, somewhere between 90 and 100 passed. Do not
anticipate monies from the state. Many counties have asked for millages to
support maintenance of county primary roads. Michigan is ahead of other states
in asset planning. Michigan does not allocate as much funding to roads as other
states.
Clerk Gaffner reviewed the motion of fund allocation for the phone system. The
storm was determined to be the cause of the phone system damage. The necessary
form for the insurance company to compensate the Township for cost of
replacement has been provided to Frontier, waiting for their cooperation in
getting form back to the insurance company.
Updates
Hudson: Waiting for appeal sometime in June/July before requesting
reimbursement of attorney fees. Judge would need to approve fees through court
hearing.
Williamson: complaint form is being revised and will be filed with the court.
Supervisor working on MDARD committee for urban farms. MDARD is not interested
in opening the right to farm act for revisions. The committee will be writing
recommendations for regulations.
Assessing: New firm has been hired to begin in January due to retirement of the
current assessor.
Township offices will be open on Tuesdays before the holidays. The last day to
pay taxes for this year is the 30th with hours 10-4. The last day to pay taxes
without a penalty is Feb 17th from 9-5.
Gas line is being extended on Sherwood Rd. and on parts of Zimmer Rd. Believe
the extension may run south of the river as well.
Public Comment
None
Public Comment closed at 7:14.
Review
Clerk Gaffner will take care of the resolution.
Supervisor Martin will follow up with the Compensation Committee and McKenna
contract.
Trustee Hayes moved to adjourn.
Meeting adjourned at 7:15pm.  
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner, Clerk
2015 Meeting Minutes
January 14, 2015
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 6:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Martin called the meeting to order reviewed the agenda and led the
Pledge of Allegiance
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Imhoff, Supervisor Martin, Clerk Gaffner, Treasurer Fielek,
Trustee Hayes, and Trustee Williams
Absent: Trustee Eyster
Public Comment
Tobin Weston, 4100 N. Williamston Rd.: Thanked the Board for the opportunity to
serve the Township on the Planning Commission and the confidence in him to
represent the community. The Board thanked him for his willingness to serve.
Closed at 6:02
Police report – Chief Hall was present to provide an update for the Board.  
New information has been added to the monthly report. A new administrative
assistant has been hired. While the 4th quarter expenses were higher, the
Township has never used the additional funds that were approved. The department
is currently interviewing to fill four vacancies. Snow blower break-ins have
been noted within the Townships. Car/ deer crashes were down from 2013. There
were more deer culled in Meridian in 2014 than 2013. The department will be
using the Gun Range four times this year and just completed low light training.
Elder abuse is a large issue and officer training is ongoing along with
training regarding liquor control. Annual report is being completed and should
be delivered by the middle of February. Evaluations of employees are being done
this month. SWAT team training is in participation with MSU and E.L.
departments and will participate with NEISA for medical first responder
training. Chief Hall has enjoyed working with Mr. Harper, the director of
NEISA.
Consent Agenda
Trustee Hayes moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the Minutes of 12/10/2014 Township board meeting
General Fund Accounts Payable paid, checks 20913-20939 for a total of
$20,136.71
Police Fund Accounts Paid check 1061 for a total of $53,794.31
Payroll Checks paid 42970 through 43000 and EFT 280-287 for a total of
$22,214.27
General Account Payable checks to approve 20940 through 20951 for a total of
$4,769.95
Revenue and expenditure report 12/31/2014
Treasurer’s Report, December 2014
Building Inspector’s Report
Litigation
Police Report
Seconded by Treasurer Fielek
Discussion: none
Motion Approved
NEW BUSINESS
Poverty Exemption Resolution
Supervisor Martin noted that every January the Board must approve property
exemption guidelines. The Township has historically provided a lower thresh
hold than Federal standards.
Trustee Hayes moved move the Williamstown Township Board approve the 2015
amendments to the Township Poverty Guidelines Resolution #97.
Seconded by Trustee Imhoff
Discussion:
There were five residents who qualified in 2014.
Two were turned down due to lack of information on the application.
Most are households with 1-2 residents.
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Trustee Imhoff, Treasurer Fielek, Supervisor Martin, Clerk Gaffner,
Trustee Hayes, Trustee Williams Nays: none
OLD BUSINESS
Budget
Supervisor Martin reviewed changes to the proposed 15-16 budget and entertained
questions from the Board:
∙   Adjusted for unemployment percentage.
∙   Added the $92.00 requested from Tri County Meals on Wheels to the Senior
Citizen budget line. Great benefit for residents.
∙   The assessing budget is being amended due to the hiring of a new assessor
who will become an employee in April. Currently serving as a contractor.
∙   Historically have budgeted for more than coming in due to revenue balance.
Budget allows for funds that are not used.
∙   Roads budget is based on the policy approved by the Board.
∙   Change of 1600.00 for reception to 3480.00 was due to a move from another
department to allow for more hours.
∙   Question the need to remove 101.475 in health insurance.
∙   Supervisor will review the road budget with Trustee Eyster.
∙   Clarification on liquor control.
∙   Clarification: Interest on deposit is the actual amount received.
∙   Police funds are held in a savings account.
Will call for public hearing in February for March.
REPORTS
Departments & Committees
NEISA: Trustee Hayes reported that the NEISA Board has had a good beginning
discussion on future goals and objectives. Dave Harper is working with the
department to move in the right direction, is very encouraging and is working
to combine the two departments. Concern regarding the handling of illegal
burns. They will be referred to Meridian Police if there is a violation of the
ordinance unless it is a risk to property or life. NEISA does not feel it is
their responsibility to enforce the Township ordinance. Developing a policy for
responding to complaints. Question the no charge for a fire run however charge
for an ambulance run. It would be helpful if they would report to the Township
all fire runs.
Clerk Gaffner sent information to the Board for review: NEISA minutes and
correspondence from the Senior Center.
Supervisor:
∙   New server being installed next Monday. It is currently being replaced
approx. every four years.
∙   MDARD committee regarding Urban farms meets again the 26th of January.
Encompasses all livestock, just not chickens. Need to have recommendations to
the Senate by the first of March for consideration regarding Urban livestock.
There is a committee working on policy and one on technical aspects of the
recommendation.
Public Comment
None
Public Comment closed at 6:57.
Review
Clerk Gaffner will take care of the resolution.
Trustee Hayes moved to adjourn.
Meeting adjourned at 6:59 p.m.  
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner, Clerk
February 11, 2015
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 6:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Martin called the meeting to order reviewed the agenda and led the
Pledge of Allegiance
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Imhoff, Supervisor Martin, Treasurer Fielek, Trustee Hayes,
and Trustee Williams
Absent: Trustee Eyster and Clerk Gaffner
Public Comment
Mitch Lutzke, 1909 Maple Shade Dr.: spoke against the Township rental of Branch
School for non-docent activity due to historical significance of the school and
items on display.
Toby Weston, 4100 N. Williamston Rd.: Regarding suggested removal of the RE
zone from proposed Agri-tourism regulations. Supervisor Martin referenced the
new rules of MDARD, Suitability of siting and Site size requirements.
Consent Agenda
Trustee Hayes moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the Minutes of 1/14/2015 Township board meeting
General Fund Accounts Payable paid, checks 20952-20964 for a total of
$16,995.35
Payroll Checks paid 43001 through 43022 and EFT 288-290 for a total of
$16,114.53
General Account Payable checks to approve 20965 through 20986 for a total of
$9,456.76
Police Fund Account Payable check to approve1062 for a total of $660.00
Revenue and expenditure report 1/31/2015
Treasurer’s Report, January 2015
Building Inspector’s Report
Litigation
Police Report
Seconded by Treasurer Fielek
Discussion: none
Motion approved
Trustee Hayes moved the Budget Amendment transferring $6,000 from Contingency
Fund 101-890-965.000 to Township Office Fund 101-294-930.000
Seconded by Treasurer Fielek
Discussion:
∙   IT needs were discussed including cost, services, consistency of service
and importance of competency.
Motion Approved
Planning Commission
Minutes 1-21-15
Commissioner Dali Giese reviewed the actions of the PC at the January meeting.
The PC has called for a PH to consider zoning amendments to address Agri-
tourism.
Vice-Chair LaMore addressed the Joint Meeting Statement with the Board. The
Statement was in response to the positive interaction at the Joint Meeting of
the Planning Commissions held last October. Williamston’s Mayor, Noah Balenger
and Planning Commissioner, Sean Bertolino were present in support of the Joint
Meeting Statement. Supervisor Martin welcomed both Mayor Balenger and
Commissioner Bertolino and expressed the Board’s pleasure of their attendance
and desire to work with the Township. Mayor Balenger reiterated the City
Council’s overwhelming approval of the joint statement with the removal of the
word “sustainable” out of the last paragraph. The make-up and meeting dates of
the Joint Committee will be at the discretion of the respective Council and
Board.
Trustee Imhoff moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the “Joint
Statement” of the City of Williamston and Williamstown Planning Commissions, as
written with one exception, removal of the word Sustainable in the last
paragraph.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes
Discussion:
∙   Thanked the Planning Commissions for taking the initiative on moving this
forward to respective governing bodies.
Motion approved
NEW BUSINESS
Board of Review appointments
Trustee Hayes moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the appointment of
Ed Timm, Gerald Eidt, Kurt Guter and alternate Mike Rice to the Township Board
of Review.
Seconded by Trustee Imhoff
Discussion:
∙   Same representatives as in the past
∙   Difficult job that is done well
Motion approved
Donation 
Hayes moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve accepting the $3,000
donation specified to assist with the Township Art Tour and maintenance of
Williamstown Township Parks.
Seconded by Treasurer Fielek
Discussion:
∙   Funds would be split between a donation on behalf of the artists towards
the playground equipment, advertising for the art tour and $800 towards the
Township Park.
∙   Artists profit from last year matched for this year.
∙   Sales have continued to increase from the tour.
Motion approved
OLD BUSINESS
Branch Road School
Explained that Ernie, representative to the Historical Committee was not
present to answer any questions regarding the materials submitted by the
Committee. Tom Johnson was available to answer questions regarding proposed
policy for school. Mr. Johnson expressed the concern of the Historical
Committee that someone be present during rentals of the school. Due to the
historical accuracy of the school the consensus was it should only be used as a
historical classroom. Teachers would be responsible for condition of the
school. The Historical Committee have been working diligently to get the school
house on the state and nation registry of Historic Places. The concerns of the
committee are rentals without oversight and without regard to the signicance,
value and rarity of the items on display at the school.
Rutgar Hoag, historical committee member, suggested that the Township require x
number of volunteers for student groups using the school.
Discussion:
∙   Very appreciative of the school and the excellent job that has been done to
bring the school to its current condition.
∙   Concern of limiting the use of the school as a teaching tool. Other rentals
may be appropriate.
∙   Feel that someone representing the Township should be present at all times
for oversight and to answer questions.
∙   Certain items should be stored during use of the school for other than
teaching.
∙   Possibility of putting some items behind glass for protection.
∙   Would not necessarily have to be a docent of the school but could be staff.
The Board will develop a policy and resolution for use of the school.
Engineering Firm
Trustee Hayes stated that he is still waiting on fees from one other firm to
present to the Board for consideration. Treasurer Fielek spoke with exhibitors
at the MTA conference and inquired as to a fee structure and response time for
services.
Discussion:
∙   No real need to be exclusive with any one firm.
∙   Larger firms tend to be more expensive.
∙   If a smaller firm is available they tend to have better service at a better
price. Trustee Hayes will have something to the Supervisor by the beginning of
next week.
∙   Wetlands consultant is important.
∙   Do not see a reason to pick a firm if there is willingness to work with
anyone.
∙   Do not want to sign a contract at this time for exclusive representation.
∙   Past wetlands consultant provided consistent immediate response to request.
∙   Engineering and wetlands are important for consistency.
∙   Feel an agreement brings immediate results.
Agreement to leave it open at this time. Trustee Hayes will have fee schedules
and suggested consultants to Supervisor Martin by February 20th.
Budget
Supervisor Martin noted the modifications to the proposed budget.
Discussion:
∙   Question hiring full time receptionist when current deputies are not
working full 21 hours. Reception position would be full time and would only
preform receptionist duties. Deputies’ wages as receptionists would go towards
deputy duties. Anticipate wage of approx. $10.00/hour for receptionist. This
would allow deputies to focus on their respective duties without covering
reception. Deputies would not need to have hours if there is not work needing
coverage. Knowing that the deputies do not work full time, the budget does not
reflect a full time person. Deputies have other positions outside of their
Township position. Each deputy currently works one full day as receptionist
except during tax and elections. Responsibility of receptionist: hall rental,
building permits, answering phone, routing questions, counter, mail, filing.
Open and closing and receiving. There is enough work for full 21 hours and it
would provide consistency to the Township residents.
∙   Raising recording secretary wages from 1500 to 4400 is a mistake and will
be corrected back to the $1500.
∙   Assessor: Have to hire part time as an employee, prefers to be an employee
than contract employee. Does work for other firms. Duties would include
reassessment and education would be provided. Provides more ownership to the
Township as an employee.
∙   Raised deficit up 27,000. Had to increase other items with wage increase.
∙   1.8 million Fund balance.
Police Special Assessment Roll
Two mistakes were caught and will be corrected. Please review for accuracy.
This can be revised again in November.
Trustee Hayes moved move the Williamstown Township hold a public hearing on
both the 2015-2016 Township Budget and the Police Assessment Roll on 3/11/2015
at 6:00 PM, with the regular March Township Board Meeting to immediately
follow.
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion: none
Motion approved.
REPORTS
Departments & Committees
∙   County Road Association Board. Trustee Imhoff noted that with the passage
of the County Millage for Parks and Recreation the Township may want to
consider requesting funding for off road trail along M-43 from the County and
state. North Williamston and North Zimmer road (north of Haslett Rd.) are
scheduled for repairs this year. County is considering chip and seal for
Sherwood Rd.
∙   Supervisor Martin stated that MDARD recommendations are due by March 15th
for consideration by the State Legislators regarding Urban Farming. Noted the
misconceptions of municipalities regarding ability to regulate within zoning on
both the township and city level. Important to encourage public participation
on a local level to facilitate change at the local level. Cannot discriminate
between livestock when allowing one unless you are a city of over 100,000 in
residents. At this time only option for Townships is to not allow livestock in
certain districts. Commercial farmers do not want to open up the RTF act to
allow urban farming. Can only use RTF as a defense if you follow GAAMPS. Should
have something in place for agri-tourism. Can always amend the zoning ordinance
at a later time.
Public Comment
Noah Balenger, Mayor, City of Williamston: Thanked the Board for their
consideration and approval of the Joint Committee statement presented by the
Planning Commissions.
Public Comment closed at 7:26
Review
Public Hearing notices will be published.
Trustee Hayes moved to adjourn.
Meeting adjourned at 7:28 p.m.  
____________________________
??      
March 11, 2015
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 6:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Martin called the meeting to order reviewed the agenda and led the
Pledge of Allegiance
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Imhoff, Supervisor Martin, Clerk Gaffner, Trustee Hayes,
and Trustee Eyster
Absent: Trustee Williams and Treasurer Fielek
Public Hearing
2015-16 Budget and Police Special Assessment
Supervisor Martin opened the Public Hearing at 6:02.
Jim Conroy: Chair of the compensation commission addressed the Board and
reviewed the Commission’s recommendation. They are recommending a salary
increase of $1000.00 each of the next two fiscal years for the Clerk, Treasurer
and Supervisor. While above the CPI, it reflects the job the officers are doing
and would be in line of salaries for similar townships. Additional information
was provided by the Clerk regarding statutory and non-statutory duties. The
Commission recognizes non-statutory duties are not covered, these are items
that the board needs to consider, not the Commission. MTA has launched a new
data base to provide information that will help in the future. Trustee salaries
are comparable to other townships and the Commission will review again in two
years. Jim thanked the board for the job they are doing.
Discussion:
∙   Curious as to what townships were used for comparison. The Commission
looked at Townships with comparable size, parcel and/or SEV.
∙   Thanked Jim for stepping up to chair with three new members.
∙   The Commission meets every two years per Ordinance, they begin meeting in
January and must conclude within 45 days.
∙   Cannot answer to previous years and raises for officials. This will be
reviewed again in two years.
∙   A raise to the officers was turned down by the board four years ago.
∙   Question of the deputies role in Official duties.
Frans Wilbrink: 4701 Zimmer Rd.
∙   Question regarding the Financial Management fee
∙   Does not feel that officers are doing their job to the capacity and should
not accept a raise.
∙   Trustee participation is different between the Trustees and they deserve a
raise.
∙   Question of hours open.
∙   Suggest police assessment be lowered as there appears to be too much in
reserve.
Clerk Gaffner moved to close the Public Hearing.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes.
Discussion: none
Motion Approved
Public Comment
Supervisor Martin opened Public Comment.
Frans Wilbrink 4701 Zimmer Rd.: Feel the township website is not kept up to
date appropriately.
Would like to see meeting time moved back to 7:00 to allow for greater
participation by residents.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 6:18.
Consent Agenda
Trustee Hayes moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the Minutes of 2/11/2015 Township board meeting
General Fund Accounts Payable paid, checks 20987-21013 for a total of
$17,865.24
Payroll Checks paid 43023 through 43054 and EFT 291-298 for a total of
$22,985.11
General Account Payable checks to approve 21014 through 21023 for a total of
$1,909.57
Revenue and expenditure report 2/28/2015
Treasurer’s Report, February 2015
Building Inspector’s Report
Litigation
Police Report
Seconded by Clerk Gaffner
Discussion: none
Motion approved
NEW BUSINESS
Meeting Dates 2015-2016
Trustee Hayes moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the scheduled
meeting dates, as presented, for fiscal year 2015-2016.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion:
∙   Preference of meeting at 7:00
Motion approved
OLD BUSINESS
Joint Planning Committee
Supervisor Martin suggested to the Board the Committee be made up of a PC
member, Board member and a member at large. Asked for suggestions/comments from
the Board.
The formation of this committee would provide a means for cooperation in
planning and other services. It also provides an opportunity for sharing the
visions for the respective communities. Having a Board member on the Committee
would provide for direct feedback to the Board. The Joint meeting of the PC’s
was enthusiastically attended. City officials showed their commitment by their
attendance at the Board meeting. The Board can review the progress in the
future. The Supervisor will meet with the Mayor of Williamston and bring back
information next month. A Planning background for members may be preferred.
Branch Road School
Supervisor Martin reviewed the draft policy for input from the Board before
finalizing next month. Will correct duplications.
Discussion:
∙   8. No alcohol, smoking or pets. Can something more positive be stated?
∙   Concern 40 seems high for occupancy. Suggest fire Marshall review occupancy
count.
∙   Concern over drinks and food. Have had food when open for tours and other
uses in the past.
∙   There will be cost to the Township for covering school visits. Charging
would limit the visits by school. Don’t have an idea how much it will be used.
If it becomes a burden to hire someone during school visits the Township can
revisit the charge for use. Feel the person overseeing the use needs to be
representing the Township.
∙   Historical Committee is looking at ways to promote the use of the school
once a policy is in place.
∙   Clerk will check on occupancy count.
Budget
Supervisor Martin reviewed her suggested amendments to the budget:
∙   Rental fees under elections. Recommend adding $300 as rental for hall to
get reimbursement for elections. Reimbursement applies to all elections and
this should apply to the use of the hall as this is what the Township charges
for rental. Allows for three elections per year/ per location.
∙   Township receptionist can start right away and would like to increase to
$12,500 to cover the full fiscal year. This covers additional weeks and hours
for opening and closing.
∙   Inspection fees should increase to $13,000 (371-811) as the Township is
seeing more building permits.
∙   (441-703) Wages for recycle to $3200. The tire grant (planning for July)
will require more staff.
∙   Compensation Commission recommendations are included in the budget.
∙   Question the hiring Assessor as an employee. Additional cost. Less than
what was being paid in the past.
∙   Against the raise for Officers.
∙   Feel that anyone in the position and doing the job deserves the raise.
∙   Senior center amount and funding from other townships.
∙   Clerk will check on other Townships funding of senior center.
Trustee Hayes moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve the 2015-2016
Township Budget as presented in the Public Hearing on March 11, 2015 with a
beginning Township Total Fund Equity of $1,831,068 as of March 31, 2014,
including the compensation commission’s recommendation.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion:
∙   Clarification on 881.002: park field fees. This will be amended the end of
the fiscal year once the roll over amount is known. This is used for field
improvements.
Motion approved
Police Special Assessment Roll
The fees are proposed to remain the same as 2014.
Hayes moved move the Williamstown Township Board Approve Resolution 2015-98,
confirming the 2015 Special Assessment Roll for Police Protection within the
Township with the Special Assessment Roll total of $227,285.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion
∙   Page 3 item 5: maximums: has this been stepped up the 3% from last year.
Clerk left to confirm number for the 3% increase from 2014. Concern that this
needs to be adjusted 3% per year for each resolution even though the amount is
dropped. This allows for adjustment. Clerk returned.
∙   168.83 and 281.38 should be the numbers in the resolution.
∙   Summer is the time to make 5 year projection for police. Need a reasonable
fund equity as the funding does not come in until the end of the year. Can be
reviewed again in November as needed.
Roll Call: Aye: Trustee Eyster, Supervisor Martin, Clerk Gaffner, And Trustee
Hayes
Nay: Trustee Imhoff
    Absent: Trustee Williams, Treasurer Fielek
REPORTS
Departments & Committees
∙   NEISA: New chief for Webberville station is Mark House. Three new hires for
the Williamston station.
Very impressed with the new director. Instituting new purchase order policy.
Request for ambulance runs: Bob submitted documentation that may be close to
what the Township was looking for. Invoicing is still taking place for
ambulance runs. Grant for new vehicle for Webberville. Clerk will request the
data for ambulance runs again.
∙   Tire recycle grant for Township~ thanks to Trustee Eyster. Need to collect
1.5 truckloads of tires to receive the grant of $4000. The grant application
specified where the tires will go for recycling. Grant is available yearly.
∙   Did receive the reimbursement from the insurance company for the phones.
∙   Trustee Eyster is working on a recycling grant for permanent recycling
location. Proposing a fall clean up as part of the grant.
∙   Clerk: FOIA law changed. Clerk going to seminar regarding changes beginning
May 1.
∙   Election laws are changing. Clerk needs to be recertified every two years.
Changing equipment being used at elections beginning 2016. Clerks Association
encouraging state to pay for all of the election equipment estimated at $7000
per precinct. Looking at changing status requirement for absentee voters.
Public Comment
Frans Wilbrink 4701 Zimmer Rd.: Clarification on receptionist wages. Would like
to see more people involved. Officer raise was not part of the public notice.
Compensation commission posted open meetings.
Supervisor Martin closed Public Comment at 7:31
Review
Supervisor: Branch School policy, budget and Joint Committee
Clerk: Resolution and posting of meeting dates.
Trustee Hayes moved to adjourn.
Meeting adjourned at 7:32 p.m.  
____________________________
Clerk Gaffner
April 8, 2015
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 6:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Martin called the meeting to order reviewed the agenda and led the
Pledge of Allegiance
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Imhoff, Supervisor Martin, Treasurer Fielek, Trustee Hayes,
Trustee Williams and Trustee Eyster
Absent: Clerk Gaffner
Public Comment
Supervisor Martin opened Public Comment.
Bill Norman 4516 Fifth St B., East Moline, Illinois: Re: protection of
agricultural farmland and land values.
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 6:06
Police report
Chief Hall was present for the quarterly report.
Calls for service were slightly up along with citations. Car/deer accidents
were similar to previous years. Meridian’s are down, likely due to program.
Three reports of tax fraud within the Township. Personal: hired two new
officers, recent graduates of the academy. Two openings remain. Four new patrol
cars are being purchased.
Library Annual Report
Julie Chrisinske, head librarian for Williamston branch of CADL provided the
annual report to the Board members. New services include a new temporary online
card, new research tools, new language learning programs are available. The
Science theme for the Summer Reading Program was very successful with STEM
Mondays featuring different science experiments. Program participation grew
over 13% last year. Described various programs that they participated in within
the community. Technology assistance is very popular. Printing is also
available through the library.
Over 61,000 visitors last year. Library is constantly evolving in the services
they offer.
The library card works at all the different branches of CADL. Director’s report
is sent to all municipalities. Will check to make sure that the Township is
receiving it.
Consent Agenda
Trustee Hayes moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the Minutes of 3/11/2015 Township board meeting
General Fund Accounts Payable paid, checks 21024-21037 for a total of $6,621.79
Police Fund Accounts Payable paid, check 1063 for $55,797.66
Payroll Checks paid 43055 through 43090 and EFT 299-301 for a total of
$19,433.18
General Account Payable checks to approve 21038 through 21040 for a total of
$614.95
Police Account Payable check to approve 1064 for a total of $639.90
Revenue and expenditure report 3/31/2015
Treasurer’s Report, March 2015
Building Inspector’s Report
Litigation
Police Report
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Planning Commission
Minutes 3-18-15
Commissioner Brown-Timm reviewed the highlights of the minutes:
∙   PH was held for the Agri-tourism regulations.
∙   Two PH’s are scheduled for May.
∙   Recommended site plan approval for 684 E. Grand River Rd. subject to
revisions.
∙   Approved PC meeting dates for 2015-16.
Discussion:
∙   Agri-tourism to be preemptive instead of reactive.
∙   Questions on what constitutes the need for a SUP.
∙   Do not see the need for regulations.
Trustee Hayes moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve the Planning
Commission’s
recommendation to approve revisions to the Williamstown Township’s Zoning
Ordinance permitting
Agricultural Tourism Uses.
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion:
∙   Regulations will permit uses. If a use is not in the ordinance, it is not
permitted.
∙   Other types of compromise for some situations.
∙   Bother to neighbors.
∙   Cannot predict future uses.
∙   State has defined Agritourism.
∙   GAAMPS are provided for farm markets
∙   Demonstration farm and nature center requirements are regulated within the
zoning ordinance.
∙   Due process for complaints to be filed.
∙   If there is an issue, we have regulations to refer to.
∙   Expansion of existing business would require review and a special use
permit.
∙   Ordinance can be reviewed and amended.
Motion Approved
NEW BUSINESS
Road Improvements 2015
Hayes moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve the Township Road
Committee’s recommendation for completion of the chip-sealing of Beeman-Rowley
Roads from Brookshire Court to the Williamston City Limit, Minor skip-paving/
wedging & chip-sealing of Beeman Road from Brookshire Court to Sherwood Road
and Skip-paving/wedging & chip-sealing of Germany Road from Zimmer Road to
Williamston Road at a total cost to the Township not to exceed $85,000.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion:
Road committee met and followed the adopted policy of the Township and the
recommendations of the Ingham County Road Dept. Memo presented outlined
estimated cost. Deferred a portion of Germany Rd. to be completed in 2016.
Discussion:
∙   Definitions of wedging and skip sealing.
∙   Clarification on location of maintenance.
∙   New pacer reports are out: 10 is a new road under 6 months, leave 8, 9, and
10 alone.
7 is time to review for crack fill. 6 do nothing. 5 should be chip sealed3-4:
1-2” asphalt recommended. 1-2: leave alone until totally reconstructed. Cost
estimate is $200-300,000 a mile for reconstruction.
∙   $30,000 a mile to grind up back to gravel.
∙   Zimmer will be redone north of Haslett and is under warranty.
∙   Give priority to 5’s to keep from becoming 4’s.
∙   Discussion of the need for some of the roads to be repaired and when.
∙   Graph provided. Trustee Eyster reviewed the graph that was provided. 2014
reflects a major change which is felt to be contributed to the winter of 2014.
Motion approved.
Road committee would like the board to ask the voters again to reconsider a
millage for road maintenance.
Township will not benefit from a Yes vote on the May ballot proposal.
Will reconsider the road committee’s recommendation in May.
Permanent Recycle Grant
Treasurer Fielek moved that if Williamstown Township is awarded the applied for
DEQ Recycling Grant, the Williamstown Township Board Approves acceptance of the
grant and make changes to the Township recycling program to meet the
requirements of grant.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes
Trustee Eyster reviewed the memo submitted to the Board. Awards won’t be
announced for two weeks. Objectives of Grant awards: Recycling plan for
doubling recycling. Want to partner with other organizations. Statewide impact.
Expressed how these issues were addressed in the grant. Part of the cost
($1600) would be additional cost. Explained the budget that is proposed by the
Township within the grant.
Discussion:
∙   Would like to see single stream method.
∙   Benefit of sorting is receiving payment for materials.
∙   Would like to see subdivisions voluntarily move to single vendor for waste
and recycled materials.
∙   Would this hurt recycling at the Township Hall?
∙   Single stream would help encourage recycling.
∙   Discussion regarding pad size and types of bins.
∙   Motion is to obtain agreement of the Board that if the Township is awarded
the grant, the Township would accept it and details would be worked out
regarding implementation.
∙   Concern over trash being dumped.
∙   Need for security.
Motion approved.
Thank you to Trustee Eyster for her work on this grant.
Park road repair
Supervisor Martin noted that road work at the park is needed and has been
deferred. The work fits within the Park budget.
Hayes moved move the Williamstown Township Board Approve contracting with Lee’s
Excavating Company to provide material and grading at the Township Park per
proposal by Lee’s
Excavating Company at a cost not to exceed $2,600.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: none
Motion approved
OLD BUSINESS
None
REPORTS
Departments & Committees
Treasurer Fielek noted that the Spring Cleanup is in May. Steel prices have
dropped significantly. The payment for the steel has typically offset the cost
of the dumpster. Cost of other metals did not drop like steel.
Tire recycling will be in July during recycling.
Art tour is May 2nd and 3rd. Need volunteers.
Trustee Eyster will volunteer both days for the Art tour and during Spring
Cleanup.
Trustee Imhoff noted a discrepancy with the Calendar on the website to be
corrected.
Supervisor Martin requested a volunteer for the Joint Committee with the City
of Williamston: Trustee Eyster will be the representative from the Board.
Constitutional Revenue sharing: originally $383,000 up to 398,000.
Municipal code tickets have arrived. Meeting today to start implementing.
Park plans are in and are being reviewed by Building Inspector.
Litigation: waiting on appeals court. Waiting for court to determine
alternative service.
Trustee Williams: The City is negotiating with a community member for the
Community Center that has intentions of expanding the Senior Center, Library,
and the Food Bank. Trustee Williams was not aware if the senior center received
monies from other Townships.
Public Comment
Bill Norman 4516 Fifth St. B, East Moline Illinois: Concern over fencing and
trees removed on property.
Supervisor Martin closed Public Comment at 7:47
Review
Trustee Eyster -grant
Clerk Gaffner - zoning amendment
Trustee Hayes moved to adjourn. Seconded by Trustee Williams.
Meeting adjourned at 7:48 p.m.  
____________________________
Supervisor Martin   
May 13, 2015
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 6:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Treasurer Fielek called the meeting to order. Due to the absence of Supervisor
Martin and Clerk Gaffner, Treasurer Fielek called for an appointment of a board
member to run the meeting. It was agreed upon by all present that Treasurer
Fielek would chair the meeting. Treasurer Fielek reviewed the agenda and led
the Pledge of Allegiance
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Imhoff, Treasurer Fielek, Trustee Hayes, and Trustee Eyster
Absent: Clerk Gaffner, Supervisor Martin and Trustee Williams
Public Comment
Treasurer Fielek closed public comment at 6:02.
Consent Agenda
Trustee Hayes moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the Minutes of 4/8/2015 Township board meeting
General Fund Accounts Payable paid, checks 21041-21077 for a total of
$49,743.88
Police Fund Accounts Payable paid, check 1065-1066 for a total of $2,819.00
Payroll Checks paid 43091 through 43140 and EFT 302-310 for a total of
$23,998.89
General Account Payable checks to approve 21078 through 21085 for a total of
$2417.47
Revenue and expenditure report 4/30/2015
Treasurer’s Report, April 2015
Building Inspector’s Report
Litigation
Police Report
Discussion:
Correction of Payroll Check number 43120 to be 43140.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
NEW BUSINESS
None
OLD BUSINESS
None
REPORTS
Departments & Committees
Treasurer Fielek reported on the success of the art tour with 354 tickets sold.
Clean-up date was a success with 307 visitors.
Trustee Eyster reported that the Township was not awarded the recycling grant.
Discussion continued regarding the desire for permanent recycling at the
Township. A proposal has been submitted by Granger’s and other options will be
investigated.
NEISA- Treasurer Fielek attended the last meeting as the alternate for Trustee
Hayes. Commendation from the Board for Trustee Hayes representation of the
Township.
Training/Election: Discussion of the Board to have options for hiring staff to
fill in for an officer when an emergency arises and how this would affect the
department’s budget.
Road: Discussion on the County Road Projects within the Township. The County
would like input from the Township as to preference.
Public Comment
none
Treasurer Fielek closed Public Comment at 6:22
Trustee Hayes moved to adjourn. Seconded by Trustee Imhoff.
Meeting adjourned at 6:23.
____________________________
Treasurer Fielek
June 10, 2015
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 6:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the Agenda.
Consensus of the Board to move public comment at the end of the meeting to
prior to the closed session. Supervisor led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Imhoff, Treasurer Fielek, Trustee Hayes, Trustee Eyster,
Supervisor Martin and Trustee Williams.
Absent: Clerk Gaffner
Public Comment
None
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 6:01.
Consent Agenda
Trustee Hayes moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the Minutes of 5/13/2015 Township board meeting
General Fund Accounts Payable paid, checks 21086-21104 for a total of
$11,779.89
EFT 310-317 for a total of $5,026.96 with EFT310 and EFT313 voided
Payroll Checks paid 43141 through 43173 for a total of $19,602.72
General Account Payable checks to approve 21105 through 21132 for a total of
$12,079.74
Revenue and expenditure report 5/31/2015
Treasurer’s Report, May, 2015
Building Inspector’s Report
Litigation
Police Report
Discussion:
·   Clarification on the voided EFT transfer
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
PLANNING COMMISSION MINUTES
Chair Eidt reviewed the minutes of 5-20-15 and addressed the action items
before the board.
SUP and Site Plan approval for an accessory apartment for 90 Sherwood Rd.
Applicant: Bonnen-Kaufman
Chair Eidt noted the plans and site plan were reviewed by McKenna Associates
and met the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance. The Public Hearing (PH) was
held on May 20th. There was no one present in opposition of the application.
The Planning Commission voted recommendation of approval to the Board of the
SUP and Site Plan with the condition that the in-law apartment become part of
the home when it is no longer used as such.
Trustee Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve the Planning
Commission’s recommendation to approve the SUP and site plan for 90 Sherwood
Rd.
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Applicant, Ed Bonnen, 712 Terminal Dr. Lansing, MI addressed the Board
regarding the change in the elimination of the Accessory Building.
The applicants may have a home occupation as a photographer.
Discussion:
·   The SUP runs with the land.
·   Clarification that Burkhart’s are the current owner. Applicant plans to
close by the end of June.
Motion approved
Chair Eidt reviewed the PH for the SUP Harns Williamston Compassionate Care,
3800 Vanneter for a 7-12 resident Adult Foster Care Facility.
Review addressed the need for a variance exceeding lot coverage and setback
requirements, submittal of state license and a recordable affidavit that the
apartment is not allowed to be rented. Concerns brought forth from the public
included: Wandering residents, handling of waste, and beginning construction
without the SUP approval in place. Due to the concerns of the public, the
Planning Commission tabled the request until July 15th, 2015.
A July 14th variance hearing has been scheduled for the lot coverage and
setback. The Planning Commission also approved the Annual Report which was
included in the Board Packet.
684 Grand River Site Plan Approval
Chair Eidt reviewed the site plan and landscaping requirements that were
addressed in the McKenna review for the site. The Planning Commission
recommended approval of the site plan with the rear of the site remaining
unpaved.
Treasurer Fielek moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve the Planning
Commission’s
recommendation to approve the site plan for 684 Grand River with the following
conditions:
1.   Replace dead landscaping material on the west front with similar and add
landscaping material across the abandoned drive to create a continual screen
according to Section 5.02(B)
2.   Due to the drive and access to the contracting yard, a chain link fence
with slatting or a wooden fence to be installed to create a visual screen of
the contracting yard.
3.   Note that all stored material cannot exceed 8 ft. in height.
4.   Copy of agreement with adjoining property owner allowing encroachment of
concrete bins.
5.   Manufacturer’s spec sheet to be provided for lighting.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Brian Ruh, 684 E. Grand River was available to answer questions.
Discussion:
·   West drive will be eliminated.
·   Landscaping will be placed along the front where the current drive is
located to create a continual landscaping screen.
·   Removal of drive is part of MDOT plan for Grand River that was reviewed by
the Planning Commission and approved by the Board.
·   Landscaping will also be placed on the east side along the fence where
possible.
·   Has agreement with Graff and will submit to the Township.
·   Will be mindful of the 8 ft. limit on height of stored material.
·   Applicant will have the plan completed by the end of 2015.
Motion approved.
NEW BUSINESS
BIS recording equipment renewal
Supervisor Martin noted that the annual renewal for equipment maintenance was
up and desired input from the Board on whether or not this should be renewed.
Discussion:
·   Consensus of the Board to continue recording the meetings.
·   The recordings are currently not coming through clearly.
·   Would like to know when it is scheduled to run.
·   Would like to see the recorded meetings on line for residents and/or
schedule of when they are available on WOW for viewing.
·   This is only a maintenance agreement. They could still be called for
servicing on an hourly basis.
·   Feel is not economical to have the maintenance agreement.
·   Cost of electronics keeps coming down.
Trustee Williams moved move the Williamstown Township Board does not renew the
contract with BIS for recording equipment.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes
Motion approved
Fee Schedule
Trustee Eyster moved move the Williamstown Township Board Approve the
Williamstown Township Fee Schedule dated June 10, 2015.
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion:
·   Fee applications for licensing and planning.
·   Covers cost for review.
·   Home based business needs to go before the planning commission. Onetime
fee.
Motion approved
FOIA
Trustee Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve Policy POL-013
FOIA Procedures and Guideline effective July 1, 2015 and rescind all previous
FOIA policies as of June 30, 2015.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes
Discussion:
·   Long and Lengthy requirements.
·   Used MTA’s suggested policy.
Roll Call: Ayes: Trustee Imhoff, Treasurer Fielek, Trustee Hayes, Trustee
Eyster, Supervisor Martin and Trustee Williams.
Nays: none
OLD BUSINESS
None
REPORTS
Departments & Committees
·   Pre-audit: Auditors were here for 3 days. Pre-audit corrects mistakes and
auditors are able to advise how to correct entries. Pre-auditors develop all
the tables and the auditor verifies and reviews. Abraham and Gaffney conduct
the Township’s pre-audit. Auditors are Layton and Richardson. Trustee Eyster’s
assistance during the audit was appreciated with Clerk Gaffner’s absence. Audit
is scheduled for July 7 & 8.
·   Supervisor Martin reviewed the proposal of Ferguson Development as part of
the Renaissance Proposal near Frandor. The DEQ requires compensatory storage in
order to develop the parcel in Frandor. The developer is willing to work with
the Township on possible improvements or other means of compensation for use of
the Township Community Park for flood water storage.
Need board approval to continue talking with developers. There would be no cost
to the Township to continue discussion and could be a win/win situation.
Consensus of the Board to move forward.
·   Treasury: Summer tax bills going out July 1st. Contracting with printing
company to print and mail.
Some residents will receive multiple tax bills.
·   Sherwood Rd is having a wedge patch and chip/seal done this year.
·   The Board is moving forward with investigating permanent recycling. Single
stream suggested. Granger serves Lansing and City of Williamston recycling.
Public Comment
Gerald Eidt, 4115 Vanneter Rd. Williamston: Commends the Board for discussion
and working together.
Brian Ruh, 684 E. Grand River Rd. Williamston: Clarification on timeline for
completion.
Supervisor Martin closed Public Comments at 7:00
Trustee Hayes moved the Williamstown Township Board move into closed session to
consider the purchase or lease of real property.
Seconded by Trustee Williams.
Roll Call: Ayes: Trustee Imhoff, Trustee Eyster, Treasurer Fielek, Supervisor
Martin, Trustee Hayes and Trustee Williams
Nays: none
Board moved into closed session at 7:01
Board came out of closed session at 7:20.
Trustee Hayes moved to adjourn.
Meeting adjourned at 7:20.
____________________________
Supervisor Martin
July 8, 2015
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 6:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the Agenda.
Supervisor led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Imhoff, Treasurer Fielek, Trustee Hayes, Trustee Eyster,
Supervisor Martin and Trustee Williams.
Absent: Clerk Gaffner
Public Comment
None
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 6:01.
Quarterly Police Report
Chief Hall was present to give the quarterly report.
72 deer have been taken in Meridian Township due to the chronic wasting
disease. Not aware of any cases found in Williamstown Township to date.
National night is being held on Tuesday August 4th. Police will work with
neighborhood watches.
Couple of fires within the Township. New arson investigator would be utilized
if a fire is suspicious.
The Meridian 2016 budget is due the 20th of this month.
The department is dedicating a FOIA coordinator.
Applied for a body camera grant in coordination Lansing, East Lansing, Ingham
County.
Two new officers are on patrol. Still have 3 vacancies to fill.
Range training finished up last week at the Gun Club on Germany Rd.
Break-ins: none since the first of the year through June 30th.
Consent Agenda
Trustee Hayes moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the Minutes of 6/10/2015 Township board meeting
General Fund Accounts Payable paid, checks 21133 through 21144 for a total of
$20,696.55
Payroll Checks paid 43174 through 43205 and EFT318 through EFT320 for a total
of $26,636.15.
General Account Payable checks to approve 21145 through 21166 for a total of
$15,827.84
Police Services check 1067 for $55,164.21.
Revenue and expenditure report 6/30/2015
Treasurer’s Report, June, 2015
Building Inspector’s Report
Litigation
Police Report
Discussion:
Clarification on Assessor wages
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Motion approved
NEW BUSINESS
Donation Acceptance
Trustee Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board accept the donation of
$3,000 from Prime Housing Group for preservation and maintenance of the
township’s parks.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes
Discussion:
Clarification of use of funds donated will be used for the park property.
Motion approved
OLD BUSINESS
Landscape Ordinance
Supervisor Martin explained the issues and complaints regarding lawn care
within some of the subdivisions.
Trustee Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board adopt the Ordinance No.
50: Landscape Ordinance with a sunset of December 31, 2015 along with a report
at the January 13, 2016 Board Meeting.
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion:
Ordinance too generalized.
Would have preferred this go before the PC first.
Consider adding definitions for weeds and lawns.
This ordinance is a compilation of other ordinances tailored to fit the needs
of the Township.
This allows the Township to step in when property owners are negligent.
Allows for a citation to be issued along with remedial activity.
This has definite height limitations where the blight ordinance does not have
limits.
Adopt with a sunset deadline and readdress the issue at a later date.
Sunset of December 31st along with a report of how this has impacted the
Township with a report at the Jan 16 board meeting.
Roll Call:
Yea: Trustee Eyster, Supervisor Martin, Treasurer Fielek, Trustee Hayes and
Trustee Williams
Nay: Trustee Imhoff
Motion approved.
 
Branch School Rental and Key policy 
Supervisor Martin addressed the revisions from the last version. Historical
Committee has reviewed and approved of the policy.
Trustee Hayes moved the Williamstown Township Board approve Policy No 13:
Branch School Rental and Key Policy.
Seconded by Trustee Imhoff
Discussion: none
Motion approved
REPORTS
Departments & Committees
Treasury: contracted with GLS for the mailing of the tax bill this year with
convenient and substantial savings to the Township. On line for payment by
credit card or electronic fund transfer is available on the website. Hall
rental can also be done on line. The Township will continue to work on
improving the website and getting information available to the public.
New receptionist: Amber Bell has joined the staff. She is a resident of the
Township.
Clerk has been out since March with his illness. Unsure of when he will be able
to return to his duties.
County MTA meeting on July 25th.
Supervisor Martin garnered input to the DNR request for a deer processing
station. Suggest a tent or other ways to block the view of activity. The heads
are sent in for testing. They need water and electric. Would like to
accommodate the DNR, however there is concern over the perception and the
process.
Public Comment
None- Supervisor Martin closed the Public Comment at 7:05
Treasurer Fielek moved to adjourn.
Meeting adjourned at 7:07.
____________________________
Supervisor Martin
August 12, 2015
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 6:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Martin called the meeting to order and reviewed the Agenda.
Supervisor led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Imhoff, Treasurer Fielek, Trustee Hayes, Trustee Eyster,
Supervisor Martin, Clerk Gaffner and Trustee Williams.
Also present: Township Attorney, Mr. Gary Bender of Murphy, Brenton, &
Spagnoula, P.C.
Absent: none
Public Comment
None
Supervisor Martin closed public comment at 6:01.
Consent Agenda
Approve the Minutes of 7/08/2015 Township board meeting
General Fund Accounts Payable paid, checks 21167 through 21200, with checks
21182 and 21188 marked void, for a total of $27,181.65
Police Account Payable Paid check 1068 for a total of $2,105.00
Payroll Checks paid 43206 through 43255 and EFT321 through EFT324 for a total
of $28,597.98
General Account Payable checks to approve 21201 through 21212 for a total of
$8,886.49
Revenue and expenditure report 7/31/2015
Treasurer’s Report, July, 2015
Building Inspector’s Report
Litigation
Police Report
Budget Amendment, increasing Park Restricted Funds 101-751-881.001 by $3,000
and reducing the Township Contingency Fund 101-890-965.000 by $3,000
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: none
Motion approved
Planning Commission
Minutes 7-15-15
Commissioner Weston reviewed the minutes and actions of the Planning Commission
at the July 15,  2015 meeting.
Site Plan 148 E. Grand River
Supervisor Martin requested further information from Commissioner Weston
regarding the PC motion for approval. Commissioner Weston reviewed the letter
from McKenna Associates dated July 13, 2015 and noted the 4 items that the PC
requested as part of their recommendation of approval to the board. The
applicant has submitted the requested information on the updated site plan.
Clint Schaefer, on behalf of Larry Schaefer Inc. addressed the Board. He noted
that he had met with Doug Franks from the Ingham County Environmental Health to
locate the drain field, the lighting has been noted on the site plan and the
location and marking of the parking will be addressed to be in compliance with
ADA requirements.
Clerk Gaffner moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Planning
Commission’s recommendation to approve the site plan for 148 E. Grand River
Road.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Discussion: none
Motion approved
 
Site Plan SUP 3800 Vanneter
Commissioner Weston reviewed the letter dated April 10, 2015 from McKenna
Associates. Residents attended the public hearing and raised concerns with the
expansion to a 12 bed facility. Concerns included: parking, generation of
trash, use of basement for an apartment and number of residents for this size
lot. He noted that the ZBA granted the variances due to administrative error of
the building permit approval process. The applicant has attempted to address
the concerns of the consultant and the neighbors.
Chris Lobb, attorney for the applicant addressed the Board. He noted that the
Harns have operated a 6 bed facility at this location for 17 years. McKenna
Associates letter dated April 10, 2015 recommended approval, based on
information provided from the applicant, for the Special Use Permit to increase
the facility to 12 beds. The 12 bed facility use is identified as a Special use
in the R-1 district, and is noted as such in McKenna’s letter as well as
addresses the need for affordable housing for a growing segment of the
population outlined in the Master Plan. Residential use abuts three sides of
the property and agriculture abuts the fourth.
The applicant addressed the consultant’s recommendations for the Site Plan
conditions and obtained the variances needed. As part of the variance approval,
an evergreen screen and fencing will be added as approved by the ZBA. The
consultant recommended less parking and the applicant revised the site plan to
accommodate his recommendation along with the addition of the Evergreen screen.
Complaints were lodged by residents of parking in the street during the Public
Hearing.
July 15th: The Planning Commission recommended denial despite the
recommendation of the consultant based on comments of the neighbors regarding
parking issues, use of living quarters by an employee’s family,
Handling of trash, and activities of residents and staff. The motion for denial
gave four reasons: Compatibility with the neighborhood, parking, size of
facility for lot and the apartment. Applicant is aware of need for SUP for
apartment. There will be no one living in the lower level. Staff person with 2
small children currently living in the lower level are moving.
Fair housing issue was not addressed by the planning commission. The board
needs to consider this when making a determination as the Federal Fair Housing
Act is there to protect discrimination against those with disabilities and
provides for financial incentive to accommodate a need within the community.
Applicant added staffing and have not personally worked at the site for some
time so in order to obtain financial viability going forward there was a need
to request the expansion. The Harns feel they have satisfied the concerns of
the consultant, McKenna and Associates and the ZBA and that this is a
reasonable request and should be approved.
Supervisor Martin opened for questions:
   Trustee felt the facility was well maintained, and that public parking is
allowed on the street.
   Reasonable to approve need for senior housing. Residents have a right to be
present.
   Supervisor Martin again asked if there were questions from the board:
   Questioned the need for the apartment. According to the architect the
expansion of the basement was made for storage and a break area.
   With 24 hour care employees work in 24 hour shifts. Building inspector
stated the basement is not approved for a bedroom facility.
   Tom Reder with Bergman associates: Architect for the Harns. Stated there was
living quarters in the lower level and it will be corrected. In his opinion
there is an escape for the bedroom. Has not been inspected for code compliance.
He stated an egress window is in place. Added on to the basement with an egress
stairway when the addition was done. Additional stairway added for staff. If it
is not used as an apartment there is not a compatibility issue with the zoning
ordinance.
   Financials show that 10 residents are needed to cover cost. The applicant
was aware of the intention to increase beds when they made application for the
addition. The owners were at a breakeven point without the addition.
   Chris Lobb noted the Smith case: his contention that board has to approve
the SUP to be economically viability. Also looking at the FFA (Federal Fair
Housing Act) along with the compatibility issue of Zoning Ordinance.
   Gary Bender, Murphy & Spagnoula, Township attorney, noted that the Smith
case does not state this in particular- have to look at industry locally not
just the owners cost.
   ZBA approved the variance for the lot coverage due to Township
administrative error.
   The applicant has addressed the nine factors outlined in McKenna’s letter,
the zoning ordinance and master plan.
   The owners had not received complaints from the neighbors until the public
hearing (PH) was held for the special use permit (SUP).
   There were unusual circumstance for approval for the variances. The variance
was only issued due to administrative error without proper oversight. The ZBA
took ownership of the Township’s mistake and hence granted variance. Do not
feel the request would have been granted otherwise. The ZBA made it clear their
decision was not to be construed that they approved the SUP request.
   The Township was not aware of a family living in the lower level at any time
prior to the application for the SUP.
   Board belief that the Township follows the Master Plan.
   Applicant’s attorney does not feel the Township can turn down the request.
   Notice must be given to residents living in lower level.
   Applicant was aware at time of building permit application the intent for
expansion of beds. The process for the SUP should have been the first step.
   Applicant’s attorney stated there was a lack of knowledge on the applicant’s
part of the process.
   Live in is an employee of Williamston Compassionate Care.
   The expansion of the business would require an understanding of the process
and going through the appropriate channels. Applicant acknowledges that it was
not well thought out and presented.
   Impact of expanding the facility is not compatible with the neighborhood.
Clerk Gaffner moved the Williamstown Township Board deny the Site Plan and
Special Use Permit for 3800 Vanneter Road, as the Township Board has determined
that a special use proposal does not comply with the standards and regulations
set forth in the Williamstown Township Ordinance, or otherwise will be
injurious to the public health, safety, welfare, and/or orderly development of
the Township.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion:
   Concern over difference between McKenna’s recommendation and PC
recommendation.   
   Time laps between review letter, Public Hearing and discussion. Review
letter was written prior to the PH.
   Parking was an issue despite applicant statement otherwise. Based on
expectation of beds and parking requirements for a 12 bed facility. Based on
PH, the Planning Commission felt the parking was not adequate or compatible.
   No objection was made by consultant, Chris Doozan over the PC’s
recommendation.
   Parking issues have been raised at the current 6 bed facility, likely to be
more of an issue at 12.
   Concern that there is not parking for residents or visitors.
   Site plan needs to be approved by the board. Variance was granted for the
setbacks and lot coverage. The ZBA does not have jurisdiction to approve the
site plan. The ZBA stipulated approval of the variance not the use or increase
or use.
   Nothing of apartment, stairway, and daylight windows was included in the
building permit.
   Concern that the approval of the additional three bedrooms may cause a
parking problem for a family home. A six bed facility is by right in the single
family district. The additional 6-12 bed falls within the jurisdiction of the
municipality. This is a business not a family.
   Expansion of business in a residential district.
   Do not see the difference between 6 or 6-12. Considered a family.
   Negligible impact on parking as McKenna pointed out. Not an impact on
neighborhood. Visitation does not impact. Is allowed per zoning ordinance.
   Going 6 to 12 does not require additional staff.
   Nursing home or assisted living. Stated as assisted living.
   There was not any support of the neighbors for the expansion.
   The recommendation decision of the PC was based on the impact of the
neighborhood.
   Room for compromise. Cutting number of beds. Once state gives license for 12
it is hard to limit. Courts can determine number.
   Suggest tabling the motion.
   Site plan needs to be revised due to apartment. Apartment needs to be
removed.
   Approval as presented would approve apartment.
   Applicant can resubmit an application.
   Conflict in ordinance: Nursing home and assisted living require a minimum
lot size of 3 acres.
   Clarification of type of housing.
   Guidelines for Assisted Living/ Adult Foster Care.
   Need for McKenna to review based on Public Hering.
   Cannot approve the Site Plan separately from the SUP.
   Opportunity for the applicant to reapply without time limit.
   Can deny now and the applicant can bring back with changes.
   Understanding with McKenna if items are changed how is it viewed.
   State licensing does not have anything in between 6 and 12 bed licensing.
   Nancy Harns: 1272 Scott Dr. East Lansing.
   State can license less than 12 given criteria provided by state.
   Can state in request that they would only apply for less than 12 on part of
licensee.
Supervisor Martin restated the motion.
Motion approved.
NEW BUSINESS
Recycle bins request
Supervisor Martin described the recycle bins request. This will promote
recycling at the park and Township Hall pavilion. These are concrete bins
labeled for recycling.
Trustee Hayes moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the quote from
fsIndustries for three 3 bin recycling centers to be placed in the Township
Park on Grand River Road and the pavilion located at the Township Hall on
Zimmer Road, at a cost not to exceed $6,094.46
Seconded by Treasurer Fielek
   Concern of placement for damage control.
   Bins are for recycling by park and pavilion users, not for drop offs.
   Concern over drop offs.
Motion approved
OLD BUSINESS
Permanent Recycle Station
Supervisor Martin noted that the board has been discussing permanent recycling
the past year. A grant was applied for and not awarded, however the Board
decided to continue researching permanent recycling. Recycling by design
submitted a proposal for permanent recycling. They currently run Meridian’s
recycling program.
Clerk Gaffner left.
Treasurer Fielek moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the establishing
of a recycling center, to be located near the south boundary of the Township
property located at 4990 Zimmer Road, with the initial startup cost not to
exceed $15,000 and a monthly management fee of $1,250.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion:
   90 ft. x 400 ft. drive for site.
   Additional funds include site improvements.
   Need limestone surface.
   Drive appears sufficient.
   Have contacted Lee’s excavating for estimate of drive.
   Bins do not have to be placed on concrete. Contractor does not have bins on
concrete currently.
   Performance bond: In case they were to leave, remediation would be their
responsibility.
   For at least the amount put into facility as part of the requirements. Do
not feel liability would increase. Would be listed on policy.
   Gravel, gate, fence, landscaping, electrical, and shed, will be part of the
improvements to the site. The shed will be a small ticket booth type, believe
it will be a pre-fab building.
   Concern of cost to maintain. 3 days a week vs once a month. $1250/month to
maintain. They expect to make money and reduce the rate to the Township to
cover cost of bins in the future.
   Township’s grant proposal did not cover operating costs. Granger’s proposal
was more costly.
   Make decision to step up to next level or not with recycling.
   Current cost includes spring cleanup.
   Inconvenient the way recycling is currently handled. This way increase
amount of recycling. The convenience to the residents is better. Great service
to provide to the constituents.
   Bins would still need to be manned if the Township did not contract with
someone to provide the service.
   This provider will collect trash and yard waste for an additional fee.
   Location site was originally not a good fit with rentals and other
activities at the hall.
   Yard waste would be removed by Hammond farms.
   There are frequent request for yard waste disposal by the residents.
   Would eliminate spring clean-up. Provider would collect most items.
Commodity purchase price has gone down. They also repurpose items collected.
Collection of metal, e-waste, yard waste,
   Target date to open is October 10th.
   The use of ground up asphalt vs. limestone.
   Suggest researching drive topping.
   Current cost analysis did not include the spring cleanup.
   Fencing and gate would be accessible for tower maintenance.
   Will connect to fence around the tower and plant landscape materials for
screening.
   Is not used for soccer any longer, has not been used for years. Moved to
park.
   Nothing for township to maintain other than normal maintenance.
   Does not include the cost savings of Mac’s time spent in preparation and
afterwards.
   Paying for other staff to cover duties that Mac will be freed up for.
   Is the township willing to cover the cost to offer to the community?
Trustee Hayes called the vote.
Motion approved.
Yard sale can still continue
Consistent business for participants of yard sale.
REPORTS
Departments & Committees
   NEISA: Mr. Hannah is resigning and moving to Charlevoix.
   Taxes have been paid by credit card and electronic fund transfers.
   Preliminary report by auditor. Saved money again, $183,000 in surplus. Good
stewardship of funds stated by auditor. More funding for roads. Close to being
caught up on major roads.
   Recycling outlay cost will come out of infrastructure budget.
   Progressing with park: plans call for a continuous foundation around rest
room along with more supports for the pavilion. Building inspector does not
inspect until sealed plans are obtained and the Township had difficulty
obtaining the sealed plans from the contractor. Feel he did not meet his
commitments to the Township. Moving forward on the project. Engineer has sealed
the plans.
   Deer Station: The DNR is going to use the site of the Township Hall for
collection during hunting season beginning September 10th through January 8th
during daylight hours. Will be set up before recycling but not during or before
recycling. Every deer that is killed in the 9 township area has to go through a
station. Meat should not be eaten if diseased. Will not be made aware until
after it is processed. Not sure what information is being collected. Another
station will be near Rose Lake. Third location is Collins and Jolly area.
   Janet and Mickey attended the county MTA meeting. Stacy Byers addressed the
farm land preservation. Preserved two farms in our twp.; Goodnoe and Stickle.
The goal when the millage ends is 10,000 acres protected. They are hoping to
preserve as much as possible around Jackson National.
   Joint meeting with the city is August 26th with the city hosting.
Public Comment for agenda & non-agenda items**
Deb Chester, 4350 Courtside Dr.: clarification on what is collected during
recycling.
Review
Supervisor Martin opened with a Statement of Resignation. She has served the
Township with privilege for nearly 30 years. She has served on the Board of
Review, Planning Commission and the past 15 years as Supervisor. The Township
offers a place for all walks of life, community facilities for everyone’s
enjoyment, advances in technology, protection of the environment, excellent
service to the residents and fiscal responsibility. She has resided at the
pleasure of the residents and offers her resignation affective September 1st at
the pleasure of the Board.
Discussion:
   Best Supervisor the Township has had. She has provided very strong
leadership not only for our township but for the state as well.
   Hard to imagine this place without her.
   Have worked with a number of supervisors and proud of her work with the
RTFA. Lobbying efforts have paid off. Great working with her.
Treasurer Fielek moved, reluctantly, to accept Supervisor Martin’s resignation
effective August 31st, 2015. Her leadership has inspired many positive changes
for Williamstown Township, benefitting all Township residents.
Seconded by Trustee Imhoff.
Discussion:
Trustee Hayes called the vote.
Motion approved
Treasurer Fielek addressed the issue of replacement. With the experience of
assessing, planning and recording secretary, Wanda is knowledgeable in working
aspects of the Township.
Treasurer Fielek moved to approve the appointment of Wanda Bloomquist as
Williamstown Township Supervisor, effective September 1st, 2015. This
appointment is to fill the Supervisor’s position for the remaining portion of
the current elected term.
Seconded by Trustee Williams.
Discussion:
   Smooth transition moving from staff to supervisor.
   Gives time for anyone interested in the position to run for office.
   State will allow for assessing work to be performed by the Supervisor.
   Need to open to others for appointment.
   Not many months before elections.
   Assessing duties include Board of review, police assessment and any other
meetings.
   Election is only a year away.
   Supervisor duties are broader in nature.
   Smooth transition to do this way.
   Wanda will need to look seriously at her replacement.
   Important that Wanda has the opportunity to work with everyone and show that
the job can be done.
Motion approved.
Supervisor Martin finished her review:
Planning Assistant: Decision notifications.
Supervisor: Recycling
Adjourn
Trustee Hayes moved to adjourn.
Meeting adjourned at 8:28
____________________________
Clerk Gaffner
September 9, 2015
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 6:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the Agenda.
Supervisor Bloomquist added recycling to the agenda under old business.
Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Eyster, Trustee Hayes, Trustee Imhoff, Clerk Gaffner,
Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Williams and Treasurer Fielek.
Also present: Dave Rider of Layton & Richardson, P.C.
Public Comment
Wendell Proudfoot, 5380 Barton Rd., Williamston, MI 48895: Expressed
appreciation for the Board members and wanted to recognize them for everything
they do for the Township.
Audit Report
Dave Rider, representative of Layton & Richardson, P.C. reviewed their findings
under accepted auditing standards for the year ended March 31. 2015. There were
no noted transactions entered into by the Township during the year for which
there was a lack of authoritative guidance or consensus. All significant
transactions have been recognized in the proper period. The financial statement
disclosures are neutral, consistent and clear. No significant difficulties in
dealing with management in performing and completing the audit.
Consent Agenda
Trustee Hayes moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the Minutes of 8/12/2015 Township Board Meeting
General Fund Accounts Payable paid, checks 21213 through 21230 for a total of
$15,798.74
Payroll Checks paid 43256 through 43285 and EFT325 through EFT332 for a total
of $24,370.66
General Fund Account Payable checks to approve 21231 through 21239 for a total
of $2,038.01
Revenue and Expenditure Report 8/31/2015
Treasurer’s Report, August 2015
Building Inspector’s Report
Litigation
Police Report
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion: Trustee Imhoff asked for clarification regarding litigation
Motion approved
NEW BUSINESS
In regards to the November 11, 2015 Township Board meeting date: The office is
closed on this date due to Veterans Day. After a brief discussion the decision
was made to keep the meeting on this date as it is when the public would expect
it to be and it has been posted on the calendar for this date.
Budget Amendment Proposal:
The recommendation for funds for the Deputy Clerk position was to exhaust the
current funds before money is moved. Due to the extended illness of the Clerk,
Trustee Eyster was brought in to assist with the Clerk’s duties. This amendment
will insure funds to cover the Deputy Clerk for the remainder of this fiscal
year. It was determined to place the item on the consent agenda for October
transferring $2,535.00 from the election worker’s budget to the Deputy Clerk’s
wages budget.
OLD BUSINESS
Permanent Recycle Station: It has become evident that the startup cost of
$15,000 approved in August will not be sufficient to cover costs. Two different
estimates have come in; one at $45,000 and one at $47,000. Trevor from
Recycling by Design is going to get another estimate for the Township. In the
meantime, the October 10th deadline is not going to be met. October recycling
will continue at the Township Hall as in the past. Other ideas for recycling
included: Renting space at the Demmer sight, $950/month, they will work with us
month to month. Cardinal Fabricating off Corwin Road might be another option.
Supervisor Bloomquist agreed to check on recycling at the park. It was agreed
to talk to Trevor at Recycling by Design and inform him we need to do more
research and will bring it back to the table in October.
REPORTS
Departments & Committees
For the purpose of collecting summer taxes: The office will remain closed on
Monday, September 14, 2015. Independent Bank will be open to receive taxes,
residents can use the drop box next to the front door of the Township. If they
are in the drop box when we open Tuesday morning, they will be considered on
time. They can also be paid on line using a credit card or an electronic
transfer.
Supervisor Bloomquist thanked everyone that came to the joint meeting at the
City.
A resolution in honor of Mickey Martin is being drafted. The Planning
Commission and the Township Board will approve the final draft at the October
14th, 2015 Board meeting for presentation to Ms. Martin.
A rough draft budget will be ready for next month’s meeting.
Niesa/Williamston Fire Station extended an invitation to a 911 ceremony
honoring police and firefighters on Sept. 11, 2015.
It was suggested that a written report from the Dept. of Transportation and
Roads be requested regarding the plan for chip seal on Township Roads and
striping that is scheduled to be completed.
Public Comment
None
Clerk Gaffner moved the Williamstown Township Board move into closed session
for the purpose of discussing attorney/client confidential information.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes.
Roll Call Vote:
Yes- Trustee Eyster, Trustee Hayes, Trustee Imhoff, Clerk Gaffner, Supervisor
Bloomquist, Trustee Williams and Treasurer Fielek 
No: None
Board moved into closed session at 7:20
Board came out of closed session at 7:45
Clerk Gaffner made a motion to approve a four month plan to receive funds from
the judgment ordered by the Ingham County Circuit Court on Case No. 13-380-CZ.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Trustee Hayes moved to adjourn.
Seconded by Treasurer Fielek.
Meeting adjourned at 7:50.
____________________________
Clerk Gaffner
October 14, 2015
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 6:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the Agenda.
Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance. Supervisor Bloomquist asked
to move the Wamhoff discussion to the first order of new business. The Board
agreed.
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Imhoff, Trustee Williams, Supervisor Bloomquist, Treasurer
Fielek, Clerk Gaffner, Trustee Eyster, Trustee Hayes
Also present: Police Chief David Hall
   Toby Weston – representing the Planning Commission
   Jake Wamhoff of Wamhoff Farms
Public Comment
None
Supervisor Bloomquist closed public comment at 6:04.
Consent Agenda
Trustee Hayes moved to approve the consent agenda with payroll paid and
accounts payable paid pulled.
Minutes of 9/09/2015 Township board meeting
Police Fund Accounts Payable paid, checks 1069 and 1070 for a total of
$56,250.35
General Fund Account Payable checks to approve 21273 through 21277 for a total
of $3,747.82
Revenue and expenditure report 9/30/2015
Treasurer’s Report, September 2015
Building Inspector’s Report
Police Report
Budget Amendment transferring $2,535 from Salary Election Workers 101-191-
703.000 to Wages Deputy Clerk 101-215-703.000
General Fund Accounts Payable paid, checks 21240 through 21272 for a total of
$26,581.38
Payroll Checks paid 43286 through 43323 and EFT333 through EFT336 for a total
of $24,485.32
Trustee Williams seconded.
Motion Passed.
Clerk Gaffner moved to approve Payroll Paid and Accounts Payable Paid.
General Fund Accounts Payable paid, checks 21240 through 21272 for a total of
$26,581.38
Payroll Checks paid 43286 through 43323 and EFT333 through EFT336 for a total
of $24,485.32
Seconded by Treasurer Fielek.
Discussion:
   Check number 21264 to Layton & Richardson, P.C. in the amount of $2,333.00 –
A portion of this amount came from the General Fund and a portion from the
Cemetery Fund, however, the Revenue and Expenditure Report did not reflect
this. The check was written on October 8th and Revenue and Expenditure Report
was for September only.
   Check number 21260 in the amount of $852.00 to Bannasch Welding, Inc. -
Inquiry as to why we are using the services for a Lansing company rather than a
more local company -
the Township’s goal is to use local people whenever possible.
Discussion took place regarding the assessor pay for Supervisor Bloomquist.
Supervisor Bloomquist is committed to taking all necessary education classes
available to receive certification. More comparisons will be done by Supervisor
Bloomquist with the practices of comparable Townships as well as the MTA.
This will be addressed at budget time.
Motion approved
Police report 
Chief Hall was present to give the quarterly police report.
   516 deer have been checked for Chronic Wasting Disease.
   A deer check station is set up in the Williamstown Township parking lot. It
will be open through November from 10 a.m. – 8 p.m. and then beginning December
1 through January 8th from 9 a.m. – 6 p.m. Closed December 25, 2015.
   There have been 27 car/deer accidents in the Township to date
   A new officer has been hired
   A new 2015 Explorer has been purchased by Meridian Township
   Oct. 22nd is the next Citizen’s Academy at Meridian Township. There are
usually 30-35 attendees. 
   A Halloween open house will be held at Meridian Township on 10/31
   All police officers will now carry the drug Narcan. It will be used to
reverse the effects of opioid overdose.
Planning Commission 
Commissioner Weston gave Planning Commission report.
   The commission tabled the Brookstone Estates application for Preliminary
Plat Approval
   The Commissioners passed the joint resolution for past supervisor Mickey
Martin.
   At the November meeting the Board will deliberate on the Wallace SUP and
site plan application for Go Mini
   An Oct. 21st public hearing will be held for a proposed cell tower at 1690
Haslett Rd.
   Also on Oct. 21st a public hearing will be held regarding a special land use
application for 3800 Vanneter Rd., adult foster care facility
NEW BUSINESS
Wamhoff request for variance
Mr. Wamhoff of Wamhoff Farms presented a request for a variance to burn 4 piles
of brush from clearing his land. Mr. Wamhoff’s brush piles exceed the size
stated in the Township Ordinance.
Trustee Hayes moved to approve the requested variance of the Township Burning
Ordinance and allow Wamhoff Farms to burn the 4 brush piles on Parcel No. 33-
03-03-28-300-005
Trustee Imhoff seconded.
Motion approved.
IT purchases
Supervisor Bloomquist reviewed the policy to update office computers and IT
equipment. It has been the past policy to replace an office computer every four
(4) years. The computer at the receptionist’s desk is the next one on the list.
The Township’s IT person noted that the Township’s firewall is five (5) years
old and recommends replacement. It is his recommendation that the Township wait
before going to Windows 10. The Township is currently using Windows 7. Windows
10 is experiencing some privacy issues and he would like to wait and have
everyone move to Windows 10 together. Clerk Gaffner will look into liability if
the Township’s computers are ever hacked.
Trustee Hayes moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the recommended
upgrades to the Township Computer Network at a cost not to exceed $2,229.96.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Discussion: none
Motion approved.
Planning Commission Appointments
The Planning Commission has three (3) members whose terms are up and the
Supervisor is recommending reappointment.
A motion was made by Trustee Hayes for the Williamstown Township Board to
approve the Supervisor’s recommendation to appoint Dali Giese, Annette Davis
and Rick DeShon to the Williamstown Planning Commission for a three year term
commencing November 2015.
Seconded by Trustee Williams.
Discussion:
No interest has been expressed for one of these positions from other residents
Motion approved.
Budget
The budget for the 2016-2017 Fiscal Year has been presented in draft form.
Supervisor Bloomquist indicated that she looked at past budgets, not just last
year’s budget. The budget for elections was increased because there will be at
least 4 elections in the upcoming FY year.  Corrections to the budget will be
made before the November Board meeting. Supervisor Bloomquist asked that she be
contacted with any questions or concerns.
Clerk Gaffner left the Board table on 7:20 and returned to the Board table at
7:30.
OLD BUSINESS
Resolution of Appreciation
Trustee Hayes moved to approve the Resolution of Appreciation for the past
Supervisor, Mickey Martin.
The motion was seconded by Treasurer Fielek.
Roll call vote:
Yes – Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustees Eyster, Hayes and Williams, Clerk Gaffner
and Treasurer Fielek
No – Trustee Imhoff
Motion approved with corrections
Joint Committee
Supervisor Bloomquist will attend the joint committee meeting with Williamston
City Mayor Belanger and others. An MDOT representative is willing to meet with
City and Township representatives to look at options such as road diet and bike
lanes. The County is starting conversation on trails and greenways and would
like to see how we can connect. The City is interested in the chip seal we have
used on some Township roads. There will be discussion on Zoning, trails, MDOT
and review of the 425’s. If anyone has suggestions on other issues to address,
please let Supervisor Bloomquist know. The meeting date will be either the end
of October or sometime the first of November.
FOIA Coordinator
Effective July 1, 2015, the Board designated the Clerk as the Township’s FOIA
Coordinator
Discussion on additional duties over and above the statutory duties
FOIA Coordinator needs to be someone on the Board that is directly accountable
to residents
Each elected official performs additional duties without additional
compensation.
Supervisor Bloomquist would like to see more research done on FOIA coordinators
with the recent FOIA changes
REPORTS
Departments & Committees
NIESA
Trustee Hayes provided the Board with the NIESA report.
   12 calls for service in September for the Williamston station
   Assisted Leroy station on a grain bin call
   Sent crew of firefighters in truck 4 to the funeral for a Lansing
firefighter
   Trucks & equipment are ok at this time.
   Open house pancake breakfast was Oct. 10
   Member-At-Large position filled by Frans Wilbrink
Bus trip  
   Urban Service bus trip is Nov 5th, 9:00 – 2:00 to Frankenmuth. Supervisor
Bloomquist would like people from the joint committee to go as well as Board
and Planning Commission members
MTA
   Oct 28th is the MTA Chapter meeting at Vevay Township
   Bring a dish to pass
   There is always good information that comes out of these meetings
Trails
Trustee Eyster attended a meeting regarding the regional trails and parks plan
for Ingham County. The Committee is discussing a plan for the use of the money
from the Parks and Trails millage. All Board members are encouraged to attend
the remaining scheduled meetings. There are a total of 6 meetings scheduled.
Public Comment
There was no public comment
Closed Session
At 8:19 Trustee Hayes made a motion to go into executive session for the
purpose of discussing attorney/client confidential information.
Seconded by Trustee Imhoff
Roll Call vote:
Yes – Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustees Eyster, Hayes, Imhoff and Williams, Clerk
Gaffner and Treasurer Fielek
No - none
Motion approved
The Board came out of closed session at 8:53.
8:54 Supervisor Bloomquist reviewed the meeting.
Trustee Hayes made a motion to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Treasurer Fielek.
Motion approved.
Meeting adjourned at 8:55
____________________________
Clerk Gaffner
November 11, 2015
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 6:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the Agenda.
Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Imhoff, Supervisor Bloomquist, Treasurer Fielek, Trustee
Eyster, Trustee Hayes
Also present: Toby Weston – representing the Planning Commission
Absent: Clerk Gaffner and Trustee Williams
Public Comment
Kurt Guter, 4045 Signet Circle, Williamston, MI 4895: Expressed interest in
Subdivision applying for Special Assessment to maintain own roads in
subdivision.
Discussion:
   Gathering cost estimates to present to subdivision and determine support
   Reviewing and gathering information to determine if it would be total
replacement or repair
Kevin Duffy, 2273 Rowley Rd, Williamston, MI 48895: Works with Ingham County
Parks and Recreation and wanted to provide flyers for county meeting regarding
trails will be at NIESA November 18, 2015 at 6:30 pm.
Consent Agenda
Trustee Hayes moved the consent agenda consisting of:
   Approve the Minutes of 10/14/2015 Township board meeting
General Fund Accounts Payable paid, checks 21289 through 21302 for a total of
$5,582.11
General Fund Accounts Payable paid, AP scans 4722 through 4741 for a total
$4,936.85
Payroll Checks paid 43324 through 43359 and EFT337 through EFT341 for a total
of $24,611.01
General Fund Account Payable checks to approve 21273 through 21277 for a total
of $3,747.82
Revenue and expenditure report 10/31/2015
Treasurer’s Report, October 2015
Building Inspector’s Report
Police Report
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Discussion:
   Confirmation on city’s contribution to cemetery fund
   Concern over supervisor pay for assessing without certification
Motion Passed.
Planning Commission
Minutes: Commissioner Weston gave Planning Commission report.
   Harns application for a Special Use Permit for a 7-12 bed adult foster care
facility is scheduled for deliberation November 18, 2015.
   APC Towers Special Land Use request to erect a 160 foot high monopole tower
will be sent to the Township Board meeting on November 11th with a
recommendation for approval.
APC Tower
Applicant addressed the board and reviewed process of collocation search and
need for height.
Trustee Hayes moved that the Williamstown Township Board approve the Special
Use Permit for a 160 ft. monopole tower at 1690 Haslett Rd. with the height
addition for the purposes of collocation. The Approval of the tower will serve
to address broader coverage for residents, the ability for other service
providers to collocate on an existing tower rather than constructing new
towers.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Discussion: None
Motion Passed.
Trustee Hayes moved that the Williamstown Township Board approve the Site Plan
for the 160 ft. monopole tower at 1690 Haslett Rd. with the following
requirements:
   1. Landscaping recommendations must be implemented.
   2. Structural and soil reports must be submitted prior to issuance of a
building permit.
   3. A removal bond shall be posted immediately upon issuance of a building
permit to ensure removal of the facility must be submitted.
Seconded by Trustee Imhoff.
Discussion: None
Motion passed.
Wallace Go Minis
Applicant was not present, Supervisor Bloomquist will contact applicant
deliberation will on December 9, 2015 agenda.
Police Assessment
The amount proposed to be specially assessed in 2015 is less than the maximum
amount permitted by the Township voters, which was $168.83 per residential unit
and $281.38 for each industrial or commercial business in 2015. In future
years, the maximum special assessment limit will increase by 3% each year. The
annual assessment will not exceed the maximum assessment.
Treasurer Fielek moved that the Williamstown Township Board approve confirming
the 2015 Special Assessment Roll total of $227,505.00 that includes the
addition of residential parcels 33-03-03-29-201-004 and 33-03-03-32-351-004.
Seconded by Trustee Imhoff
Roll Call Vote:
Yes-Supervisor-Bloomquist, Trustee-Eyster, Treasurer-Fielek, Trustee-Imhoff,
and Trustee-Hayes
No-none
Motion Passed.
NEW BUSINESS
None
OLD BUSINESS
Budget
Supervisor Bloomquist addressed over budget items, budget amendment will be
presented in December to allow review on reassessment payroll. Procedure for
notification of budget overage will be reinstated.
Discussion: None
Emergency Siren
Treasurer Fielek moved that Williamstown Township Board approve funds to
Westshore Services for maintenance agreement not to exceed $700.00 for first
year and to move forward with needed repairs.
Discussion:
   Is larger horn for distance a possibility   
   Check with 911 regarding funding to help with repairs   
REPORTS
Departments & Committees
NIESA
Trustee Hayes provided the Board with NIESA report.
   Director Harper resigned
   Recording Secretary Paula resigned.
   Will be posting to fill Recording Secretary Position.
Recycling
Supervisor Bloomquist is still getting estimates and researching recycling
options.
Public Comment
None-Closed at 7:40
Closed Session
Treasurer Fielek moved to go into executive session for the purpose of
discussing attorney/client confidential information.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes.
Roll Call vote:
Yes – Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Trustee Hayes, and Trustee Imhoff,
Clerk Gaffner and Treasurer Fielek
No - none
Motion approved
Board went into closed session at 7:47 pm
Trustee Hayes moved to come out of closed session at 8:24.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Motion Approved.
Trustee Hayes moved to adjourn.
Seconded by Treasurer Fielek
Meeting adjourned at 8:26
____________________________
Ernie Gaffner, Clerk
 
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
December 9, 2015
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 6:06 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and led the Pledge of
Allegiance. Supervisor Bloomquist reviewed the Agenda.
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Imhoff, Trustee Williams, Supervisor Bloomquist, Treasurer
Fielek, Clerk Gaffner, Trustee
                 Eyster, Trustee Hayes
Also present: Susan Cockerill - representing the Senior Center
        Annette Davis – representing the Planning Commission
      Tracy Wallace – Go Mini Rental
      Thomas Reder – Harns – Williamston Compassionate Care
      Nancy Harns – Harns – Williamston Compassionate Care
Public Comment
Kurt Guter, 4045 Cygnet Court, Williamston – addressed the Board regarding
maintaining subdivision roads within the Township. He has researched other
municipalities and shared some financing options for the Township Board to
consider in maintaining subdivision roads.
Supervisor Bloomquist closed public comment at 6:12 p.m.
Consent Agenda
Trustee Williams moved to approve the consent agenda.
Minutes of 11/11/2015 Township Board meeting
General Fund Account Payable paid, checks 21311 through 21324 for a total of
$8,571.69
Payroll Checks paid 43360 through 43392 and EFT 342 through EFT 345 for a total
of $22,015.14
General Fund Account Payable checks to approve 21325 through 21337 for a total
of $4,733.67
Revenue and expenditure report 11/30/2015
Treasurer’s Report, November 2015
Building Inspector’s Report
Police Report
Litigation Report
Trustee Hayes seconded.
Motion approved
Senior Center Annual Report
Susan Cockerill addressed the Board with the Annual Senior Center Report. Key
points include:
·   New/additional fitness classes have been added and are well attended
·   Grant money was received from the Arts Council of Greater Lansing for art
classes
·   A grant was received from Graf Chevrolet
·   Budget for 2016 will remain close to previous year (2016 budget was not
ready for review)
·   Susan is looking at ways to help finance the Senior Center as many centers
are funded by a local millage and Williamston’s is not
·   One idea is each Township pay $10.00 for each senior resident. Ms.
Cockerill will be addressing the participating Townships along with the City of
Williamston with this idea
·   Ms. Cockerill appreciates any and all feedback on ways to help fund the
Center
Planning Commission  
Commissioner Annette Davis presented the Planning Commission report.
·   Commission recommends approval of the Go-Mini application for special land
use and site plan
·   Commission recommends approval of the SUP & site plan for Williamston
Compassionate Care
·   Commission recommends the Township Board update the Subdivision Control
Ordinance
·   Brookstone Estates preliminary Plat Approval is tabled until the January
meeting
·   Officers for 2015/2016 were re-elected to serve for 2016/2017
Wallace-Special Use Permit Go-Mini Rentals
Trustee Williams moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Special Use
Permit for the Go-Mini Storage system. The approval will help serve a growing
need for temporary service at a location that is already providing on site
storage. Approval is subject to the following conditions:
1.    No more than 104 Go-Mini Storage Units will be stored on site
2.   Go-Mini Storage Units will be locked at all times
3.   Rented Go-Mini Storage Units will not be stored on site
4.   Go-Mini Storage Units will not be stacked on site
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
 Discussion:
·   Concerns were expressed relative to the motion and the possibility of
adding some additional conditions to the approval of a special use permit
·   Concerns about the height of trees being purchased by the owner to comply
with the site plan.
Since the motion was not ready to be approved, Trustee Eyster withdrew her
second and Trustee Williams withdrew his motion. It was the consensus of the
Board that a new motion be drafted to include Board member concerns and brought
back for discussion at the January 2016 meeting.
Harns – Williamston Compassionate Care Special Use Permit
Trustee Williams moved the Township Board approve the Williamston Compassionate
Care special land use application, calling for expansion to accommodate up to
12 residents, based on the following findings:
1.    By virtue of having obtained lot coverage and set back variances, the
building is in compliance with zoning ordinance requirements.
2.   Measures have been implemented by the applicants to address neighbors’
concerns and achieve compatibility with adjacent uses.
3.   A need for a facility of this nature exists in the area.
4.   The facility will have no greater impact on public services and traffic
and roads than a typical single family home.
This recommendation of approval is subject to the following conditions:
1.   An affidavit, in a form suitable to the Township, shall be recorded by the
applicant confirming that the basement shall not be used as living quarters.
2.   An additional two parking spaces shall be constructed by May 1, 2016, as
proposed on the site plan.
3.   A copy of the adult foster care license from the State of Michigan shall
be submitted to the Township, including a copy of all renewal licenses.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Discussion:
·   Once the special use permit is approved by the Board, Harns can then submit
the license
·   With the addition of beds, the code went from residential to commercial
·   As part of the licensing process with the State, a final check will be made
by the fire marshal
·   Initial license is for six months, then renewal is every other year
Motion approved
NEW BUSINESS
Trustee Hayes moved the Williamstown Township Board approve recommending the
Planning Commission review the Township subdivision ordinance and the Township
zoning ordinance pertaining to signs and make any necessary recommendations to
the Township Board with the cost not to exceed $10,460.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Discussion:
·   Cost of planning consultant not to exceed $10,460
·   Review of the sign regulation is due to a Supreme Court ruling regarding
signage
·   Subdivision ordinance has not been updated since 1996
Motion approved
OLD BUSINESS
Budget
Supervisor Bloomquist has met with Trustee Imhoff, Trustee Eyster with a future
meeting planned with Clerk Gaffner. The goal is to bring the numbers closer
together, reviewing the last 3 – 4 year’s budgets so as to not lose anything
that should be included
Assessing
Clerk Gaffner moved to approve the transfer of $2,178.00 from Contingency Fund
101-890-965.000 to the Reassessment Fund 101-209-702.002.
Seconded by Treasurer Fielek.
Discussion: This line item has been increased for the 2016-17 fiscal year to
accommodate reassessments.
Motion approved
Assessing Duties
·   Supervisor Bloomquist compiled a list of assessing duties as Supervisor of
Williamstown Township as well as budget history
·   She attempted to make contact with many area Townships and Williamston City
for assessing duties and payment for duties as assessor for comparison
REPORTS
Departments & Committees
NIESA
Trustee Hayes provided the Board with the NIESA report.
·   NIESA is changing their meeting date to the 2nd Thursday of the month
·   There is an alternate at large position open on the NIESA Board
Siren
A maintenance program has been purchased for the warning siren at the Township
at a cost of $400.00
Planning Assistant
Rhea Johnson has been hired to fill the planning assistant position
Board of review 
December Board of Review is scheduled for Tuesday, Dec. 15, 2015, at 6:00 p.m.
Joint Committee – City of Williamston/Williamstown Township
The first meeting of the joint committee was held and Supervisor Bloomquist
said it went well. Some of the items discussed were: trails, 425 agreements,
streets, and zoning. The committee reviewed the 425’s and feels it is important
to become more familiar and knowledgeable about them. The next meeting is
scheduled for January with the City of Williamston as host with the “Island
425” agreement set to be discussed. The committee plans to meet quarterly.
Trails
Supervisor Bloomquist is attending the trail meetings and will report back to
the Board with any information.
Tax Bills
The tax bills were sent out December 1st.
Public Comment
There was no public comment
Trustee Hayes made a motion to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Treasurer Fielek.
Motion approved.
Meeting adjourned at 8:00
 
____________________________
Clerk Ernie Gaffner
2016 Meeting Minutes
January 13, 2016
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
January 13, 2016
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 6:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the Agenda.
Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Imhoff, Supervisor Bloomquist, Treasurer Fielek, Trustee
Hayes, Clerk Mitchell, Trustee Williams
Also present:  Chief Hall, Tracy Wallace of Go-Mini
Absent: Trustee Eyster
Public Comment
None.
Consent Agenda
 Trustee Williams moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the Minutes of 12-09-15 and 01-06-16 Township board meeting and Special
Meeting
General Fund Accounts Payable paid, checks 21338 through 21350 for a total of
$3,426.44
Payroll Checks paid 43393 through 43437and EFT346 through EFT347 for a total of
$16,742.52
General Fund Account Payable checks to approve 21351 through 21371 for a total
of $70,625.84
Revenue and expenditure report 12/30/2015
Treasurer’s Report, December 2015
Treasurer’s Report, January 2016
Building Inspector’s Report
Seconded by Trustee Hayes
Discussion: None
Motion approved
Police Report
Chief Hall said he has reviewed the report and it is accurate. The reported 5
ID thefts is an increase, not unusual in the region. Four drunk drivers were
reported. An officer saved one person through use of Narcan (for opiate
overdoses). This medication may be administered through injection or nasal
mist. Neighborhood leader meetings will be held on January 14 (Watch program).
A speaker will discuss a new program for interviewing child victims of criminal
sexual conduct. The annual report for the Township should be available in
February. The Police Department has a goal to increase diversity in hiring.
There was a request to have police presentation to Senior Center on preventing
identity fraud.
Wallace Go Minis, 1099 East Grand River Ave
Tracy Wallace, Applicant, was present.
Treasurer Fielek moved that the Williamstown Township Board approve the Special
Use Permit for Go- Mini Storage system. The approval will help serve a growing
need for temporary service at a location that is already providing on site
storage. Approval is subject to the following conditions:
No more than 104 Go-Mini Storage Units will be stored on site in approved
designated locations only.
Go-Mini Storage Units will be locked at all times.
Rented Go-Mini Storage Units will not be stored on site.
Go-Mini Storage Units will not be stacked on top of each other on site.
Landscaping replacement to consist of at least two different types of
evergreens and one deciduous tree. At least one third of the trees will be 4-
6 feet in height.
Crushed asphalt or limestone to be placed in Go-Mini Storage areas.
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion: It was proposed by the applicant that tall grasses be planted next
to shorter trees pending growth of the trees, retaining compliance with
condition #5 in approval conditions above. This was agreed to.
Motion approved.
NEW BUSINESS
Poverty Guidelines
Trustee Williams moved that the Williamstown Township Board approve adopting
the 2016 amendments to the Township Poverty Guidelines Resolution #97.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes
Discussion: Guidelines have not changed since 2011.
Roll Call Vote: Yes – Clerk Mitchell, Trustee Imhoff, Trustee Hayes, Supervisor
Bloomquist, Treasurer Fielek< Trustee Williams
No – None
Absent – Trustee Eyster
Tractor Purchase
It was proposed to sell the current tractor after doing repairs. The Tractor
has been in service since 2001. Funds for purchase would be charged to three
Departments’ capital outlay. Contingency in Cemetery budget could be utilized
with the funds from sale of the tractor placed back in Cemetery. Will be put on
next month’s agenda as an action item.
Nationwide-Update of Group Retirement Plan
Trustee Williams moved that the Township Board approve Resolution 107 updating
the Williamstown Township Governmental Non-ERISA Retirement Plan.
Seconded by Trustee Imhoff.
Discussion: Required to update per IRS. Changes only affected dates, etc. There
were no policy changes.
Roll Call Vote: Yes – Trustee Hayes, Treasurer Fielek, Trustee Williams,
Trustee Imhoff, Supervisor Bloomquist; Clerk Mitchell
No – None
Absent – Trustee Eyster
OLD BUSINESS
Harns Williamston Compassionate Care
Trustee Hayes moved that the Board approve the Site Plan for Williamston
Compassionate Care.
Seconded by Trustee Williams.
Motion approved.
Budget
Final revision will be completed next month, February, with a public hearing in
March. Supervisor Bloomquist requested that any suggestions be brought forward
and the opportunity to meet with each board member to review the budget.
REPORTS
Departments & Committees
Clerk Mitchell noted that she had appointed Mark Steinberg as Deputy Clerk. He
was sworn in on January 11, 2016.
Trustee Hayes: NEISA. No report, meeting will be held on January 14.
Supervisor Bloomquist: DNR meeting about River Trails suggestion making the Red
Cedar a river trail, with MDOT site as potential trail head. Possible grant to
do clean-up. Would like to convene a stakeholder meeting to consider writing a
grant application.
Trustee Williams: Meeting with Williamston City council, discussion of campaign
finance reform.
Trustee Imhoff: Road meeting. Sherwood Road will be repaired from North Branch
to Williamston Rd in 2016.
Public Comment
None.
Closed Session
The Board went into closed session at 7:44PM to consider a real estate
purchase. Board came out of closed session at 8:01PM.
Trustee Hayes moved to adjourn.
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Motion approved
Meeting adjourned at 805PM.
___________________________      ______________
Shirley Mitchell, Clerk       Date
February 10, 2016
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
February 10, 2016
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 6:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the Agenda.
Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Imhoff, Supervisor Bloomquist, Treasurer Fielek, Clerk
Mitchell, Trustee Williams
Also present: Jason Hockstock, Ferguson Continental, 150 E. Broad St, Columbus,
Oh; Eric Iversen, 3135 Pine Tree, Suite D, Lansing, MI; Dave Love, Ingham
County Drain Commission, 707 Buhl St, Mason, MI, 48854; Tom Stover, 5499 Mystic
Lake Dr, Brighton, MI; Garry Rowe, 2301 Tiffany Ln, Holt, MI
Absent: Trustee Eyster, Trustee Hayes
Public Comment
Patrick Hanes, 4830 Zimmer Rd, regarding Township law enforcement
Closed at 6:10PM.
Consent Agenda
Trustee Williams moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the Minutes of 01-13-16 Township board meeting
General Fund Accounts Payable paid, checks 21372 through 21387 for a total of
$6,527.28
Payroll Checks paid 43430 through 43468 and EFT348 through EFT352 for a total
of $28,329.34
General Fund Account Payable checks to approve 21388 through 21398 for a total
of $9,881.89
Revenue and expenditure report 01/31/16
Treasurer’s Report, February 2016
Building Inspector’s Report
Pending Litigation
   Police Report
Seconded by Treasurer Fielek
Discussion: Clarification on Murphy/Spagnuolo billing.
Motion approved
PLANNING COMMISSION
Red Cedar Renaissance
Commissioner Giese reviewed the actions of the Planning Commission and the site
plan review for Red Cedar Renaissance. At its January 20, 2016 meeting, the
Planning Commission recommended approval by the Board of the site plan
contingent on Ferguson/Continental Lansing’s commitment to remove the log jam
(fallen trees) in the river at the northwest corner of the Township park, and
on the Township being recognized for its efforts on behalf of this project.
Jason Hockstock, Eric Iversen and Tom Stover (land owner) presented an overview
of the project. The compensating cut will create protected wetlands and flood
plain. Mr. Stover plans to begin work soon to restore property to farming. The
applicant has agreed to clear the log jam in the northwest corner of the
Township park.
Treasurer Fielek moved the board approve the site plan application by Ferguson/
Continental Lansing LLC.
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion:
Dave Long, Ingham County Drain Commission representative, stated the Drain
Commission approved the soil erosion application. The Drain Commission will
make weekly visits through project completion
Soil will not be removed from site
Clarification on process to protect topsoil
Should not impact view for neighboring residents
Clarification on cut area to high water table
Appreciation for clearing log jam
NEW BUSINESS
USGS/Ingham County Water Study
Garry Rowe described the proposed well-water testing project that will involve
testing about 20 Township residential wells for bacteria and for several heavy
metals. The 17 wells that were tested in 1983 will be retested. Testing has
been completed in Aurelius Township. Mr. Rowe asked for Township help in
communicating with residents. Individual test reports will be provided to
residents whose wells are tested and a report of findings will be presented to
the Township. The Ingham County Drain Commission will provide major funding.
Township funding will be up to $600.
Trustee Williams moved the Township Board approve the participation in the
USGS/Ingham County Groundwater Study at a cost not to exceed $600. This Study
will provide information useful to Township residents on the quality of the
Township wells.
Seconded by Clerk Mitchell.
Discussion: None
Motion approved.
RESOLUTIONS
Board Farmland Preservation Resolutions
Trustee Imhoff moved the Township Board approve Resolution 107, 108, and 109
authorizing parcels 33- 03-03-22-300-004, 33-03-03-0-100-013 and 33-0303—22-
300-005 to participate in the Ingham County PDR program. The Township Master
Plan encourages the protection of farmland through this program.
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion: None
Roll Call Vote: Yes – Trustee Imhoff, Trustee Williams, Treasurer Fielek, Clerk
Mitchell, Supervisor Bloomquist
No – None
Absent – Trustee Eyster, Trustee Hayes
Tractor Purchase
Trustee Imhoff moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the budget
amendment reducing the Cemetery Contingency Fund 209-276-965.000 by $9,760 and
reducing Cemetery Repairs and Maintenance Fund 209-276-930.000 and adding these
funds to Cemetery Capital Outlay for the purpose of purchasing a new Kubota
L39-01 HT tractor. The funds from the sale of the John Deere tractor to be
placd back in the Cemetery Fund. The tractor purchase is in the amount
of$30,660 with the balance of funds coming from 101-265-980.000, Building and
Grounds Capital Outlay in the amount of $6,000 and 101-751-881, Parklands, in
the amount of $6,000.
Seconded by Treasurer Fielek
Discussion: None
Roll Call Vote: Yes – Trustee Imhoff, Supervisor Bloomquist, Treasurer Fielek,
Trustee Williams, Clerk Mitchell
No – None
Absent – Trustee Eyster, Trustee Hayes
Public Hearing
Treasurer Fielek moved the Board call for a public hearing on the proposed
budget and Police Assessment Roll to be held at 6:00PM on March 9, 2016.
Seconded by Trustee Imhoff
Discussion: Art Tour revenues are restricted and must be carried over if not
spent. Discussion of lowering the Police special assessment. Consideration of
increasing funding to the Senior Center.
Motion approved
Contract with Mannik & Smith Group
Discussion postposed to enable input from Trustees Eyster and Hayes.
OLD BUSINESS
None
REPORTS
Trustee Imhoff reported that Smith Gravel can provide free gravel and earth for
the recycling center. Will ask for a revised bid.
Treasurer Fielek: local banks seem to have stricter policies regarding
signatures. He has arranged for removing Mr. Gaffner and adding Mr. Steinberg
as Township signatories.
Clerk Mitchell: the Presidential Primary vote is March 8, 2016.
Treasurer Fielek:
Will attend the February 11 NIESA meeting for Trustee Hayes.
Supervisor Bloomquist:
Plans to attend the March 7 meeting of the Ingham County Parks.
Township Cemetery Commission is currently reviewing cemetery rates.
Assessment notices will go out end of month.
Trustee Williams attended the February 8 Williamston City Council meeting. City
is currently reviewing regulations concerning food trucks.
Public Comment
Jonathon Brandt, 4725 N. Branch Rd., described inconveniences with cable TV
service. Has enjoyed living on North Branch Rd.
William Mead, regarding the Branch Road School.
Meeting Summary
Supervisor Bloomquist will follow up on the tractor purchase, on the water
study, and with Chief Hall regarding disposition of funds from police
citations.
Clerk Mitchell will see to the publication of resolutions and public hearing
notices.
Adjournment
Treasurer Fielek moved to adjourn.
Seconded by Trustee Williams.
Motion approved.
Meeting adjourned at 8:15PM.
____________________________
Shirley Mitchell, Clerk
March 9, 2016
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
March 9, 2016
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 6:05 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the Agenda.
Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Trustee Williams, Trustee Eyster, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee
Hayes, Clerk Mitchell, Trustee Imhoff
Also present: Gerre Lou Imhoff, 1210 Gulick Rd.; Howard Dahlstrom, 4075
Vanneter Rd.; Kevin Duffy, 2273 Rowley Rd., Franciscus Wilbrink, 4701 Zimmer
Rd.
Absent: Treasurer Fielek
Public Hearing for 2016-17 Budget and Police Assessment Roll
Supervisor Bloomquist opened the public hearing at 6:08PM.
Franciscus Wilbrink, 4701 Zimmer Rd., regarding the budget balance, the
Township park pavilion, past approval of raises for Township officers, and the
Police Assessment Roll.
No further remarks.
Trustee Hayes moved to close the Public Hearing.
Seconded by Trustee Williams.
Motion approved.
Public Hearing closed at 6:18 p.m.
Public Comment
Gerre Lou Imhoff, 1210 Gulick Rd., regarding raises for Township officers
recommended by the Compensation Committee in 2015.
Franciscus Wilbrink, 4701 Zimmer Rd., regarding past approval of raises for
Township officers, start time for Board meetings, and importance of attendance
at Board meetings by Board members.
Closed at 6:24PM.
Consent Agenda
Trustee Hayes moved the consent agenda consisting of:
General Fund Accounts Payable paid, checks 21399 through 21412 for a total of
$4,709.25
Payroll Checks paid 43469 through 43501 and EFT 355 through EFT 358 for a total
of $26547.90
General Fund Account Payable checks to approve 21413 through 21430 for a total
of $11,853.42
Revenue and expenditure report 02/29/16
Treasurer’s Report, March 2016
Building Inspector’s Report
Pending Litigation
Police Report
Police Annual Report
Seconded by Trustee Williams.
Discussion:
Clarification of checks to Mannick & Smith and DEQ.
Pulled the minutes of the 02-10-16 Township board meeting to allow time for
review. Will add to April’s consent agenda.
Motion approved.
2016-17 Meeting Dates
Trustee Hayes moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the scheduled
meeting dates as presented, for fiscal year 2016-17, and that the meetings’
start time be changed to 7:00PM.
Seconded by Trustee Imhoff.
Discussion: Changing the start time to 7:00 will permit Township officers to be
available to the public for the full complement of posted Wednesday office
hours (10:00AM-7:00PM).
Motion approved.
Abraham & Gaffney
Trustee Williams moved the Township Board accept the Engagement Letter from
Abraham & Gaffney for pre-audit services regarding the 2015-16 fiscal year.
Seconded by Clerk Mitchell.
Discussion: None.
Motion approved.
Budget 2016-17
Trustee Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve the 2016-17
Township Budget as presented in the Public Hearing on March 9, 2016 with a
beginning Township Total Fund Equity of $2,000,864.00 with the addition of
expenditures to GL number 101-751-883 of $276.00 for a total of $1276.00 and
$3000.00 to 101-751-884.001 for a total of $7209.00, with an increase of funds
of $300.00 to 101-411-702.000 and a decrease in funds of $300.00 to 0101-411-
702.000. The following provisions to apply:
No money may be spent from infrastructure 101-101-982.000 or roads 101-441-814-
000 without Board approval, per Board policy.
Contributions over $1000.00 shall be approved by the Board before accepting.
There shall be no salary expenditure per general ledger number greater than the
amount budgeted unless the budget is amended with Board approval, per Board
policy.
Amends Senior Center budget by an increase of $1,276.00.
Adds Prime Housing Group donation of $3,000.00.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes.
Discussion:
Raises approved by Board in March 2015.
Clarification of process used by Board for wage approval.
Zoning Administrator change to salary.
Renaming of plot purchase where appropriate.
Assessing duties presented at December meeting.
Roll Call Vote: Yes – Trustee Hayes, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Mitchell, Supervisor
Williams, Supervisor Bloomquist
No – Trustee Imhoff
Absent – Trustee Fielek
Police Assessment Roll
Trustee Hayes moved the Williamstown Township Board approve Resolution 2016-98,
confirming the 2016 Special Assessment Roll for Police Protection within the
Township with the Special Assessment Roll total of $229,220.
Seconded by Trustee Williams.
Discussion: The following issues were discussed:
Appropriate to reduce Special Assessment due to balance.
Need to cover contracted amounts.
Currently collecting less than budgeted for.
Would need to raise amount collected in near future.
Preference for leaving as is.
Roll Call Vote: Yes – Trustee Hayes, Clerk Mitchell, Trustee Eyster, Supervisor
Bloomquist, Trustee Williams.
No – Trustee Imhoff.
Absent: Treasurer Fielek
Prime Housing Group Donation
Trustee Williams moved the Township accept the donated funds in the amount of
$3000. To be placed in 101-751-884.001 Art tour playground restricted funds.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: Maintaining impartiality of decision-making.
Roll Call Vote: Yes – Clerk Mitchell, Trustee Williams, Supervisor Bloomquist,
Trustee Eyster, Trustee Hayes
No – Trustee Imhoff
Absent – Treasurer Fielek
Reports
Board of Review meets March 14-15
Art Tour May 7-8
Annual Spring Clean-Up May 14
NIESA meets on March 10.
Public Comment
Opened 8:32PM.
Franciscus Wilbrink thanked the Board for changing the starting time of Board
meetings, and recommended that the Budget as amended be presented to the
public.
Closed 8:36PM.
Review
Supervisor Bloomquist will send a letter of thanks to Smith Gravel.
Supervisor Bloomquist will send a letter of thanks to Prime Housing Group
regarding support for the Art Tour.
Clerk Mitchell will see to the publication of resolutions and meeting dates and
times.
Adjournment
Trustee Hayes moved to adjourn.
Supervisor Bloomquist adjourned the meeting at 8:37PM.
________________________________      _______________
Clerk Shirley Mitchell               Date
________________________________    _______________
Supervisor Wanda Bloomquist         Date
April 13, 2016
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
April 13, 2016
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the Agenda.
Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Mitchell, Treasurer
Fielek, Trustee Imhoff, Trustee Hayes
Also present: Chief Hall; Kevin Duffy, 2273 Rowley Rd
Absent: Trustee Williams
Public Comment
None
Closed at 7:05 pm.
Consent Agenda
Trustee Hayes moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the Minutes of 02-10-16 & 03-09-16 Township board meetings
General Fund Accounts Payable paid, checks 21420 through 21451 for a total of
$47,559.74
Payroll Checks paid 43496 through 43551 and EFT 357 through EFT 360 for a total
of $38,666.78
Police Fund account check 1072 for a total of $53,533.43
General Fund Account Payable checks to approve 21452 through 21481 for a total
of $12,289.98
Revenue and expenditure report 03/31/2016
Treasurer’s Report, March 2016
Building Inspector’s Report
Police Report
Planning Commission Minutes
Planning Commission meeting dates
Seconded by Treasurer Fielek
Discussion: The March 9 meeting minutes have been revised to reflect a roll
call vote regarding the 2016-17 budget, page 3.
Motion approved
Police Report
Chief Hall presented the Police Report, which included: April 10 fatal car
crash on Meridian Road south; motor vehicle/deer collisions in the Township
averaging 69 per year, past five years; house fire on Milton Road showed good
cooperation among regional responders; police have the capacity to request that
trains try to stop before RR crossings that emergency responders need to cross.
NEW BUSINESS
Hazard Mitigation Plan
Treasurer Fielek moved the Township Board adopt the Hazard Mitigation Plan with
Resolution #111
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Discussion: Suggest adding to the Township website.
Roll Call Vote: Yes – Treasurer Fielek, Clerk Mitchell, Trustee Imhoff, Trustee
Hayes, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster
Absent – Trustee Williams
Motion approved
Signatory Resolution
Trustee Imhoff moved the Township Board adopt the amended Resolution #73
regarding new bank signatories that includes Clerk Shirley Mitchell, Deputy
Clerk Mark Steinberg, Treasurer Michael Fielek and Deputy Treasurer Jill
Cutshaw as authorized signers on any check or withdrawal instrument.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: None
Roll Call Vote: Yes – Trustee Hayes, Treasurer Fielek, Trustee Imhoff,
Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Mitchell
Absent – Trustee Williams
Motion approved
Spring Clean-Up
Spring clean-up day is May 14 at the Township hall. It is uncertain whether
CRTs can be accepted, still working on a vendor for electronics. The Township
is investigating whether we can employ a mechanism to accept unused
prescription medications.
Park Driveway
The Township is investigating costs and methods for grading driveway potholes.
Metal slag and crushed asphalt are possibilities.
Cemetery Fees
Trustee Hayes moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the fee structure
as recommended by the Cemetery Board.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Discussion:
It has been 8 years since the last revision.
Township costs continue to increase.
Concern over raising rates for residents
Rates comparable to other communities
Roll Call Vote: Yes – Trustee Eyster, Supervisor Bloomquist, Clerk Mitchell,
Trustee Hayes, Treasurer Fielek
No – Trustee Imhoff
Absent: Trustee Williams
Motion approved
Public Comment:
None.
Closed at 8:35
Reports
Trustee Hayes: NEISA has a new interim director; next meeting is April 14.
Supervisor Bloomquist: the Art Tour is May 7 and 8. Volunteers are needed.
Supervisor Bloomquist: Attended the Michigan Township Association’s Capitol
Conference in Lansing on April 12. Informative workshops on grant writing,
medical marijuana, and dark stores (equitable taxation).
It was noted that disposition of the Township’s used tractor will be on Craig’s
List, and failing that perhaps at auction.
Closed Session
Trustee Imhoff moved the Board go into closed session to discuss a real estate
purchase.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes
Roll Call Vote: Yes – Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Mitchell,
Treasurer Fielek, Trustee Imhoff, Trustee Hayes
Absent – Trustee Williams
Motion approved
The Board went into closed session at 8:45pm.
Coming out of closed session
Trustee Hayes moved to come out of closed session.
Seconded by Treasurer Fielek.
Discussion: None
Approved.
Closed session ended at 9:07pm.
Adjournment
Treasurer Fielek moved the regular meeting be adjourned.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes.
Approved.
Supervisor Bloomquist adjourned the meeting at 9:10pm.
Minutes approved:
____________________________________ _________________
Shirley Mitchell, Township Clerk Date
____________________________________ _________________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor Date
May 11, 2016
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
May 11, 2016
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the Agenda.
Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Mitchell, Treasurer
Fielek, Trustee Imhoff, Trustee Hayes,Trustee Williams
Also present: Julie Chrisinske, Williamston Library; Trenton Smiley, Capitol
Area District Library
Public Comment
None
Closed at 7:03 pm.
Consent Agenda
Trustee Hayes moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the Minutes of 4/13/16 Township board meeting
General Fund Accounts Payable paid, checks 21482 through 21502 for a total of
$11,273.46
Payroll Checks paid 43551 through 43585 and EFT 359 through EFT 365 for a total
of $25,703.45
General Fund Account Payable checks to approve 21503 through 21525 for a total
of $19,717.11
Revenue and expenditure report 04/30/2016
Treasurer’s Report, April, 2016
Building Inspector’s Report
Police Report
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion: The Revenue and Expenditure report was pulled pending
clarification, and inclusion of the April Treasurer’s Report was confirmed (it
had not been included in the e-packet).
Motion approved, as revised per the above discussion.
Library Report
Julie Chrisinske, head of the Williamston branch of the Capitol Area District
Library, gave an update on library programs and services. They have completed a
strategic plan for the next four years. “CADLMobile” is available as a free app
for smart phones or tablets, enabling patrons to reserve and renew materials.
The “Hooplah” app enables downloading of audiobooks, e-books, and movies. In
2015, attendance increased by 14% over the prior year.
OLD BUSINESS
None.
NEW BUSINESS
Roads
Trustee Hayes moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the recommendations
of the Road Committee for 2016 road projects:
These projects include allowing the County to maintain the segment of Germany
Road from Hart Road to North Branch Road until its useful life is exhausted.
REVISED at June 8, 2016 Board meeting to read Barry Road from Lounsbury Road to
about 1,000 east of Shoeman Road (not Shoesmith Road) be wedged and chip sealed
if it remains a local road.
Lounsbury Road with road segment ratings of 5 and 4 should be wedged and chip
sealed.
Shoesmith Road should be wedged and chip sealed as indicated by the County.
That the following projects be considered if funding remains: middle section of
Gulick Road; Foster Road between Barry Road and the Township line; Barton Road
between Sherwood Road and Germany Road; and Barton Road between Germany Road
and Haslett Road, in that order.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Discussion: Consider resuming the striping of local roads.
Motion approved.
Treasurer Fielek Resignation
Township Treasurer Mike Fielek has completed long-term plans to relocate to
Wisconsin to be nearer to family, and so has notified the Township of his
impending resignation from the Treasurer position.
Trustee Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board regretfully accept the
resignation of Treasurer Michael Fielek as of May 31, 2016
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion: Trustees and Officers stated that Michael’s service has been much
appreciated and that he will be missed. They offered best wishes as he makes
the transition to full-time doting grandfather.
Motion approved.
Trustee Williams moved the Williamstown Township Board appoint Deputy Treasurer
Jill Cutshaw to the position of Treasurer for the remaining term of retiring
Treasurer Michael Fielek as of June 1, 2016.
Seconded by Trustee Imhoff.
Discussion: Jill has been serving as Deputy Treasurer reporting to Michale
Fielek. She has been trained to assume the Treasurer’s duties. Since she is
currently running unopposed for election to the Treasurer position. It
therefore seems appropriate to appoint her to the position for the remaining
term.
Motion approved.
Reports
Spring clean-up is on May 14.
Art Fair attendance was down, but sales by local artists were up.
A receptionist has been hired. Her name is Pati Snow.
Thanks to Rod for making repairs on the John Deere tractor. The tractor will
fetch a better price because of his work. Deer Creek has offered to sell the
tractor on behalf of the Township.
Wanda and Janet attended the Joint Committee meeting with the City Of
Williamston. There was continuing discussion with the City regarding our 425’s.
Water testing on the 17 residential wells that were tested previously is almost
completed. A report is forthcoming. See minutes from the January 2016 Board
meeting for details.
Public Comment:
None.
Closed at 8:18
Adjournment
Trustee Hayes moved the regular meeting be adjourned.
Seconded by Treasurer Fielek.
Approved.
Supervisor Bloomquist adjourned the meeting at 8:19pm.
____________________________________ _________________
Shirley Mitchell, Township Clerk Date
____________________________________ _________________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor Date
June 8, 2016
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
June 8, 2016
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:03 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the Agenda.
Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Supervisor Bloomquist requested that Closed Session be removed from the agenda,
as the issue has been resolved.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Mitchell, Trustee Imhoff,
Trustee Hayes,
Also present: Billie Jo O’Berry, candidate for Ingham County Prosecutor; Julie
Rudd, Williamston Chamber of Commerce; Joscelyn Brown-Timm, Williamstown
Township Planning Commission
Absent: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Williams
Late: Trustee Hayes arrived at 7:10 p.m.
Public Comment
Billie Jo O’Berry, an Assistant Prosecutor with the City of Lansing and a
candidate for the position of Ingham County Prosecutor, presented her
qualifications for the position.
Closed at 712: p.m.
Kim VanErp
Supervisor Bloomquist introduced Kim VanErp, recently hired into the Township’s
Deputy Treasurer position. This position had been held by Jill Cutshaw, who was
appointed Township Treasurer following the resignation of Mike Fielek.
Consent Agenda
Trustee Hayes moved the consent agenda consisting of:
   Approve the Minutes of 5/11/2016 Township board meeting
   General Fund Accounts Payable paid, checks 21526 through 21535 for a total
of $4,998.36
   Payroll Checks paid 43586 through 43629 and EFT 366 through EFT 373 for a
total of $36,906.35
   General Fund Accounts Payable checks to approve 21536 through 21559 for a
total of $9,537.16
   Revenue and expenditure report 5/31/2016
   Treasurer’s Report, May, 2016
   Building Inspector’s Report
   Police Report
   Pending Litigation Report
Seconded by Clerk Mitchell
Discussion:
the April, 2016 Revenue and Expenditure Report should be added to the consent
agenda; this report had been tabled at the May, 2016 Board meeting
the minutes of the May 11, 2016 meeting should be revised to say “Barry Road
from Lounsbury Road to about 1,000 feet east of Shoeman Road (not Shoesmith
Road) be wedged and chip-sealed if it remains a local road” (page 2, bullet 2).
Motion approved, as revised per the above discussion.
Planning Commission
Joscelyn Brown-Timm, Secretary of the Township Planning Commission, summarized
topics from the Commission’s May 18 meeting and annual report covering the
period of April 2015 through March 2016. The Commission will hold a public
hearing on July 20, 2016 to consider updating the Township’s subdivision
ordinance with respect to issues including walkability, landscaping, and
whether homeowner associations should be mandated.
Williamston Chamber of Commerce
Julie Rudd, Chamber executive director, provided an update on Chamber
activities and recent changes in operation.
Road Budget Approval
Trustee Eyster moved the Township Board approve the Ingham County Road
Department’s estimates and recommendations for 2016 to include:
Lounsbury between Barry and Haslett
Shoesmith between the Township line and Shoeman
Gulick between Shoeman and Zimmer
Foster between Barry and Township line
With cost to the Township not to exceed $204,451.
Seconded by Trustee Imhoff.
Discussion: The motion was amended to reflect a maximum Township cost, as
indicated above, and to propose that the contract with the County Road
Department include road striping and the resurfacing of road surfaces at the
crossroads indicated in the above four bullets.
Motion approved
Signatory Resolution
Trustee Imhoff moved the Township Board adopt the amended Resolution #73
regarding new bank signatories that includes Clerk Shirley Mitchell, Deputy
Clerk Mark Steinberg, Treasurer Jill Cutshaw and Deputy Treasurer Kim VanErp as
authorized signers on any check, withdrawal and certificate of deposit
instrument removing any other names currently listed as signatories.
The accounts are as follows:
Capital National now Bank of America
   Certificate of Deposit No. 9001000998
Dart Bank
   Certificate of Deposit No. 51839
Fifth Third Bank
   Certificate of Deposit No. 124-0653356960
First National
   Certificate of Deposit No. 3035218
          No. 3035217
          No. 3035216
Flagstar Bank
   Certificate of Deposit No. 101150316
Independent Bank
   Certificate of Deposit No. 9019774954
   Certificate of Deposit No. 9019774936
First Merit
   Police Services Checking Account No. 4535722526
   Money Market Account No. 4534910767
Independent Bank
   Williamstown Township Trust – Agency Checking Account No. 0005902903
JP Morgan Chase Bank
   General Fund Checking Account No. 240420468101
Seconded by Trustee Hayes.
Roll Call: Yes – Clerk Mitchell, Trustee Imhoff, Trustee Hayes, Supervisor
Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster. Absent: Trustee Williams, Treasurer Cutshaw.
Motion approved.
Public Comment:
None.
Public comment closed at 8:30.
Reports
The Library will hold a family fun day at the Township pavilion on July 19 from
10 a.m. to 2 p.m.
Wanda will attend the June 9 NIESA meeting, as Bob had a conflict. Meeting
agenda is enclosed.
Costs of the spring clean-up should be available at the July Board meeting. The
Board has been requested to consider adding a fall clean-upday.
Adjournment
Trustee Hayes moved the regular meeting be adjourned.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Approved.
Supervisor Bloomquist adjourned the meeting at 8:50 p.m.
____________________________________ _________________
Shirley Mitchell, Township Clerk Date
____________________________________ _________________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor Date
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
July 13, 2016
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:04 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the Agenda.
Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Trustee Imhoff, Trustee Hayes,
Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Williams
Also present: Director Yanz, NEISA; Chief Hall, Meridian Township Police
Absent: Clerk Mitchell
Public Comment
None.
Closed at 7:06: p.m.
Consent Agenda
Trustee Hayes moved the consent agenda consisting of:
   Approve the Minutes of 06-08-16 Township board meeting
   General Fund Accounts Payable paid, checks 21560 through 21569 for a total
of $10,859.57
   Payroll Checks paid 43629 through 43665 and EFT 372 through EFT 377 for a
total of $28,757.95
   Police Fund account check 1073 for a total of $55,029.43
   Revenue and expenditure report 06/30/2016
   Treasurer’s Report, July 2016
   Building Inspector’s Report
   Police Report
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: None
Motion approved.
NIESA Report
Michael Yanz reported that he has been appointed NIESA Director as of June 1.
He is also serving as fire chief. He provided the number of service runs for
the first quarter
Police Report
Chief Hall provided a summary of recent developments in his department, and
commented on the report of police activities in the Township.
Road Striping
Trustee Hayes moved the Township Board approve $8,000. To be used towards the
striping of Township Roads in 2016 out of GL# 101-441-814.000.
Seconded by Trustee Imhoff
Discussion:
Half of Ingham County townships stripe
To be done out of safety concerns.
Half of townships strip.
Consider doing every four years and when road maintenance is done.
Motion approved.
Plot Repurchase
Trustee Hayes moved the Township Board approve the plot repurchases for
VanDusen and Julian with the amount of $2000.00 being moved from Contingency
209-276-965.000 to Plot Repurchase 209-276-964.000.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: None
Roll call: Yes – Trustee Williams, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Imhoff, Trustee
Hayes, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster. Absent – Clerk Mitchell.
Motion approved
Field Rentals
Trustee Williams moved the Township Board approve the discounted rate for field
reservation to the Soccer Club for training to $30.00 a three hour session for
the Grand River Soccer fields.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: None
Motion approved
Approval of GF AP Checks
Trustee Eyster moved the Board approve the General Funds Accounts Payable
checks 21571 through 21608 for a total of $34,632.29.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes
Discussion: None
Motion approved
Police Contract
The current agreement between the Township and Meridian Township ends on
December 31, 2016. The Board discussed whether to solicit bids for police
services, and determined that it would not be fruitful to do so. Services such
as neighborhood watch, property checks and code enforcement are much
appreciated. Residents have expressed their opinion that Meridian Township’s
services are an excellent value. The gross assessment has been reduced over the
years.
Deer Check Station
Having a deer check station for chronic wasting disease at the Township hall
this past season seems to have been a valuable service. A check station will be
located at the Township again next season.
Reports
This year’s spring clean-up cost the Township $2,500. The Board discussed
establishing a permanent recycling center at the Township as well as a fall
clean-up. Review of this question will continue.
Concrete will be poured at the park pavilion by the end of the week.
Public Comment:
Chief Hall mentioned his agency’s involvement in a recent code enforcement
situation.
Chief Yanz noted that he is now full-time with NIESA.
Public comment closed at 8:33p.m. 
Closed Session
Trustee Hayes moved the Board go into closed session to discuss a property
purchase.
Seconded by Trustee Williams.
Roll call: Yes – Trustee Hayes, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Imhoff, Trustee
Williams, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster. Absent: Clerk Mitchell.
Motion approved
The Board went into closed session at 8:36p.m.
Coming out of Closed Session
Trustee Williams moved the board come out of closed session.
Seconded by Eyster
The board came out of closed session at 9:25p.m.
Adjournment
Trustee Hayes moved the board adjourn the regular meeting.
Motion approved.
Supervisor Bloomquist adjourned the meeting at 9:30p.m.
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________ _________________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor      Date
August 10, 2016
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
August 10, 2016
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:03 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the Agenda.
Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Trustee Imhoff, Treasurer
Cutshaw, Trustee Williams, Clerk Mitchell
Also present: Todd Bashore, 4040 Warbler Way
Absent: Trustee Hayes
Public Comment
Todd Bashore said he is interested in the agenda item on fireworks. He said he
appreciates getting e-mails from the Township that include Board meeting
agendas.
Closed at 7:07: p.m.
Consent Agenda
Trustee Williams moved the consent agenda consisting of:
   Approve the Minutes of 07-13-16 Township board meeting
   General Fund Accounts Payable paid, checks 21609 through 21624 for a total
of $7,829.86
   Payroll Checks paid 43666 through 43702 and EFT 378 through EFT 384 for a
total of $29,587.23
   Police Fund account check 1073 & 1074 for a total of $56,089.43
   General Fund Account Payable checks to approve 21625 through 21644 for a
total of $12,898.37
   Additional General Fund Account Payable checks to approve 21645 through
21654 for a total of $28,716.48
   Revenue and expenditure report 07/31/2016
   Treasurer’s Report, July 2016
   Building Inspector’s Report
   Police Report
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Motion approved.
November Meeting Date
Trustee Williams moved the November 09, 2016 meeting date be changed to
November 15, 2016 at 7:00 p.m. due to the November 8th election.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: Adminstration of the General Election will not leave enough time to
prepare for a Board meeting the next day.
Motion approved.
Fireworks Regulations
Trustee Williams moved the Township Board approve the development of a
Fireworks Ordinance with cost not to exceed $1,000.00.
Seconded by Trustee Imhoff.
Discussion: The Township has received requests to limit use of fireworks.
Michigan Township Association legal counsel has advised that townships have the
authority to adopt fireworks ordinances that do not conflict with State law.
Development of an ordinance would include one or more public hearings.
Motion approved.
Computer Upgrades
Trustee Eyster moved the Township Board approve the recommended Computer,
Software and Network Switch upgrades with a cost not to exceed $4,750.00
Seconded by Trustee Williams.
Discussion: This will include increased RAM for replacement computers,
extending the life use of the computers, repairs, and maintenance. Two of the
replaced computers will replace older machines that don’t get that much use.
The network switch connects the computers to the server and should be on
rotation for replacement with the server.
Motion approved.
Tree Clean Up
Trustee Williams moved the Township Board approve the Cemetery recommendation
of the estimated tree removal, stump removal, and clean-up of existing trees at
an amount not to exceed $4500.00
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: This work includes taking down one tree, trimming out two pines,
canopy trimming on others, and removing two stumps.
Motion approved.
Accept Clerk Mitchell Resignation
Trustee Williams moved the Williamstown Township Board accept the resignation
of Clerk Mitchell as of August 31, 2016.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: Board members thanked Clerk Mitchell for her many years of
dedicated service to the Township and its residents.
Motion approved
Appointment of Clerk
Trustee Williams moved the Williamstown Township Board appoint Deputy Clerk
Mark Steinberg to the position of Clerk for the remaining term of retiring
Clerk Shirley Mitchell as of September 1, 2016.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: Board members welcomed Deputy Clerk Steinberg to the Clerk
position.
Motion approved.
Reports/Committees
Cemetery: Pillars at Summit need further work. Fencing has been postponed.
Historical: Committee will meet on August 17 at 7:00 pm at the Township Hall.
The upcoming historical tour will be on October 9 from 1:00-5:00 p.m. will
visit the Depot, Branch School, St. Katherine’s and the cemeteries. There will
also be a Civil War reenactment at City Hall.
The annual joint meeting with the City will be on August 24 at 7:00 p.m.
NIESA: Will pursue a ballot initiative to renew the millage rate.
Election report: 26% of Township voters participated in the August 2 Primary.
Recycling: Trustee Imhoff and Supervisor Bloomquist met with Granger to discuss
options and costs regarding setting up a permanent recycling service at the
Township. Further review and discussion will take place.
Public Comment:
Todd Bashore said he supports curtailing late night fireworks but would like to
continue to be able to use fireworks on occasions such as graduations.
Public comment closed at 8:28 p.m. 
Adjournment
Trustee Williams moved the board adjourn the regular meeting.
Supervisor Bloomquist adjourned the meeting at 8:30p.m.
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________ _________________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor       Date
____________________________________ __________________
Shirley Mitchell, Township Clerk         Date
September 14, 2016
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
September 14, 2016
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:03 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the Agenda.
Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Trustee Hayes, Trustee Imhoff,
Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Williams, Clerk Steinberg
Also present: Carla Clos, Deputy Drain Commissioner Ingham County; Howard
Dahlstrom, 4075 Vanetter; Jonathan Brandt, 4725 N. Branch; Dennis Schornack,
4232 Redbud; Garry Rowe, Registered Sanitarian
Absent: None
Public Comment
None
Closed at 7:10 p.m.
Presentation
Gary Rowe presented his findings of a water test study conducted of the
groundwater quality in Williamstown Township. It was a follow up study to the
1986 county grant project. The current study compares results from 1986 with
2017. Mr. Rowe states tests done this year show an overall rise in some
elements (such as Boron) and a decrease in others (such as Arsenic). At this
time, the State of Michigan does not have a Boron water safety standard. There
is a Boron brochure available with recommendations for the residents regarding
this health advisory. Testing is continuing in other Ingham County townships.
The report was presented to the Board. A copy of the report is available from
the Township.
Consent Agenda
Supervisor Bloomquist pulled the Accounts Payable for Approval to be addressed
at the end of the meeting.
Trustee Eyster moved the consent agenda consisting of:
   Approve the Minutes of 08-10-16 Township board meeting
   Payroll Checks paid 43703 through 43742 and EFT 389 through EFT 396 for a
total of $32,881.08
   Revenue and expenditure report 09-14-2016
   Treasurer’s Report, August 2016
   Building Inspector’s Report
   Police Report
Seconded by Trustee Hayes
Motion approved.
Meridian Police Contract
Trustee Williams moved the Township Board approve the continuation of police
services provided by the Meridian Township Police with a new two year contract
from January 1, 2017 through December 31, 2018 with terms to be the same as the
past two years except for the dollar amounts which will be $216,723.00 per year
and $56.17 per hour for all 911 calls outside of the normal patrol hours with a
cap of $22,500 per quarter.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes
Discussion:
4.2% increase over 2 year period.
There have been few complaints received by the Township regarding services
provided by Meridian police.
Chief Hall and Assistant Chief Plaga have been responsive to Township.
Services include Neighborhood Watch, Citizen Academy, home checks, etc.
Officers have a visible presence in the community.
Suggestion for Competitive Bidding
Competitive Bidding should begin early in the year.
Motion approved.
Restricted Funds Donation
Trustee Hayes moved the Township Board accept the donation of $3,000 from Prime
Housing Group for preservation and maintenance of the township’s parks with the
funds from 2015 and 2016 dedicated to the walkway for the pavilion and
restrooms.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Discussion:
Walkways were part of the pavilion project.
Donors would be able to see where their money goes and receive recognition for
their contribution.
The walkways are essential to the project, approved project funds are not able
to cover the walkways.
Motion approved.
Plannng Commission Appointments
Trustee Hayes moved the Township Board approve the Supervisor's recommendation
appointing Rex LaMore and Joscelyn Brown-Timm to the Williamston Planning
Commission for a three year term commencing November 2016.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion. Vice Chair LaMore has had a historical presence on the Commission
and brings expertise to the Commission. Commissioner Brown-Timm brings insight
to the Commission.
Motion approved.
Budget
Recommendations for departments, committees, and Board members to submit items
for consideration in the budget for 2017-18. A draft budget will be provided in
October.
Trustee Eyster moved to approve the General Fund Account Payable checks to
approve 21655 through 21667 for a total of $3,042.89.
Seconded by Trustee Williams.
Discussion: none
Motion approved.
Reports/Committees
Historical: The upcoming historical tour will be on October 9 from 1:00-5:00
p.m. The tour will visit the Depot, Branch School, St. Katherine’s Church, the
Township Community Park, and Foote and Summit cemeteries. There will also be a
Civil War reenactment at McCormick park.
NIESA: Millage renewal will be on the ballot.
Recycling: Trustee Imhoff met with estimators for cost of site preparation for
the possibility of a permanent recycling center. Different options were
considered. Further review and discussion will take place.
Public Comment:
Jonathan Brandt, 4745 N Branch: commented on services provided by Meridian
Police.
Howard Dahlstrom, 4075 Vanetter: asked for the reason for the scheduled closed
session of the Board meeting, and stated his belief that the 3 day posting of
closed session notice is not in compliance with the Open Meeting Act.
Public Comment Closed at 8:55
Discussion ensued between the Board members regarding the ability to go into
closed session. The Board concluded that it was appropriate to go into closed
session.
Closed Session
Trustee Hayes moved the Board go into closed session to discuss a property
purchase.
Seconded by trustee Eyster.
Roll Call: Yes – Trustee Williams, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Hayes, Clerk
Steinberg, Trustee Eyster, Supervisor Bloomquist
No – Trustee Imhoff
Supervisor Bloomquist asked Mr. Dahlstrom to leave. He stated he would not
leave. Supervisor Bloomquist left the meeting to confer with the Township
attorney. Upon her return, the Board discussed options and determined to delay
closed session to confirm posting requirements.
Trustee Hayes moved the Board rescind the motion to go into closed session.
Seconded by Eyster
Motion approved.
Adjournment
Trustee Hayes moved the Board adjourn.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Supervisor adjourned the meeting at 9:45 P.M.
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________ _________________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor      Date
___________________________________     __________________
Mark Steinberg, Township Clerk          Date
October 12, 2016 Synopsis
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP
BOARD OF TRUSTEES MEETING
October 12, 2016 Synopsis
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held its regularly scheduled
monthly meeting, October 12, 2016 at 7:03p.m. with Supervisor Bloomquist,
Treasurer Cutshaw, Clerk Steinberg, Trustees Imhoff, Williams, Hayes and Eyster
present. The Board approved the consent agenda, consisting of the minutes of
the September 14, 2016 Board meeting, payroll report, treasurer’s report,
accounts payable, revenue and expenditure reports, building inspector’s report,
and police report. The Board heard the quarterly police report from Chief Hall
and, from the township’s audit firm, a summary of the latest audit report. The
Board approved the Planning Commission’s recommended revisions to the
Subdivision Control Ordinance and approval of the Whitcraft pond site plan. The
Board tabled the recommended changes to the Zoning Ordinance sign regulations
and the denial of the Verizon Tower Special Use Permit/Site Plan. The Board
also acted on a FOIA appeal, reviewed budget changes for FY 2017-2018, reduced
the police assessment to $100 per residential unit and $175 per commercial
unit, accepted donated funds for a park picnic table, and approved expenditures
for township soccer fields. The meeting adjourned at 10:25p.m..
The next meeting of the Board is Tuesday November 15, 2016 at 7:00P.M. in the
Township boardroom at 4990 Zimmer Rd.
Township website: http://www.williamstowntownsip.com
Mark Steinberg, Clerk
Williamstown Township
October 12, 2016
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
October 12, 2016
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:03 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the Agenda.
Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Trustee Hayes, Trustee Imhoff,
Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Williams, Clerk Steinberg
Also present: Jeff Bartrem, 3813 Berkley Road; Annette Davis,4200 Williamston
Road; Gerald Eidt, 4115 Vanetter Road; Shannon Rodrigues , Layton and
Richardson, PC; Chief Hall, Meridian Township Police; Mike Harris, Mid-Michigan
Ponds; and Jun Yu, Amy Rodriguez, and Robert LaBelle of Verizon Wireless.
Absent: None
Public Comment
Jeff Bartrem, 3813 Berkley Road, expressed opposition to the proposed Verizon
tower. Submitted petition of area residents opposed to the tower.
Public comment closed at 7:08 p.m.
Audit Report
Shannon Rodrigues, Layton and Richardson, PC, presented summary findings from
the audit report for the year ending March 31, 2016 (report dated September 15,
2016). The report shows the Township to be on solid financial ground.
Consent Agenda
 Trustee Eyster moved the consent agenda:
   Minutes of 09-14-16 Board meeting
   Reports: Accounts Payable Paid
       Accounts Payable –Approval
       Revenue/Expenditure
     Building Inspector’s Report
    Police Report
    Treasurer’s Report
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion: Payroll account will be corrected for the November 15 Board
meeting.
Motion approved.
Quarterly Police Report
Chief Hall presented the report, which included notice of a Halloween open
house on October 29 from 10:00a.m. to 1:00p.m., that all officers are being
equipped with body-worn cameras, and that the Department has made headway in
increasing diversity among its officers.
Whitcraft Pond –Site Plan Approval
Trustee Eyster moved the Board approved the revised site plan as submitted on
October 6, 2016 for the Whitcraft pond located on Epley Road parcel #33-03-03-
11-400-017.
Seconded by Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: Mike Harris of Mid-Michigan Ponds described revisions incorporated
into the revised site plan.
Motion approved.
Telecad Wireless/Verizon Wireless
Trustee Williams moved the Board table action on the special use permit and
site plan application to the November 15, 2016 meeting to allow the Board
sufficient time to review the Planning Commission’s recommendation and
additional materials supplied by the applicant.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: Annette Davis, Township Planning Commission, outlined reasons for
the Planning Commission’s recommendation to deny the application.
Representatives from Verizon (Jun Yu, Amy Rodriguez, and Robert LaBelle)
presented legal and technical reasons for approving the application.
Motion approved.
Subdivision Ordinance Revisions
Trustee Hayes moved the Board approve the recommended revisions to the
Subdivision Ordinance. The revisions reflect the desire of the community to
protect environmentally sensitive areas and to protect the health and well-
being of the residents as outlined in the Township Master Plan.
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion:
Motion approved
Sign Ordinance Revisions
Trustee Hayes moved the Board table action on the revisions to the Township
Zoning Ordinance regarding signage to the November 15, 2016 Board meeting.
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg
Discussion: None
Motion approved
General Funds Accounts Payable
Trustee Eyster moved to approve the General Fund Account Payable checks to
approve 21655 through 21667 for a total of $3,042.89.
Seconded by Trustee Williams.
Discussion: none
Motion approved.
FOIA Appeal
Trustee Hayes moved the Board deny Tom Fredericks’ September 19, 2016 appeal of
the Township’s fees charged for responding to his August 22, 2016 FOIA request.
Fees charged were stated in the Township’s September 8, 2016 response to the
FOIA request. Consultation with the Township attorney and among the officers
may result in a recommendation for a different response to Mr. Fredericks’
appeal, in which case the Supervisor would call for a special Board meeting for
additional action.
 Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion: Merits of the appeal were discussed.
Motion approved
Budget
Supervisor Bloomquist invited input from Board members on the 2017/18 budget.
Road funding will need to be addressed. The Township office building may need
roof repair or replacement. Propose reducing capital outlay per department to
$1000.00.
Police Assessment Modification
Trustee Williams moved the Board approve lowering the police assessment to
$100.00 per residential unit and $175.00 per commercial/industrial unit, with
the revised assessment roll and resolution to be presented at the November 15
Board meeting.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes
Motion approved
Kiwanis Restricted Funds
Trustee Williams moved the Board accept the donation of $275.00 from the
Williamston Kiwanis Club to be applied to the purchase of a picnic table for
the Township Community Park.
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg
Motion approved
Park Expenditure
Trustee Hayes moved the Board approve the expenditure of $3250.00 to
Contractors Landscape and Development Services, LLC to continue needed
maintenance of the soccer fields at the Township Community Park.
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Motion approved
Reports
Historical/Park: The History Tour seemed to be well received.
Recycling: Two cost estimates have been received, further information will be
obtained for a permanent recycling center on Township property.
Public Comment:
None.
Public Comment Closed at 10:25p.m.
Adjournment
Trustee Hayes moved the Board adjourn.
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Supervisor adjourned the meeting at 10:25p.m..
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________ _________________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor      Date
___________________________________     __________________
Mark Steinberg, Township Clerk          Date
October 25, 2016
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
October 25, 2016
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 9:32a.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the Agenda.
Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Trustee Hayes, Trustee Imhoff,
Treasurer Cutshaw, Clerk Steinberg
Absent: Trustee Williams
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
None.
Public comment closed at 9:35a.m.
FOIA Appeal
Trustee Eyster moved the Board approve the Township’s October 25, 2016 response
to Mr. Fredericks’ September 19, 2016 appeal of FOIA charges which reduces the
charges from $675.52 to $473.54 for reasons given in the October 25, 2016
detailed breakdown of expenses.
Seconded by Trustee Hayes
Discussion: It was noted that responding to the FOIA request required
substantial time from Township Officers.
Motion approved.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
None.
Public comment closed at 10:03a.m.
Trustee Hayes moved the meeting adjourn.
Seconded by???
Motion approved.
Meeting adjourned at 10:05a.m.
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________ _________________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor      Date
____________________________________ _________________
Mark Steinberg, Township Clerk          Date
November 15, 2016
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
November 15, 2016
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:04 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the Agenda.
Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Trustee Hayes, Trustee Imhoff,
Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Williams, Clerk Steinberg
Absent:None
Also present: John Kane 5170 N Williamston Rd,Kevin Duffy 2273 Rowley Rd,Scott
Lucas 4000 Beeman Rd Kelly Bonheim, Stenographer and Jun Yu, Amy Rodriguez, and
Robert LaBelle of Verizon Wireless.
Public Comment
None
Public comment closed at 7:06 p.m
Consent Agenda
Trustee Hayes moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Minutes of 10-12-16 and 10-25-2016 Board meeting
   Reports: Accounts Payable Paid $19, 319.98 from the general fund
   Payroll checks paid 43773 through 43786 and ETF 397-ETF 400 for a total of
$31,643.83
   General Fund Accounts Payable to approve checks 21745 thru 21778
    for a total of $17,414.16
       Revenue Expenditure report 10-31-2016
Treasures Report October 2016 started 9-1 to 10-1
Building Inspectors Report
Police Report
Seconded by Trustee Williiams
Discussion:
General Fund checks approved for October were 21708-21732.
Treasurers report will be reviewed before next meeting to clarify beginning
dates and exclude the check range noted above and reflect the amended amount of
$ 19,319.98.
Independent Bank account is strictly for tax accounts that are paid out twice
monthly with the checks and balances coming from the County.
General accounts payable will be pulled and reviewed prior to next meeting
Motion approved
Old Business.
Telecad Wireless/Verizon Wireless
Trustee Hayes moved that the board approve the Special Use Permit for a 115 ft
monopole tower on parcel # 33-03- 03-33-100-001.
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg
Discussion:
Propagation maps lacked clarity re: capacity and gap issues.
There was a lack of clear and complete information with the initial proposal.
Representatives from Verizon ( Jun Yu, Amy Rodriguez and Attorney LaBelle)
presented legal and technical reasons for approving the application  
Roll Call: Yes:Trustee Eyster, Clerk Steinberg Trustee Williams, Trustee Hayes.
Nays: Supervisor Bloomquist, Treasurer Cutshaw and Trustee Imhoff
Motion approved
Sign Ordinance Revisions
Trustee Williams moved the Williamstown Township Board table action on the
revisions to the Township Zoning Ordinance regarding signage to the December 14
,2016 meeting.
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg
Discussion:
Concerns raised re: monitoring and enforceability, and allowing of marquee
signs.
Motion approved
Budget
Supervisor Bloomquist opened the floor to Budget discussion.
Disscussion:
Township Officer pension funds
origination of beginning fund numbers will be reviewed.
Police Assessment
Trustee Hayes moved that the Williamstown Township Board approve Resolution
2016-98 confirming the 2016 Speccial Assessment Roll for Police Protection
within the Township with the Special Assessment Roll total of $ 208,020.00
Discussion : none
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Roll Call: Yes Trustee Williams,Treasurer Cutshaw,Clerk Steinberg,Trustee
Imhoff,Trustee Hayes, Supervisor Bloomquist and Trustee Eyster
Nays: none
Motion approved
Real Estate Purchase Resolution
Trustee Hayes moved that the Williamstown Township Board approve resolution
#112 hereby approving the purchase of 507 E Grand River Rd from the Estate of
Bruce McDowell , parcel # 33-03-03-28-300-008 for the purchase price of $
171,000.00 and that a budget amendment be made from Parklands 101-751-881.000
in the amount of $4000.00 and the balance from Contingency 101-890-965.000 to
account number 101-101-982.000 to cover the transition cost.
Discussion:
A press release release will be issued regarding the purchase. It was noted
that the real estate
Purchase will have no effect on funds available for roads.
Purchase of this property has been part of the Parks and Recreation Master Plan
and Township Master Plan since the purchase of the park property
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Roll Call: Yes:Trustee Hayes, Treasurer Cutshaw,Clerk Steinberg , Trustee
Williams,Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster
No: Trustee Imhoff
Motion approved
New Business
Mitel Maintainence Agreement
Clerk Steinberg moved that the Board not renew the Mitel Maintenance Agreement.
Discussion: Pricing seemed high for coverage
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Motion approved
Fireworks Ordinance
Trustee Eyster moved that the Williamstown Township Board table discussion re:
draft of Fireworks Ordinance until the December 14, 2016 Board meeting.
Discussion:
Ordinance as written follows minimum use required by State Law.
Residents have requested other times for use such as weddings, open houses,
etc.
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Motion approroved
Bank Signatory
Trustee Imhoff moved that the Board adopt a revised Bank Signatory Regulation
#73 be adopted due to change in officers.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: None
Roll Call: Yes: Trustee Eyster,Trustee Imhoff, Supervisor Bloomquist,Clerk
Steinberg, Trustee Williams, Trustee Hayes, Treasurer Cutshaw.
Nays: none
Motion approved
Reports
Supervisor Bloomquist stated that she attended the NIESA meeting at which it
was discussed that
Fire Chief of Leroy Twp has resigned and that the Deputy Chief will serve as
interim.
Treasurer Cutshaw proposed that a cushion fund be implemented for overdraft
protection in the tax account at Independent Bank in the event that a resident
check should bounce . This has happened in the past and has resulted in fees
assessed. Check writers (taxpayers) who write NSF checks pay the associated
fees.
The Board supported Supervisor Bloomquist and Treasurer Cutshaw following
through on this issue.
Public Comment
Scott Lucas of 4000 Beeman Rd, a new resident introduced himself and commended
the Board on the handling of resident concerns and welfare.
Announcements
There will be a get together for the Board and Staff on Thursday November 17 at
4:30 PM at
Williamston Pub and Grill in appreciation of the service Trustees Hayes and
Imhoff have given to the community and to celebrate the election of Supervisor
Bloomquist and Clerk Steinberg and our new
Trustees elect Kevin Duffy and John Kane.
Adjournment
Trustee Hayes moved the Board adjourn.
Seconded by Trustee Imhoff
Supervisor Bloomquist adjourned the meeting at 9:33PM.
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________ _________________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor      Date
____________________________________ _________________
Mark Steinberg, Township Clerk          Date
DECEMBER 14 2016 Synopsis
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP
BOARD OF TRUSTEES MEETING
DECEMBER 14 2016 Synopsis
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held its regularly scheduled
monthly meeting Wednesday December 14, 2016 at 7:00 PM at the Township hall,
with Supervisor Bloomquist, Treasurer Cutshaw, Clerk Steinberg, Trustees
Eyster, Williams, Kane and Duffy present. The Board approved the consent agenda
consisting of the minutes of the November 15, 2016 Board Meeting and the
following reports: accounts payable paid, accounts payable for approval,
revised payroll check report, payroll paid, revenue and expenditure reports,
Building inspector’s report, Treasurer’s report and Police report. The
following Board actions were taken: approved a Zoning Ordinance Amendment
regarding Open Space Preservation in Section 8.03 (C); approved a modified site
plan for the Verizon Tower on 1690 Haslett Rd for an overhead canopy in lieu of
an enclosed building; sent the proposed Sign Regulations revisions to the
Planning Commission for further review and revision;. approved the purchase of
a Snow Blower to be used in the parks cemeteries and other Township properties;
approved a variance to the Township Burning Ordinance to allow burning of brush
piles on Parcel No. 33-03-03-01-400-005; tabled a draft fireworks ordinance for
discussion at the January 11 Board meeting; and scheduled a workshop on the
2017/2018 budget at 6:00pm on January 25, 2017 at the Township Hall.
The next meeting of the Board is January 11, 2017 at 7:00pm in the Township
boardroom at 4990 Zimmer Road.
Township website: http:/www.williamstowntownship.com. Phone 517-655-3193.
Mark Steinberg, Clerk
December 14, 2016
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
December 14, 2016
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the Agenda.
Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Trustee Kane, Trustee Duffy,
Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Williams, Clerk Steinberg.
Absent: None
Also present: Scott Lucas of 4000 Beeman Rd, Gerald Eidt of 4115 Vanetter Rd,
John Roy Castillo, Director of the Williamston Senior Center; Bob Przybylo,
Southfield, Michigan and Recording Secretary,Carolyn Burt.
Public Comment
Mr. Castillo of 4382 Congdon, commented re: A new grant for Senior Center Tech
classes that will offer computer training in February.
Public comment closed at 7:06 p.m.
Consent Agenda
Trustee Williams moved the consent agenda consisting of:
   Approve minutes of 11- 15-16 Township Board meeting
   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid, checks 21779 through 21799 for a total
of $9,861.88
   Revised Payroll check report for October paid 43786 through 43814 and 43884
and EFT 404    
   Through 406 for a total of $29,988.18.    
   Payroll checks paid 43815 through 43875 and 43883 and EFT 407 for a total of
$ 32,825.68      
   General Fund Account Payable checks to approve, Checks 21800-21806 for a
total of $2,460.94
   Additional Account Payable checks to approve, 21807-21811 for a total of $
1,814.92
   Revenue and expenditure report 11/30/16
   Treasurer’s Report, corrected October, and November 2016 reports
   Building Inspector’s Report
   Police Report
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion:
Accounts payable checks paid from September-November will be sent to the Board
members for review prior to the next board meeting
Motion approved
Planning Commission
Gerald Eidt, chair, reported on November 16 meeting
Zoning Ordinance Amendment was recommended so it aligns with the Subdivision
Act re: Open Space Preservation
Recommendation that the Board approve the modified site plan for Verizon Tower
on Haslett Rd from and enclosed building to an overhead canopy
Trustee Eyster moved to approve the Planning Commission’s recommendation to
amend the Zoning Ordinance amendment regarding Open Space Preservation in
Section 8.03 (C)
Seconded by Trustee Duffy
Discussion: This would make the Zoning Ordinance and Subdivision Act consistent
with one another
Motion approved
Trustee Eyster moved that the Williamstown Township Board approve the
modification to the approved site plan for the overhead canopy in lieu of the
enclosed building at 1690 Haslett Rd due to the lack of objection from the
property owners, the required landscaping, fencing and limited visibility of
the project due to the distance from the road.
Seconded by Trustee Duffy
Discussion: none
Motion approved
Medical Marijuana Changes
The Zoning Ordinance will need to be updated due to changes with definition/
uses in recent legislation The Planning Commission will review the needed
changes and make a recommendation to the Board .
Old Business
Sign Ordinance Revisions
Trustee Williams moved that the Williamstown Township Board send the
recommended zoning ordinance amendment re: the sign regulations back to the
Planning Commission for further review and revisions.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion:
Typographical errors
Expanded uses
Board members should get questions to Jim for presentation to Planning
Commission to aid in discussion
Motion approved
Fireworks Ordinance
Trustee Williams moved to table the Board Motion on the Fireworks Revision
until the January 11
Township Board Meeting
Seconded by Trustee Duffy
Discussion: Board Members will review the Milton Township Ordinance to see how
it may be applicable here.
Motion Approved
Budget
Supervisor Bloomquist offered to have a Budget Workshop in January. All agreed
that this would benefit the board members. The date of January, 25th at 6:00 pm
at the Township hall was scheduled.
New Business
Maintenance Equipment Purchase
Trustee Eyster Moved that the Williamstown Township Board approve the purchase
of the Simplicity Snow Blower at a cost not to exceed $1500.00.
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion: This equipment will be used in the parks, cemeteries and township
hall.
Motion Approved
Committee Appointments for 2017
Planning Commission- Trustee Eyster
NIESA Board- Trustee Kane, Treasurer Cutshaw, Alternate
Parks and Recreation- Trustee Duffy, Clerk Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist
Cemetery- Treasurer Cutshaw, Supervisor Bloomquist
Transportation- Trustee Eyster, Supervisor Bloomquist
Joint Committee w/City of Williamston-Trustee Williams, Supervisor Bloomquist
Historical –Supervisor Bloomquist
Travis Burn Variance
Trustee Williams moved that the Williamstown Township Board approve the
requested variance regarding the size of brush piles in the Township Burning
Ordinance and allow Rick Travis to burn the two brush piles on Parcel No. 33-
03- 03-01-400-005. Township is to be notified of proposed dates at least a week
in advance and immediate neighbors are notified.
Seconded by Trustee Duffy
Discussion: This has been done in the past on large farm parcels
Motion approved
Reports:
Departments& committees
NIESA sent a chart re: EMS/Fire runs to date in 2016 for the Township
Compensation Committee meets biannually to discuss and recommend compensation
changes to the board. This is scheduled for January 2017. Committee members
are: Jim Conroy, Janet Kranz, Frank Simenski, Kurt Schoenmaker, and Todd
Walters.
The Road Committee will meet in January so planning can be done ahead of the
County road planning scheduling
A chart of how Township taxes collected are dispersed was shared with the Board
and will be available in the lobby for residents.
Supervisor Bloomquist commented on Commissioner Rex LaMore’s recent
installation as the President of the Michigan Association of Planning and how
very fortunate we are to have him on our Planning Commission as Vice Chair.
Public Comment for Agenda and Non agenda items opened at 8:39
Scott Lucas of 4000 Beeman Rd, welcomed the new Board members
Public comment closed at 8:42
Motion to Adjourn
   by Trustee Williams and Seconded by Clerk Steinberg
Supervisor Bloomquist adjourned the meeting at 8:44PM.
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________ _________________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor      Date
____________________________________ _________________
Mark Steinberg, Township Clerk          Date
Carolyn Burt Recording Secretary
2017 Meeting Minutes
January 11, 2017
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
January 11, 2017
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:00p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the Agenda.
Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Kane, Trustee Duffy, Treasurer Cutshaw,
Clerk Steinberg. Absent: Trustee Eyster and Trustee Williams
Also present: Chief Dave Hall of Meridian Police Department, Jeff Lawton and
Daniel Lawton of 2340 Dennis
Rd and Recording Secretary, Carolyn Burt/ Deputy Clerk.
Public Comment
7:02 None
Consent Agenda
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve minutes of 12-14-16 Township Board meeting
General Funds Accounts Payable Paid, checks 21812 through 21825 for a total of
$18,368.64
General Fund Account Payable checks to approve, (21826-21834 voided) 21835-
21843 for a total of $12,182.10
Additional Accounts Payable checks to approve, 21844-21849 for a total of$
3,248.94
Revenue and expenditure report 12/30/16
Building Inspector's Report
Police Report
The payroll checks paid report and theTreasurer's report to be deferred for
clarification at the next Board meeting
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg
Motion approved
Police Report
Chief Hall reported the following:
o    37 Body Cams will be ordered
o    A grant is in the works for new palm print fingerprinting software
o    A new officer with 11 years experience in the military is now on the force
o    New Branding for the Department will soon be revealed including the police
cars, letterhead and patches
o    A Christmas party for the needy was held at Murphy elementary
o    Shop with a Cop had more than 100 needy kids participate in December
o    18th annual Citizen Academy was held recently and a Youth Academy will be
offered soon, dates to be provided
Old Business
Fireworks Ordinance
Trustee Kane moved that the Williamstown Township Board send a revised draft
Fireworks Ordinance modeled after the Milton Township Ordinance with restricted
hours Sunday-Thursday 11am-9pm and Friday-Saturday 11am-12 midnight to the
Planning Commission to garner public comments at the Planning Commission's
March meeting for consideration at the April Township Board meeting.
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg
Discussion:
o    Keep the provision "May approve" professional fireworks displays similar
to the Milton Township
Ordinance reviewed
o    Ban on Chinese lanterns
o    Discussion of limiting use of consumer fireworks to Friday and Saturday
Motion approved
Budget
Supervisor Bloomquist solicited questions/ comment on the draft agenda for the
Budget Workshop to be held on January 25th at 6:00 pm. A Budget packet will be
sent to Board Members prior to the meeting.
Compensation Committee Appointments.
Teasurer Cutshaw moved that the Williamstown Township Board approve the re-
appointment of Kurt Shoecraft for a term of 5 years to expire in December of
2021, the appointment of Frank Seminski for a term of 4 years to expire
December 2020, and Robert Hayes to fill the vacancy left by Martin Wright with
a term expiring December 2017
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg
Discussion:
•   The terms are for 5 years and are staggered
•   The compensation recommendations affect only elected officials
•   Suggestion that there be an application process for those interested in
serving on Township Commissions
Motion Approved
New Business
Poverty Exemption Guidelines
Trustee Kane moved that the Williamstown Township Board approve the 2017
amendments to the Township Poverty Guidelines Resolution #97-2017 with the
beginning income qualification set at $17,820.00
Seconded by Trustee Duffy
Discussion:
•   The Resolution is approved annually in January
Roll Call Vote: Ayes: Trustee Kane, Trustee Duffy, Treasurer Cutshaw, Clerk
Steinberg and Supervisor Bloomquist
Absent: Trustees Eyster and Williams
Motion Approved
507 East Grand River
Supervisor Bloomquist discussed an upcoming Stakeholder meeting on Tuesday
January 31,2017 to garner input from Stakeholders re: Possible uses for the
property that would benefit the community. From this meeting, the ideas put
forth will be presented to the residents at an Open House proposed for Saturday
February 11th from 10 am -2 pm. The township expects to submit a grant
application to help support renovations, due April 1.
Hall Rental
•   Discussion re: allowing commercial activities
•   Liability insurance issues
•   A reworked agreement will be presented for approval at a later date
Reports
•   Niesa Committee meeting is scheduled for Thursday January 12.
•   Treasurer Cutshaw proposed a change to Investment reports to include an "
Interest to date" column rather than "Interest at maturation"
•   A Michigan Township Association meeting will be held at the Township hall
on February 22nd at 6:30 pm which will provide an opportunity to network with
other township personnel.
•   Concern expressed re: recent CATA reduction in services to our community
Public Comment for agenda and non agenda items
Opened at 8:57
•   Jeff Lawton, Scoutmaster, expressed interest in possible uses of the 507 E.
Grand River property on behalf of local Scouts
•      Daniel Lawton, local Scout, suggested involving the Science department
at the High School in usage of the property
Public comment closed at 9:02
Clerk Steinberg moved to adjourn and seconded by ?
Supervisor Bloomquist adjourned the meeting at 9:07
Minutes approved by:
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor    Date
Mark Steinberg, Township Clerk    Date
Carolyn Burt Recording Secretary
January 25, 2017
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Budget Workshop Minutes
January 25, 2017
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened a budget workshop at 6:04
p.m. at the Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston,
Michigan. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the
Agenda. Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Kane, Trustee Duffy, Treasurer Cutshaw,
Clerk Steinberg, Trustee
Williams and Trustee Eyster (via Skype).
Absent: None
Public Comment
None. Closed at 6:06 pm.
Budget Workshop
The purpose of the workshop was to provide Board members an opportunity to
review and discuss a draft budget and related materials concerning the
Township’s fiscal year 2017-2018 beginning April 1, 2017. Materials discussed
included:
·   Draft budget
·   Employee benefit summary
·   Staffing recommendations
·   Road and Infrastructure funding policy
·   Financial administration policies
·   Escrow accounts
·   Costs of administering tax collections
In context of detailed discussion, the Board selected several items for further
review this calendar year. These included:
Policy issues
1. Infrastructure budget (how determined?)
2.   Benefits for elected officials
3. Employee benefit policy
4. Contract policy (assessing, IT, planning, legal, insurance
5. Recycling
6. Roads
Budget issues
1. 911 revenue
2. Dues
3. Park fees
4. Internet and phones
5. Capital outlay
6. Office repairs
7. Codification
Strategic planning
1. Videotaping board meetings
2. Tax collection administration fee
Public Hearing
A date for a public hearing on the 2017-2018 budget will be set in the near
future.
Public Comment
None. Public comment closed at 9:07 pm.
Supervisor Bloomquist adjourned the workshop at 9:08 pm.
Minutes approved by:
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor   Date
Mark Steinberg, Township Clerk   Date
February 28, 2017
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Special Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 6:59 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the Agenda.
Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Kane, Trustee Duffy, Treasurer Cutshaw,
Clerk Steinberg and Trustee Williams.
Absent: Trustee Eyster
Also present: Donna and Marvin Zischke of 939 Cherry Valle, Donna Tocarchik of
9605 Deer Trail, Karl Bartels of 9665 Deer Trail, Jill Fewer of 2190 Haslett
Rd, William Bailey of 363 Turner Rd, Ron and Ida Buntin of 1604 Milton Rd, Rick
and Nancy Horton of 5632 Shoeman Rd, Lisa Dalton [Redacted] and Recording
Secretary, Carolyn Burt/ Deputy Clerk.
Public Comment for non agenda items
None Closed at 6:05
Trustee Williams moved to Open the Public Hearing for the Police Assessment
Roll 2017-2018
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg
Discussion:
Supervisor Bloomquist announced that the Board has recommended a reduction from
$110.00 to $100.00 per residential household, $175.00 for Commercial properties
and none on vacant land. This will be reevaluated again in October.
Public Comment
·   Karl Bartels regarding the cost of Police response and the enforcement of
Ordinances
·   Ron Buntin noted that the presence of Meridian Police In the community is
vastly improved than in past.
·   Donna Tocarchick regarding the detailed report from Police Department and
the visable presence of Police at the school areas
·   Bill Baileycommented on great job Meridian Police are doing
·   Trustee Williams noted that the Police reports are available monthly at the
Township Hall and in the Board Meeting minutes on the webpage
Trustee Williams moved to close the Hearing on the Police Assessment Roll
Treasurer Cutshaw seconded
Motion passed
Budget
Supervisor Bloomquist commented on highlights of the Budget and items that will
affect the budget. This meeting was held now to allow for public input before
being presented for Board approval in March.
Clerk Steinberg Moved to open the Public Hearing on Budget
Trustee Williams seconded
Motion Passed
Public Comments
Donna Tocarchick regarding increase number of volunteers to keep costs down for
Branch school and Cemetery
Trustee Williams moved to close Public Hearing on Budget
Treasurer Cutshaw Seconded
Motion Passed
Discussion: None
Public Comment for non agenda items
None closed at 6:45
Treasurer Cutshaw moved to adjourn
Clerk Steinberg seconded
Motion Passed
Planning Commission
Chairman Eidt gave highlights of the Comission’s meeting re: Sign Ordinance.
Clerk Steinberg Moved that the Williamstown Township Board table action on the
proposed sign regulations to the March 8, 2017 Board meeting..
Discussion: none
Seconded by Trustee Duffy
.Motion Approved
Old Business
Budget
Trustee Williams Moved that the Townswhip Board convene a Public Budget hearing
on February 28, at 6:00 pm
Discussion: none
Motion to adjourn by Treasurer Cutshaw at 6:49
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg
Motion approved
Minutes approved by:
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor   Date
Mark Steinberg, Township Clerk   Date
Carolyn Burt Recording Secretary
February 28, 2017
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Special Meeting Minutes
February 28, 2017
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 6:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the Agenda.
Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Kane, Trustee Duffy, Treasurer Cutshaw,
Clerk Steinberg and Trustee Williams.
Absent: Trustee Eyster
Also present: Donna and Marvin Zischke of 939 Cherry Valle, Donna Tocarchik
9605 Deer Trail, Karl Bartels
9665 Deer Trail, Jill Fewer 2190 Haslett Rd, William Bailey363 Turner Rd, Ron
and Ida Buntin 1604 Milton Rd, Rick and Nancy Horton 5632 Shoeman Rd, Lisa
Dalton [Redacted], and Recording Secretary, Carolyn Burt/ Deputy Clerk.
Public Comment for non agenda items
None. Closed at 6:05
Trustee Williams moved to Open the Public Hearing for the Police Assessment
Roll 2017-2018
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg
Discussion:
Supervisor Bloomquist explained that the Board has reduced the special
assessment for police services to
$100.00 per residential unit and $175.00 for commercial units in October 2016.
This will be reevaluated again in October 2017.
Public Comment
·   Karl Bartels, 9665 Deer Trail, with concerns about the cost of police
response and non-involvement in the enforcement of ordinances
·   Ron Buntin,1604 Milton Rd, noted the increased presence of Meridian Police
In the community
·   Donna Tocarchick, 9605 Deer Trail, regarding the detailed report from
Police Department
·   Bill Bailey, 363 Turner Rd, expressed support for current police services
·   Trustee Williams, 131 Bismark St, noted that the Police reports are
available monthly at the Township Hall and in the Board Meeting minutes on the
webpage
Trustee Williams moved to close the Hearing on the Police Assessment Roll
Treasurer Cutshaw seconded
Discussion: None.
Motion passed
Public Hearing closed at 6:17pm.
Budget
Supervisor Bloomquist commented on highlights of the Budget and items that will
affect the budget. Clerk Steinberg Moved to open the Public Hearing on Budget
Trustee Williams seconded
Motion Passed
Public Comments
·   Donna Tocarchick, 9605 Deer Trail, suggested increasing the number of
volunteers to keep costs down for Branch School and Cemetery.
·   Trustee Kane, 5170 N. Williamston Rd, on the potential cost savings of
contracting for lawn mowing and snow removal.
Trustee Williams moved to close Public Hearing on Budget
Treasurer Cutshaw Seconded
Discussion: None. Motion Passed
Public Hearing closed at 6:39pm
Public Comment for non agenda items
None.
Public Comment closed at 6:45pm Treasurer Cutshaw moved to adjourn Clerk
Steinberg seconded
Motion Passed
Meeting adjourned at 6:49pm
Minutes approved by:
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor   Date
Mark Steinberg, Township Clerk   Date
Carolyn Burt Recording Secretary
March 8, 2017
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
March 8, 2017
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:03 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the Agenda.
Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Kane, Trustee Duffy, Treasurer Cutshaw,
Clerk Steinberg and Trustee
Williams and Trustee Eyster.
Absent: None
Also Present: Jill Fewer of 2190 Haslett Rd, Robin Cleveland 5221 Zimmer Rd,
Lisa Dalton [Redacted] and Carolyn Burt/ Deputy Clerk.
Public Comment for agenda and non agenda items
None Closed at 7:08
Consent Agenda
Trustee Williams moved to approve the consent agenda
Approve the Minutes of 2/08/17 and 02/28/17 Township board meeting
General Fund Accounts Payable paid, checks 21880 to 21893 for a total of
$4,613.73
Payroll Checks paid checks 43949 through 43972 and EFT 441-444 for a total of
$25,691.84
General Account Payable checks to approve 21894 through 21902 for a total of
$4,293.35
Revenue and expenditure report 2/28/2017
Treasurer’s Report, February 2017
Building Inspector’s Report
Litigation
Police Report
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw
·   Discussion: Minutes of 02/08,2017 to be pulled to clarify and highlight the
items discussed and change order of Seconds, and to be included in the packet
for the April 5 Board meeting
·   Corrected Treasurer’s report to be included in April 5 Board packet
Roll Call Vote : Ayes: Trustee Williams,Treasurer Cutshaw,Trustee Eyster, Clerk
Steinberg and Supervisor Bloomquist
Nays: Trustee Kane, and Trustee Duffy
Motion passed
OLD BUSINESS
Compensation Commission Recommendations
·   Commission Chair Jim Conroy reported on the process used by the Commission
to make their recommendations.
·   The process was bound by the 45 days it is authorized by law to operate
(mid January- March 1)
·   The members voted unanimously to recommend approval of the recommendation
Trustee Williams moved the Board approve the Williamstown Township Resolution
114-2017 refusing the Compensation Commission recommended Board compensation
for the 2017-2018 and 2018-2019 budgets.
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg
Discussion
·   Board member salaries will be unchanged for the next two years
·   The Board has declined to accept salary increases in response to
Compensation Commission recommendations on three of the last six occasions
Roll Call Vote: Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Kane,
Trustee Williams, Clerk Steinberg
Nays: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Eyster
Police Assessment Roll
Treasurer Cutshaw moved that the Williamstown Township Board Approve Resolution
2017-98, confirming the 2017 Special Assessment Roll for Police Protection
within the Township with Special Assessment Roll total of $208,150,
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion:
·   Question whether the assessment may still be too high given a large fund
balance
·   The assessment was lowered to try to achieve a balance between revenue and
expenditures
·   The current amount collected may need to be increased after 3 years..
Roll Call Vote:   Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Eyster, Supervisor Bloomquist,
Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Williams and Clerk Steinberg
Nays: Trustee Kane
Motion Passed
2017-2018 Budget
Trustee Eyster moved that the Williamstown Township Board approve the 2017-2018
Township Budget with a beginning Township Total Fund Equity of $2,147,727 as of
March 31, 2016 with department appropriations as outlined:
Dept 101- Township Board          $208,096
Dept 171- Supervisor              $44,448
Dept 191- Elections               $23,641
Dept 209-Assessor                 $47,663
Dept 215- Clerk                   $46,772
Dept 247- Board of Review         $ 2,673
Dept 253- Treasurer               $53,578
Dept 265- Building and Grounds    $67,102
Dept 276- Cemetery                $26,000
Dept 294-Township Office          $60,282
Dept 371-Buliding Inspector       $ 20,583
Dept 400- Planning Commission     $ 61,869
Dept 411- Zoning Administrator    $   326
Dept 420- Zoning Board of appeals $ 3031
Dept 441- Public Works            $396,761
Dept 751-Recreation               $ 62,688
Dept 851- Other expenses    $ 500
Dept 890-Contingency              $40,000
Total general fund appropriations $1,166,013
Dept 301-Police Fund              $324,373
Dept 276- Cemetery                $ 96,246
 
Total Fund Appropriations   $1,586,632
The following provisions to apply:
1. No money may be spent from infrastructure 101-101-982 or roads 101-441-814
without Board approval.
2.   Items with estimated total cost over $1000 must be approved by the Board.
3. Contributions over $1000 must be approved by the Board.
4. Salary appropriated for each position may not be changed without a vote of
the Williamstown
Township Board with the exceptions provided in the Board Policy 008.
5. Salary for the Supervisor, Treasurer and Clerk to remain at $ 28,500.
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion:
·   Consider a separate fund for dedicated funds with a rollover. Would include
Roads and Art Tour funds
This would separate out capital improvements from operating fund
·   Policy on fund allocations for roads to be reviewed at the June 21 special
meeting on policy
Roll Call Vote: Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee
Williams, Trustee Eyster, Trustee
Duffy, Clerk Steinberg and Trustee Kane
Nays: none
Motion passed
Medical Marijuana
Clerk Steinberg moved the Township Board direct the Planning Commission to
update the definitions in the Zoning Ordinance that apply due to the recently
adopted PA 281, the Medical Marijuana Facilities Licensing Act, MCL 333.27101.
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion:
·   Prohibit expansion at this time. Can further review in the future.
Motion Passed
Sign Ordinance
Trustee Williams moved the Williamstown Township Board table action on the
proposed sign regulations to the April 5, 2017 meeting
Trustee Duffy seconded
Discussion:
·   Revisions can be made later
·   Get clarification from Planning Commission
·   Have a screen available at next meeting for further discussion
Motion Passed
Park Drive
Supervisor Bloomquist noted that the Township continues to spend monies on
needed grading and is suggesting that additional work be done to the access
drive and parking area to negate some of this expense. Will bring estimates to
a future board meeting for consideration.
Park Ecological Burn
Clerk Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Parks and
Recreation Committee’s recommendation for an Ecological Burn at the Township
Park on Grand River Road.
The burn is to be completed during the Spring or Fall of 2017 for a contract
cost to the Township of up to $7,785. The Burn includes 53 acres of prairie and
7 acres of woods. The Township will contact NIESA to determine whether they are
interested in doing the work and qualified to conduct an ecological burn. If
not, a private contractor may be selected. Final decision to be determined by
the 3 Township officers.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion:
·   Need a certified Ecological Burn and a definition of same
·   NIESA could possibly use this as a training exercise
·   Good to keep money in the Township
Roll Call Vote: Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Duffy,
Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Kane, Clerk Steinberg and Trustee Williams
Nays: none
Motion passed
Park Design
Trustee Williams moved that the Williamstown Township Board approve the
expenditure of a maximum of $1500.00 to create preliminary drawings and plan
for the 507 E Grand River for the purposed of the grant application with cost
of the construction drawings to be a part of the grant application.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion:
·   Specific plans for Park House use yet to be determined
Motion Withdrawn by Trustee Williams
Firearms
Trustee Williams moved that the Township sell the four rifles and ammunition
from 507 E. Grand River, granting permission to the Supervisor, Clerk, and
Treasurer to determine the best method to carry out the sale.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Motion passed
CATA Resolution
Trustee Duffy moved The Williamstown Township Board adopt Resolution 113-2017
regarding CATA’s reduction of services to the residents of Williamstown
Township, with the resolution revised to read: Between 2012 and 2020
Williamstown Township residents will pay at least $1,170,000 for CATA Services
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg
Discussion:
·   Payments estimates above are tied to the 2012-2020 millage
·   These are not “Contributions”, but rather taxes
Roll Call Vote: Ayes: Trustee Kane, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Williams, Treasurer
Cutshaw, Clerk Steinberg, Trustee Eyster and Supervisor Bloomquist
Nays: none
Motion passed
NEW BUSINESS
Board Meeting Schedule
Clerk Steinberg moved that the Williamstown Township Board approve the
scheduled meeting dates, as presented, for fiscal year 2017-2018 with the
exception of June 28 th  Policy workshop changed to June 21 st .
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: None
Motion Passed
Grant Application to MDNR
Reports
Roads
·   Supervisor Bloomquist reported on a meeting of County Road Department
representatives with Township residents concerned about planned tree removal
·   About ½ of the trees originally planned to be removed are now to be saved
·   The project west on Sherwood between Zimmer and Meridian does not include
widening of the road, it will be chip sealed
·   Suggestion that this information be added to the Website
NIESA
·   At the last meeting , the first female was promoted to the rank of
lieutenant
·   Webberville will be acquiring a new ambulance
·   Self-contained O2 masks have been acquired for all Firefighters
Parks and Recreation Committee
The Committee discussed potential uses of the 507 E. Grand River house, the
ecological burn, and passed a resolution supporting a passport grant
application for renovations to the house at 507 E. Grand River
There was a Board discussion about applying for a DNR Passport grant.for the
507 E. Grand River house.
The Board concluded that more information is needed before moving ahead.
Public Comment
·   Robin Cleveland, 5221 Zimmer Rd, commented that she was pleased to hear the
positive remarks regarding tree removal as she lost trees when Zimmer Road
project was done
·   Jill Fewer, 2190 Haslett Road, enjoys learning more about the Township and
is pleased with the discussions
Public comment closed at 9:43 PM
Trustee Williams moved that the Board Meeting adjourn
Clerk Steinberg seconded
Supervisor Bloomquist adjourned at 9:45 PM
Minutes approved by:
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor   Date
Mark Steinberg, Township Clerk   Date
Carolyn Burt Recording Secretary
April 5, 2017
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
April 5, 2017
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the Agenda.
Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Kane, Treasurer Cutshaw, Clerk
Steinberg and Trustee Williams and
Trustee Eyster.
Absent: Trustee Duffy
Also Present: Lisa Dalton [Redacted], Lois Kill 5085 Barton Rd, Chris Scott
1102 Cobblestone, Jerry Eidt
4115 Vanneter, Andrew Brieschke Director of Operations CATA, Bradley Funkhouser
Deputy CEO of CATA, Nancy Williams of 131 Bismark and Carolyn Burt/ Deputy
Clerk.
Public Comment for agenda and non agenda items
Chris Scott, 1102 Cobblestone, President of the Williamston Soccer Club
commented on the excellent care of the Township soccer fields.
Public comment closed at 7:04
CATA Presentation
∙   Andrew Brieschke presented the new proposal to provide services to
Williamston, Williamstown Township and Webberville in response to Feedback from
residents.
∙   Proposed service will have 3 services, a designated Williamston/Webberville
Connector.to Meridian Mall and Meijer with 7½ trips M-F and 5 on Saturday, The
48 Passenger Limited bus to run from Webberville- Lansing in am and return in
pm, and a CATA Rural Service to operate service to the Township.
∙   Input will be gathered from CATA Stakeholders, the Marketing dept. will
publish routes and times
∙   Service would begin 45 days after approval at the Ingham County
Commissioners level
Consent Agenda
Trustee Williams moved to approve the consent agenda
Approve the Minutes of 2/08/17 and 03/08/17 Township board meeting
General Fund Accounts Payable paid, checks 21903 to 21927 for a total of
$16,047.98
Payroll Checks paid checks 43973 through 44014 and EFT 445-450 for a total of
$32,301.88
General Account Payable checks to approve 21928 through 21944 for a total of
$13,798.65
Police paid check number 1081 for $57,817.76
Revenue and expenditure report 3/31/2017
Treasurer’s Report, January (revised), February (revised) and March 2017
Building Inspector’s Report
Litigation
Police Report
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: None
Roll Call Vote : Ayes: Trustee Williams,Treasurer Cutshaw,Trustee Eyster, Clerk
Steinberg and Supervisor Bloomquist
Nays: Trustee Kane Absent: Trustee Duffy Motion passed
Police Report
Chief Hall reported the following:
∙   Department lost 2 recent recruits
∙   Officer recently recognized for valor
∙   Just graduated 9 from Youth Academy
∙   May 18 will be the second Quarter neighborhood leader meeting
∙   Williamston will provide the Honor Guard at the MTA meeting next week
Planning Commission
Gerald Eidt, Chair discussed the recommendations of the planning commission re:
Signs and Fireworks Ordinances
∙   Received a range of citizen comments re: fireworks and plan to present to
Board after an April Planning Commission meeting for consideration at its June
meeting.
∙   Signs: Balloons, searchlights and inflatables were added.
∙   Legal non conforming signs are grandfathered until need to replace. A
variance can be requested.
∙   Digital signs were eliminated due to driver distraction.
Trustee Williams moved the Williamstown Township Board approve Planning
Commission appointment of Rob Sanford.
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg
Motion passed
NEW BUSINESS
Consumers Energy Gas Franchise Ordinance
∙   Chris Thelen Consumers Representative presented information:
∙   The Michigan Constitution requires a Franchise agreement
∙   The Old Ordinance is dated 1987 and is due to expire.
∙   Mr. Thelen saw no problem in deferring until the May Board meeting to allow
the Township Attorney to review
Clerk Steinberg moved the Township Board table until May 10,2017 Board meeting,
Ordinance No 30 C.P.-2017, Consumers Energy Gas Franchise Ordinance. Seconded
by Trustee Williams
Motion passed
Election Equipment Resolutions
Trustee Eyster moved the Township Board approve Resolution 115-2017,
Application to the Secretary of State to Purchase Election Equipment. Seconded
by Clerk Steinberg
Discussion:
∙   Replacement equipment needed for 15year old tabulators.
∙   Federal and State funds will cover the costs
Roll Call Vote: Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Treasurer Cutshaw, Supervisor Bloomquist,
Trustee Kane, Clerk Steinberg and Trustee Williams. Absent: Trustee Duffy
Motion passed
River Trail Committee
Trustee Williams moved the Williamston Township Board approve working with
Meridian Township to apply for an Ingham County Grant to create a Red Cedar
River Trail with the Board to have final approval of the grant application
before submittal.
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg
Discussion: Committee to make grant proposal due in October
Art Tour Donation
Clerk Steinberg moved the Township accept the donated funds in the amount of
$3000. To be placed in 101-751-884.001 Art tour playground restricted funds,
revenue account. Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion:
∙   These monies must be put in a revenue account
∙   Donations to the Township in excess of $1000. Must be approved by the Board
OLD BUSINESS
Sign Ordinance
Trustee Eyster moved the Board table the revisions to the Sign Ordinance until
the May Board Meeting.
Seconded by Trustee Kane
Discussion: none
Motion passed
Cemetery
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Township Board accept the bid from Redwood
Landscaping to complete the water expansion at Summit Cemetery, provided the
applicant provide proof of liability insurance, Workers Comp, a valid license
and provision # 4 be deleted.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion:
∙   Provisions above added to the motion
∙   Expanded water lines will facilitate watering of plants
Roll Call Vote: Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Supervisor Bloomquist, Treasurer Cutshaw,
Trustee Kane, Trustee Williams, and Clerk Steinberg
Absent: Trustee Duffy
Motion passed
Trustee Williams left meeting 8:25, returned at 8:30
Reports:
Departments and Committees:
NIESA: Wanda met with Mike Yantz
∙   NIESA to do Eco burn
∙   Considering multiple filling stations with “Dry Hydrants”
∙   Collaboration on emergency response plan
∙   Burn Ordinance to allow NIESA to be reimbursed for burn
Parks:
∙   River Trail is priority
∙   Williamston Schools Triathlon is scheduled in Township April 22
∙   Art Tour is May 5 th  and 6 th
∙   Spring cleanup is May 13 th  cost of some items ie., motor oil, Electronics
and tires yet to be determined
Historical:
∙   Plan to apply for National Historic Designation
Public Comment for Agenda and non-agenda items
None closed at 9:28 pm
Clerk Steinberg moved to adjourn the Board Meeting
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw
Supervisor Bloomquist adjourned the meeting at 9:29 pm
Minutes approved by:
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor   Date
Mark Steinberg, Township Clerk   Date
Carolyn Burt Recording Secretary
May 10, 2017 Synopsis
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP
BOARD OF TRUSTEES MEETING
May 10, 2017 Synopsis
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held its regularly scheduled
monthly meeting on Wednesday May 10, 2017 at 7:00 PM at the Township hall, with
Supervisor Bloomquist, Treasurer Cutshaw, Clerk Steinberg, and Trustees
Williams, Kane, Eyster and Duffy present. The Board approved the consent agenda
consisting of the minutes of the April 5, 2017 Board Meeting and the following
reports: accounts payable paid, accounts payable for approval, payroll paid,
revenue and expenditure report, Building Inspector’s report, Treasurer’s report
( March 2017), and Police report. The following additional Board actions were
taken:
Approved the Consumers Energy Gas Franchise Ordinance.
Tabled a decision on the proposed Sign Ordinance to the June Board meeting.
Approved the County Road Department‘s estimates for maintenance and repair of
Barry, Lounsbury, and Milton Roads for 2017.
Approved a plan to do crack filling, surfacing and striping of the Township
Hall parking lot.
Approved an amendment to the budget to create an additional fund for special
projects.
Approved the Planning Commission review and preparation of recommended
revisions to regulations for wireless communication facilities.
The next meeting of the Board is June 14, 2017 at 7:00pm in the Township
boardroom at 4990 Zimmer Road.
Township website: http:/www.williamstowntownship.com. Phone 517-655-3193.
Mark Steinberg, Clerk
May 10, 2017
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
May 10, 2017
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:00p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the Agenda.
Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Kane, Treasurer Cutshaw, Clerk
Steinberg, Trustee Williams, Trustee
Eyster, and Trustee Duffy.
Also Present: Rod Imhoff 2380 Wilgus Rd, Julie Chrisinski CADL Director
Williamston, Jonathan Brandt 475 N Branch Rd, Michele Brussow 4015 Capitol,
Lansing, Aaron Vanderurst 3840 Vanetter, Chris Thelen Consumers Energy, and
Carolyn Burt/ Deputy Clerk.
Public Comment for agenda and non- agenda items
•   Rod Imhoff, 2380 Wilgus, spoke re: Gulick Rd repairs/maintence.
•   John Brandt 475 N Branch re: Fee schedule for building permits. Public
comment closed at 7:06
Consent Agenda
Trustee Williams moved to approve the consent agenda:
Approve the Minutes of April 5, 2017 Township Board meeting
General Fund Accounts Payable paid,checks 21945 through 21967 for a total of
$12,511.78.
approve
Payroll paid check numbers 44015-44044 and EFTs 451-463 for a total of
$28,470.13.
General Account Payable checks to 21968 through 21986 for a total of $9,017.77.
Revenue and expenditure report 4/30/2017
Treasurer's Report, April 2017
Building Inspector's Report
Litigation
Police Report
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: Treasurer's report shows actual interest income as of 3/31/17, the
end of fiscal year and 4/1/17 investment principal.
Roll Call Vote:    Ayes:   Trustee Williams, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Eyster,
Clerk Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist,Trustee Duffy.
Nays: Trustee Kane
Motion passed
CADL Annual Report
Julie Chrisinski, director, presented highlights of 2016 including the fact
that Williamston was awarded a Celebration Cinema Service award. She described
the new "Library of Things" which allows people to borrow items such as cameras
and sewing machines, and the extensive digital services that are offered.
NEW BUSINESS
Trustee Eyster moved the Township Board approve Ordinance No 30-CP-2017,
Consumers Energy
Company Gas Franchise Ordinance. Seconded by Clerk Steinberg Discussion: none
Roll Call Vote:  Ayes: Trustee Kane, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Williams, Treasurer
Cutshaw, Clerk Steinberg, Trustee Eyster and Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None
Motion passed
Spring Cleanup
To be held Saturday May 13 at the Township Hall. The Township is accepting more
items this year including all batteries, latex paint, tires, and electronics.
The hours are 9 am to 3 pm.
Policy Workshop
Supervisor Bloomquist distributed a list of suggested topics for the Board
policy workshop to be held on June 21st at 6:00pm. She invited Board members to
suggest additional topics.
Sign Ordinance
Trustee Kane moved the Board table the revisions to Article 7 of the Sign
Ordinance to clarify or revise the following sections:
•   Page 7-11, B:3
•   Page 7-12, C
•   Page 7-21,Temporary and Temporary promotional sign standards (section 7.05,
sub-section C)
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion:
•   Clarification and/or revisions are needed before adoption. Board members
are to be prepared to adopt a sign ordinance at the June Board meeting.
Motion passed
Park House Discussion
•   Preliminary cost analysis discussed to ready house for residential rental
•   Other options discussed included leaving vacant, selling structure only and
other rental uses.
•   Grant process would take approximately 2 years.
Fireworks Ordinance Discussion
•   On the May 24 Planning Commission meeting agenda
•   Scheduled for June 14 Board meeting as an action item.
Roads
Trustee Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Ingham County
Road Department estimates for 2017 to include:
1. Repair Zimmer South- bound, South of Barry
2. Barry from Shoeman to Lounsbury
3. Barry from Zimmer to Lounsbury
4. Milton from Zimmer to Bentley
5. Lounsbury from Barry to Milton
Estimated cost: $226,000.00
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: Cost breakdown = $196,000 from the Township and $30,000 from the
County for materials. The Township does not pay labor costs.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes:    Treasurer Cutshaw, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Williams, Trustee
Eyster, Trustee Duffy, Clerk Steinberg and Trustee Kane.
Nays: None
Motion Passed
Parking Lot
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Township Board approve the crack filling, surfacing
and striping of the Township parking lot at a cost not to exceed $3,600 with
expenditure under GL#101-101-982 (Infrastructure)
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg
Discussion: None
Roll Call Vote: Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Duffy,
Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Kane, Clerk Steinberg and Trustee Williams
Nays: None
Motion Passed
Budget Amendments
Trustee Eyster moved that the Williamstown Township Board establish a separate
fund for special projects. To do this the following income and expenditure
budget account lines will be amended as follows:
101-000-668.000 (Art Tour Tickets) reduced from $2,000.00 to $0.00,
101-101-982.000 (Infrastructure) reduced from $117,358.00 to $0.00,
101-441-814.000 (Road improvement) reduced from $364,406.00 to $0.00 and
101-751-884.001 (Art Tour Playground) reduced from $8,419.00 to $0.00. New
accounts to be established are as follows:
_-000-668.000 (Art Tour Tickets)
_-101-982.000 (Infrastructure)
$2,000.00
$ 117,358.00
_-441-814.000 (Road improvements) $ 195,228.00
_-441-814.001 (Road improvements encumbered) $ 169,178.00 and
_-751-884.001 (Art Tour Playground) $ 8,419.00
The final new account numbers are to be established by the Supervisor. The
Clerk will move any FY 18 income and expenditures in the original account lines
listed above to the new account lines.
Seconded by Trustee Duffy
Discussion:
•   All are still part of the General Fund.
•   This will improve transparency and understanding for residents.
Roll Call Vote: Ayes: Trustee Kane, Trustee Eyster, Trustee Williams,
Supervisor Bloomquist, Clerk Steinberg, Treasurer Cutshaw and Trustee Duffy
Nays: None
Motion Passed
Maintenance Services Discussion
Costs and benefits of current staff model compared to contract model.
•   One verbal estimate for mowing and trimming all Township properties except
Summit and Foote Cemeteries was $13,000.00 for 26 mows per season.
•   More information needs to be provided.
•   Staff will track mowing and trimming hours by Park, Township Hall and
Branch School.
Cell Towers Discussion
Clerk Steinberg moved the Township Board request the Planning Commission review
and recommend revisions to regulations for wireless communications facilities
in Section 8.02 (V) to incorporate additional requirements for approval.
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion:
•   More data needs to be provided with the application for Planning Commission
and Board to have adequate information for review.
Motion Passed
Hall Rental Refund request
Trustee Kane moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the full refund of
the deposit for Hall Rental to Jann Nestell. Seconded by Clerk Steinberg
Discussion: Unable to comply with cancellation policy on a timely basis.
Motion Passed
Public Comment for Agenda & non-agenda items
•   John Brandt 475 N Branch Rd, remarked about Sign Ordinance and possibility
of a survey for clarification.
•   Aaron Vanderurst 3840 Vanneter, spoke in favor of permitting professional
firework displays.
Reports
NIESA: Eco burn was done last Sunday in the Township Park. Regular meeting on
May 11.
CATA: Supervisor to follow up on status of proposed service to Township
Trustee Eyster moved to Adjourn
Seconded by Trustee Cutshaw
Supervisor Bloomquist adjourned meeting at 10:17
Minutes approved by:
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor
Mark Steinberg, Township Clerk
Carolyn Burt Recording Secretary
June 14, 2017 Synopsis
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP
BOARD OF TRUSTEES MEETING
June 14, 2017 Synopsis
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held its regularly scheduled
monthly meeting on Wednesday June 14, 2017 at 7:00 PM at the Township hall,
with Supervisor Bloomquist, Treasurer Cutshaw, Clerk Steinberg, Trustees Kane,
Eyster and Duffy present. Trustee Williams was absent. The Board approved the
consent agenda consisting of the minutes of the May 10, 2017 Board Meeting and
the following reports: accounts payable paid, accounts payable for approval,
payroll paid, revenue and expenditure report, revenue report, Building
Inspector’s report, Treasurer’s report and Police report. The following
additional Board actions were taken:
Approved the Fireworks Ordinance.
Tabled a decision on the proposed Sign Ordinance to the July Board meeting.
Tabled a plan to expense funds to do repairs to Park House at 507 E Grand River
Ave
Approved the appointment of Jill Fewer to the Zoning Board of Appeals
Approved an amendment to the Depository Resolution for safekeeping of Township
Funds.
Tabled the adoption of the Principles of Governance until the July Board
Meeting.
The next meeting of the Board is a Workshop Meeting to Review Township Policies
on June 21, 2017 at 6:00pm in the Township boardroom at 4990 Zimmer Road.
Township website: http:/www.williamstowntownship.com. Phone 517-655-3193.
Mark Steinberg, Clerk
June 14, 2017
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
June 14, 2017
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the Agenda.
Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Kane, Treasurer Cutshaw, Clerk
Steinberg, Trustee Eyster, and Trustee Duffy. Trustee Williams absent.
Also Present: Jonathan Brandt 4725 N Branch,Dr. Charles Bethke 77 Granite Rd,
Bob Barkham 89 Granite Rd, Nancy Horton 5632 Shoeman, Jana Barkham 87 Granite
Rd, John Powell 790 Haslett Rd, Brett J Dickey 5582 Shoeman Rd, Aaron
Vanderurst 3840 Vanetter Rd, and Carolyn Burt/ Deputy Clerk.
Public Comment for agenda and non- agenda items
Opened at 7:02 PM.
Jonathan Brandt commented about Sherwood Road recent work still in progress.
Bob Barkham 87 Granite Rd, wants his Cider Mill to be grandfathered in under
Ag-Tourism Ordinance.
Nancy Horton 5632 Shoeman Rd, objects to fees for Ag-Tourism. Is there a set
fee schedule?
Dr. Charles Bethke 77 Granite Rd, objects to fees placed on Cider Mill and adds
his support to this business in the community.
Public comment closed at 7:20
Consent Agenda
Clerk Steinberg moved to approve the consent agenda:
   Approve the Minutes of May 10, 2017 Township Board meeting
   General Fund Accounts Payable paid, checks 21987 through 22011 for a total
of $ 532,193.34.
   Payroll paid check numbers 44045-44083 and EFTs 464-469 for a total of
$31,860.29.
   General Fund Accounts Payable for approval, checks 22012 through 22037 for a
total of $ 25,042.81.
   Revenue and expenditure report 5/31/2017
   May Revenue Report 2017
   Treasurer’s Report, May 2017
    Building Inspector’s Report
   Police Report
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: Would like more clarity on how financial information is presented
Roll Call Vote : Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Steinberg,
Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Duffy.
Nays: Trustee Kane
Absent: Trustee Williams
Motion passed
Senior Center Update
Removed from Agenda due to absence of Director
OLD BUSINESS
Sign Ordinance
Trustee Kane moved the Township Board table the vote on the Sign Ordinance
until July meeting.
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg
Discussion: Need to have memo ahead of time.
Roll Call Vote : Ayes: Trustee Kane, Trustee Duffy, Treasurer Cutshaw, Clerk
Steinberg, Trustee Eyster and Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None
Absent: Trustee Williams
Motion passed
Fireworks Ordinance
Trustee Eyster moved that the Williamstown Board approve the proposed Fireworks
Ordinance with the Following revisions: Section 4.07-Approval Criteria, Add: 5.
A person shall not ignite, discharge, or use articles pyrotechnic, display
fireworks, and special effects fireworks on public property, school property,
church property, or the property of another person without that organization’s
or person’s express permission to use the fireworks on a form provided by the
township. 6. How to limit articles pyrotechnic, display fireworks and special
effects fireworks..
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Discussion: Fee of $ 50.00 for the application was agreed upon.
Roll Call Vote: Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster,
Duffy, Clerk Steinberg and Trustee Kane. Absent: Trustee Williams
NAY: TRUSTEE DUFFY
Park House, 507 E Grand River
Trustee Kane moved the Williamstown Township Board table the expenditure
approval to prepare the house for rental until the July Board meeting.
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg
Discussion:
Send out revised estimates
Trustee Kane to obtain an estimate to move the house
Trustee Duffy will get estimate on demolition costs
Motion Passed
Policy Workshop
Supervisor Bloomquist suggested the Board Members decide what policies they may
want to revise at the
Policy Workshop to be held on June 21st at 6:00pm. She would like to form
committees at that time to recommend revisions.
NEW BUSINESS
ZBA appointment
Clerk Steinberg move that the Williamstown Township Board approve the
appointment of Jill Fewer to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
Seconded by Trustee Duffy.
Discussion: None
Motion Passed
Depository Resolution
Trustee Kane moved that the Williamstown Township Board adopt amended language
of resolution # 116 regarding the banks financial depositories for the
safekeeping of Township funds.
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg
Discussion:
Bank name change from First Merit Bank to Huntington Bank.
Add LAFCU and MSUFCU
Question how Resolutions are named and numbered.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Trustee Duffy,
Clerk Steinberg and Trustee Kane.
Nays: None
Absent: Trustee Williams
Motion Passed
MTA Principle of Governance
Trustee Duffy KANE moved the Williamstown Township Board table the adoption of
the Principles of Governance until the July meeting.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: Allow time to read thoroughly
Motion Passed
Reports:
Departments and Committees
Balance sheet for Spring Cleanup revenues and expenditures presented
Art Tour sales and donations submitted
Niesa
Information re: Dry hydrants still on Niesa agenda as well as a pumping station
and reservoir
Public Comment for Agenda and non agenda items
Opened at 9:39
Burn Ordinance is on line
Roadside grass is under the County Road Commission jurisdiction
Follow up with County re: dangerous Township intersections
Closed at 9: 47
Trustee Duffy Moved to Adjourn
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Supervisor Bloomquist adjourned the meeting at 9:49
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________ _________________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor Date
_________________________________________ ____________________
Mark Steinberg, Township Clerk       Date
Carolyn Burt Recording Secretary
October 11, 2017
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
October 11, 2017
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the Agenda.
Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Kane, Clerk Steinberg, Trustee Eyster,
Trustee Duffy and Trustee Williams
Absent: Treasurer Cutshaw
Also Present: Carolyn Burt/ Deputy Clerk/ recording secretary.
It was noted that Food Purchase Policy and Time Study will be on the November
meeting agenda.
Public Comment for agenda and non- agenda items
Opened at 7:02 PM.
Chad Walter, 40 Monarch Lane, re: the Baan.Gan.Aka rezoning request.
Bob Barkham, 89 Granite Rd, re the Zoning Board of Appeals recommendation to
the Board.
Closed at 7:06
Consent Agenda
Trustee Williams moved to approve the consent agenda
Approve the Minutes of September 13 & 20, 2017 Township Board meeting.
General Fund Accounts Payable paid, check numbers 22156-22174 for a total of
$20,956.32.
Police AP paid check number 1084 for $56,989.25
Payroll paid check numbers 44193 to 44226 and EFTS 488-491 for a total of
$33,438.73.
General Fund Accounts Payable for approval, check numbers 22175-22186 and
22187-22192 for a total of $18,037.50.
Police Account for Approval check number 1085 for $1,233.33.
Revenue and expenditure report ending September 30, 2017.
Building Inspector’s Report
Police Report
Litigation Report
Acknowledge receipt of Treasurer’s Report and August Revenue Report
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg
Roll Call Vote: Ayes: Trustee Duffy,Trustee Williams, Clerk Steinberg, Trustee
Eyster and Supervisor Bloomquist
Nays: Trustee Kane
Absent: Treasurer Cutshaw
Motion Passed
Audit Report
Brenda Seelman of Layton & Richardson, P.C. stated that the FY 2016-2017 Audit
Report included an “unmodified opinion,” the highest commendation. There were
only two prior year recommendations, regarding cash receipting and segregation
of duties. Given the Township’s small staff these can be difficult to achieve.
There were no current year recommendations.
Police Report
Assistant Chief Ken Plaga of the Meridian Police Department spoke:
Halloween Open House is October 28th
Currently interviewing for 2 new police openings and a crime property
management opening.
Current Resident Academy is about half way through
November meeting with Neighborhood Watch groups will be November 1 at the new
Fire Station on Okemos Rd.
Ballot Proposal
Information on the November 7 general election is available on the Township
website and at the Township Hall.
Planning Comission
Gerald Eidt, Chair, spoke re: the Planning Commission’s recommendation
regarding Baan.Gan.Aka, a 140 acre planned community. He noted that the PC will
conduct a public hearing on the proposed telecommunication ordinance and will
prepare an ordinance revision on solar farms.
Trustee Duffy moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Amendment to
the Development Agreement for Baan.Gan.Aka with inconsistencies and details
clarified before recording with the Ingham County Register of Deeds.
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg
Discussion: Mr. Walter was commended for his foresight as a trailblazer in
developing this project.
Motion Approved
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Hall Rental
Trustee Duffy moved that the Williamstown Township Board approve the
recommended revisions to the Hall Rental Agreement pending approval of legal
counsel.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: It was clarified that organizations, not individuals, must be
certified not-for-profit to be eligible for lower rental rates.
Motion passed
NEW BUSINESS
Gerald Eidt,chair of the Zoning Board of Appeals, spoke re: the ZBA’s
recommendation concerning Barkum Creek Farms business on Haslett Rd.
Clerk Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the
recommendation of the Zoning Board of Appeals and waive the Special Use Permit
and Site Plan application escrow and fees for Barkham Creek Farms, 181 Haslett
Rd. provided a complete application is submitted by January 11th, 2018 as
outlined in the Williamstown Township Zoning Ordinance.
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion: The parties were commended for reaching a mutually agreeable
recommendation.
Motion passed
Cemetery
Clerk Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the
recommendation of the Cemetery Committee for installation of an alarm system
not to exceed $750.00 with funds to be split equally between the Township Hall,
Parks and Cemetery.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion:
Recent break-in at the Summit cemetery storage building triggered this need.
The building houses election equipment and Park supplies as well as cemetery
equipment.
Roll Call Vote: Ayes:Trustee Eyster, Trustee Williams, Trustee Kane, Clerk
Steinberg, Trustee Duffy, Supervisor Bloomquist
Nays: none
Absent : Treasurer Cutshaw
Motion Passed
Trustee Williams moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the
recommendation of the Cemetery Committee to move forward on the purchase and
installation of fencing on the south property line at Summit Cemetery. Not to
exceed $6000.00 from Department 209-276-980-000 based on the solicitation of
two bids, minimum.
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg
Discussion: none.
Roll Call Vote: Ayes: Supervisor Bloomquist,Trustee Williams, Trustee Eyster,
Trustee Duffy, Clerk Steinberg and Trustee Kane.
Nays: none
Absent: Treasurer Cutshaw
Motion passed
Budget
Supervisor Bloomquist presented a copy of the Township Revenue and Expenditures
for this year to date for consideration by the Board and to facilitate
suggestions re: the 2017-2018 budget. She will present a draft to the Board in
November.
Strategic Planning Committees
Following the Strategic Planning Meeting, Supervisor Bloomquist will be
soliciting help on various committees. She asked Board Members to consider and
get back to her on how each may contribute.
Distilleries, Hard Cider
Trustee Williams moved the Williamstown Township Board ask the Planning
Commission to review and make recommendation to the Board on regulations for
Distilleries and Hard Cider manufacturing.
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg
Discussion:
Current regulations do not allow such ventures
This issues would amend Zoning
Motion Passed
Reports
Meadowdale Subdivision will meet next week re: Possible Special Assessment on
Subdivision Roads.
Niesa sold a 1966 Fire Truck, The Board is also discussing options re :
investments, and the need to recruit volunteers
History Tour: more than 200 people attended last weekend, special mention on
the tour of former business people in the community, The Eysters have been
generous contributors to Branch school.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:32 PM
Jonathan Brandt, 4725 N Branch Rd, re school policy development on transgender
students
Dick Horton, 5632 Shoeman Rd., re the ZBA recommendation on Barkam Creek Farms
Bob Barkham, 89 Granite Rd., thanked the Board for their support
Closed at: 8:41pm
Trustee Duffy moved the Williamstown Township Board adjourn.
Trustee Eyster seconded
Supervisor Bloomquist Adjourned the Meeting at 8:44 PM
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________________ ______________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor Date
_____________________________________________ _____________
Mark Steinberg, Township Clerk Date
November 8, Synopsis
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP
BOARD OF TRUSTEES MEETING
November 8, Synopsis
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held its regularly scheduled
monthly meeting on Wednesday November 8, 2017 at 7:00 PM at the Township hall,
with Supervisor Bloomquist, Treasurer Cutshaw, Clerk Steinberg, and Trustees
Kane, Eyster, Duffy and Williams present. The Board approved the consent agenda
consisting of the minutes of the October 11, 2017 Board Meeting and the
following reports: accounts payable paid, accounts payable for approval,
payroll paid, revenue and expenditure report, revenue report, building
inspector’s report, the Police report and acknowledged receipt of the
Treasurer’s October report . The following additional Board actions were taken:
Approved the purchase of a fence on the South border of Summit Cemetery.
Approved further discussion the use of the Township Park for the Williamston
Middle School.
Approved the aeration, top dressing and addition of sand to the Park soccer
fields.
Approved an amendment to the 2017 Special Assessment Roll for Police Protection
in the Township. The 2017 unit assessment for residential is $100., and for
commercial is $175.
Approved the purchase and installation of playground equipment from the funds
raised from the Art Tour.
Approved an increase in pay for election workers to $12. per hour and mileage
to training site.
The next meeting of the Board is a Regular Board Meeting on Wednesday, December
13, 2017 at 7:00pm in the Township boardroom at 4990 Zimmer Road.
Township website: http:/www.williamstowntownship.com. Phone 517-655-3193.
Mark Steinberg, Clerk
November 8, 2017
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
November 8, 2017
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the Agenda.
Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Kane, Clerk Steinberg, Trustee Eyster,
Trustee Duffy and Trustee Williams, Treasurer Cutshaw
Also Present: Carolyn Burt/ Deputy Clerk/ recording secretary.
Public Comment for agenda and non- agenda items
Opened at 7:02 PM
None
Closed at 7:02PM
Consent Agenda
Trustee Williams moved to approve the consent agenda
Approve the Minutes of October 11, 2017 Township Board meeting.
General Fund Accounts Payable paid, check numbers 22193-22206 for a total of
$28,588.04.
Payroll paid check numbers 44227- to 44255 and EFTS 492-497 for a total of
$30,554.38.                               
General Fund Accounts Payable for approval, check numbers 22207-22229 for a
total of $12,966.18 plus.
Police Account check number 1086 for $430.00 for grand total of $13,396.18.
Revenue and expenditure report ending October 31, 2017.
Building Inspector’s Report
Police Report
Litigation Report
Acknowledge receipt of Treasurer’s Report and Revenue Report
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: Keep Police checks separate from General fund.
Roll Call Vote: Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Williams, Clerk Steinberg, Trustee
Eyster, Supervisor Bloomquist and Treasurer Cutshaw
Nays: Trustee Kane
Motion Passed
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Policy Review
Three topics were presented for discussion. Trustee Eyster prepared background
information on budget policy and road policy.
Budget Policy - - In recent years the Board has maintained a substantial
reserve account so as to assure adequate resources in the event of emergencies.
In context of developing the budget for FY 2018-2019, the Board will consider
reducing the maximum Fund Balance so that additional funds can be allocated for
roads.
Food Purchase Policy – A draft policy was presented, intended to clarify when
the Township will and will not approve food purchases and will be brought back
for approval in December.
Road Policy – Despite anticipated increases in Township allocated funds and
funds available through the Ingham County Road Department, funding for roads in
the foreseeable future will not be adequate to meet road maintenance needs. The
Board was asked to consider various methods for applying available funds in
ways that maximize the volume of roads maintained while being fair to all
residents.
Budget Review
Supervisor Bloomquist presented a preliminary budget for review and input by
Board members. The budget will reflect a 3% increase for the staff. The
supervisor is recommending soliciting bids for pre-audit services.
Cemetery
Trustee Williams moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Cemetery
Committee move forward on the purchase of fence for the South property line up
to $ 33,000 from Dept. 209-276-980.000 from 1. Sawdon Fence or 2. Spartan Fence
to be completed by December 31, 2017.
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg
Discussion:
Keep the business local when possible
Want project completed by December 31,2017
Roll Call Vote: Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Eyster, Supervisor Bloomquist,
Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Kane, Trustee Williams and Clerk Steinberg.
Nays: none
Motion Passed
NEW BUSINESS
Township Community Park
The Cross Country coach, Tim Kelly, was introduced and spoke to the desire of
the Williamston Middle School Cross Country team to hold meets at the Township
Park. There would be two per year and the trail would only need two small
changes in order to comply with MHSAA regulations. A map of the proposed route
was available to Board. At a later date the High School may also wish to
utilize the course.
Clerk Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Township move
forward to allow the Williamston School District to use the Park for Middle
School and Possibly High School Cross Country meets.
Seconded by Treasure Cutshaw.
Discussion:
School liabilities will apply
Ayes: Trustee Kane, Trustee Eyster, Trustee Williams, Supervisor Bloomquist,
Clerk Steinberg and Treasurer Cutshaw
Nays: None
Motion Passed
Ball Fields
Clerk Steinberg moved that the Williamstown Township Board approve the
expenditure of up to $5500. For aeration and top dressing and the addition of
55 cubic yards of sand to the two soccer fields, to be paid from Dept. 101-751-
881.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion:
Irrigation for the soccer fields will be considered at a later date and will
need additional bids at that time.
Roll Call Vote: Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Supervisor Bloomquist,Trustee
Williams, Trustee Eyster, Trustee Duffy, Clerk Steinberg and Trustee Kane.
Nays: none
Motion Passed
Police Assessment Roll
Trustee Williams moved the Williamstown Township Board approve amending the
Resolution 2017-98,
Confirming the 2017 Special assessment Roll for Police Protection within the
Township with the Special Assessment Roll total from $208,150. To 210,475.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion:
For a residential unit the special assessment is $100 and for a commercial unit
is $175
Roll Call Vote: Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Duffy,
Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Kane, Clerk Steinberg and Trustee Williams
Nays: None
Motion Passed
Artist Restricted Funds
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the expenditure
from Dept. 401-751-884.001 for the purchase and installation of playground
equipment not to exceed $8400
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion:
The Funds are in the Restricted Funds gifted by the Artists who participate in
the Art Tour.
This equipment purchase will complete the commitment of the artists to the
Township Hall location.
Funds will also cover installation and site improvements.
Roll Call Vote: Ayes: Trustee Kane, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Williams, Treasurer
Cutshaw, Clerk Steinberg, Trustee Eyster and Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None
Motion Passed
Time Study
Additional input on the Time Study re: hours dedicated to Mow and Snow have
been presented for review.
Election Pay
Clerk Steinberg moved that the Williamstown Township Board approve changes in
the pay rates tor Township election inspectors to $12/hr for training and
payment for mileage from the Township Hall to training site according to IRS
rates. And Further to pay $`12/hr for election day work plus an additional $50
for a full day as precinct chair. Pay rate to be effective immediately and to
include the November 7, 2017 election, provided no overtime policies apply.
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion:
In line with compensation of other municipalities
Roll Call Vote: Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Eyster, Supervisor Bloomquist,
Trustee Kane, Trustee Williams and Clerk Steinberg
Nays: None
Motion Passed
Reports
Niesa to meet November 9.
Road Commission to meet next week
Winter Tax Bills to go out at the end of the month.
Public Comment for agenda & non-agenda items
Opened at 9:24
None
Closed at 9:24
Trustee Duffy moved the Williamstown Township Board adjourn
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg
Supervisor Bloomquist adjourned the Meeting at 9:24
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________________ ______________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor Date
_____________________________________________ _____________
Mark Steinberg, Township Clerk Date
December 13, 2017 Synopsis
WILLIAMSTOWN TOWNSHIP
BOARD OF TRUSTEES MEETING
December 13, 2017 Synopsis
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held its regularly scheduled
monthly meeting on Wednesday, December 13, 2017 at 7:00 PM at the Township
hall, with Supervisor Bloomquist, Treasurer Cutshaw, Clerk Steinberg, and
Trustee Kane present. Trustees Duffy, Eyster, and Williams were absent. The
Board approved the consent agenda consisting of the minutes of the November 8,
2017 Board Meeting , the Minutes of November Planning Commission Meeting and
the following reports: accounts payable paid, accounts payable for approval,
payroll paid, revenue and expenditure report, November revenue report, building
inspector’s report, the Police report and acknowledged receipt of the
Treasurer’s November report . The following additional Board actions were
taken:
Approved the Food Policy revisions to be incorporated into the Financial
Policy.
Approved Resolution 117 to waive the collection of fines for late filing of
Property transfer affidavits.
Approved the pre-payment of $10,000 for the Williamstown-Locke Drain to be
expended from 401-101-982.
Approved the expenditure of a maximum $4400 for the budgeted recommended
upgrades to Township Computers and software to be expensed from 101-191-980 and
728 (elections), 101-215-980 and 728 (Clerk) and 101-253-980 and 728
(Treasurer).
Approved the expenditure of $2036.88 for the remaining balance for the drain
assessment from GL 101-441-813 (Drains-at-large).
The next meeting of the Board is a regular Board meeting on Wednesday, January
10, 2018 at 7:00pm in the Township boardroom at 4990 Zimmer Road.
Township website: http:/www.williamstowntownship.com. Phone 517-655-3193.
Mark Steinberg, Clerk
2018 Meeting Minutes
January 10, 2018
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
January 10, 2018
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the Agenda.
Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustees Kane, Williams, Eyster, and Duffy, and
Clerk Steinberg and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Absent: None
Public Comment for agenda and non- agenda items
Opened at 7:02 PM None.
Closed at 7:02PM
Consent Agenda
Clerk Steinberg moved to approve the consent agenda: Minutes of December 13,
2017 Township Board meeting.
General Fund Accounts Payable paid, check numbers 22277-22294 for a total of
$211,305.80
Payroll paid check numbers 44298-44327 and EFTS 506-511 for a total of
$29,394.55.
General Fund Accounts Payable for approval, check numbers 22295-22309 for a
total of $3,861.22
Police paid check number 1089 for $56,567.98. December Revenue Report
Revenue and expenditure report ending December 31, 2017.
Building Inspector’s Report
Police Report
Litigation Report
Acknowledge receipt of Treasurer’s Report
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Roll Call Vote: Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Williams, Treasurer Cutshaw, Clerk
Steinberg, Trustee
Eyster, and Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: Trustee Kane
Motion Passed
Police Report
Chief Hall reported that Meridian Township Police Department has hired two new
officers. There have been two recent break-ins in the Williamston area, and
seven ID thefts.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Mitchell Road
Trustee Duffy moved that the Williamstown Township Board petition, in the form
of a resolution, the Ingham County Road Commission and/or the Ingham County
Board of Commissioners stating the board’s support for lowering the speed limit
on Mitchell Road with the following points to be included in the resolution:
1. The speed limit should be reduced to 35 MPH.
2. Mitchell Road’s proximity to Williamston Community Schools, specifically
Williamston High School, makes 45 MPH an unsafe speed limit.
3. A current Support letter from Meridian Police Chief Hall
4. Williamston Community Schools Board of Education submitted a letter to the
township expressing its members unanimous support for the speed limit
reduction.
5. A request that any new speed study should be conducted while school is in
session
6. A new petition from Mitchell Road area residents
7. Letter of support from County Commissioner Randy Schafer and State
Representative Sam Singh
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion
State law has changed, making the Township’s position less controlling. Would
be useful to enlist support from various constituencies.
State Police response to informal request was shared with Board members
Motion passed. Budget Policy
Trustee Duffy moved the Williamston Township Board approve the amendments to
Budget Policy 12 to add more funding to Township roads with the addition of a
definition for special projects. Seconded by Trustee Williams.
Discussion:
?   The Policy amendments would reduce budget reserves and increase funding
available for roads.
?   Is the new reserved amount ($800,000) higher than needed?
Roll call vote – Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Eyster, Supervisor Bloomquist,
Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee
Kane, Trustee Williams, Clerk Steinberg
Nays: None. Motion passed. Budget Review
An updated draft budget for FY 2018-19 was distributed for review and
discussion. Supervisor Bloomquist requested that Board members provide any
recommendations by February 1 st . Final draft review and discussion is
scheduled for the February Board meeting. A Public Hearing will be scheduled at
the February meeting.
Senior Center
Treasurer Cutshaw moved that Williamstown Township Board approve a $3,000 grant
to the Williamston Senior Center, 201 School St., Williamston, MI for the
support and enrichment of our senior residents for the fiscal year ending March
31, 2018. The Williamston Senior Center to provide a yearly Revenue and
Expenditure audit report and a monthly calendar of activities to the Township.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Discussion: State Law outlines the requirements within a motion as well as
publication requirements. Role call vote – Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Supervisor
Bloomquist, Trustee Williams, Trustee Eyster, Trustee Duffy, Clerk Steinberg
Nayes: Trustee Kane
Motion passed.
Wireless Communication Towers
Supervisor Bloomquist distributed recommended revisions based on Board
discussion at the January meeting. Please submit any questions or concerns
prior to the February meeting so that there is time to obtain any additional
information before the February Board meeting.
NEW BUSINESS
Crosaires Request
Clerk Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board recognize the Crosaires
Foundation of Williamston as a nonprofit organization operating in the
community for purposes of obtaining charitable gaming licenses.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Discussion: The language of the motion is specified by the State’s Charitable
Gaming Division. Crosaires has provided documentation of IRS designation as a
nonprofit organization.
Roll call vote - Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Duffy,
Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Kane, Clerk Steinberg, Trustee Williams
Nays: None. Motion Passed
507 E. Grand River Lease
Trustee Williams moved the Williamstown Township Board approve a monthly rent
reduction to $1,200 in lieu of replacing the garage door and opener, as
requested by the tenant at at 507 E. Grand River for the balance of the lease.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Discussion: the garage door expense would be similar to the reduced revenue.
Roll Call vote - Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Trustee Williams, Supervisor Bloomquist,
Clerk Steinberg, Trustee Duffy, Treasurer Cutshaw. Nays: Trustee Kane Motion
Passed
Township Hall Furnace
Trustee Williams move the Williamstown Township Board approve the purchase of a
replacement furnace at a cost not to exceed $2,750 with McNamara Heating and
Cooling.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Discussion: The Township was unable to secure bids from local contractors.
Roll call vote – Ayes: Trustee Kane, Trustee Eyster, Trustee Williams,
Supervisor Bloomquist, Clerk
Steinberg, Trustee Duffy, Treasurer Cutshaw
Nays: None
Motion passed.
Willow Village
Trustee Duffy moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Special
Assessment reduction from $3,600 to $3,100 due to the removal of five housing
units for Willow Village, parcel #33-03-07-01-226-003. Seconded by Trustee
Eyster.
Discussion: Supervisor Bloomquist verified that the units had been removed.
Roll call vote – Ayes:   Treasurer Cutshaw, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee
Williams, Trustee Eyster, Trustee Duffy, Clerk Steinberg, Trustee Kane
Nays: None. Motion passed.
Poverty Exemption Guidelines
Clerk Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the 2018 Township
Poverty Guidelines Resolution #97 with the beginning income qualification set
at $18,230 (increase the federal level by a CPI of 1.3%).
Seconded by Trustee Williams.
Discussion: Modified original motion to add the CPI increase.
Roll call vote – Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Duffy,
Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee
Kane, Clerk Steinberg, Trustee Williams
Nays: None. Motion passed.
Hall Rental Refund
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the hall rental
refund of $100 to Jeanne Brown for the rental date of January 20, 2018.
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg
Motion passed.
Reports/Correspondence
NIESA: Purchased new equipment. Have adopted a new investment strategy. All
meetings hereon will be in Williamston.
Road Committee: Is developing a neighborhood funding policy.   Consider
encouraging formation of informal neighborhood associations.
Public Comment for agenda & non-agenda items
Thomas English commented on the effort to lower the Mitchell Road speed limit.
Closed at 9:10pm.
Trustee Kane moved the Williamstown Township Board adjourn
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Supervisor Bloomquist adjourned the Meeting at 9:13pm. Minutes approved by:
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor   Date
Mark Steinberg, Township Clerk   Date
February 14, 2018
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
February 14, 2018
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the Agenda.
Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustees, Kane and Williams, Clerk Steinberg
and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Absent : Trustees Duffy and Eyster
Public Comment for agenda and non- agenda items
Opened at 7:02
Kent Hall of Williamston American Legion spoke of the Travelling Vietnam Wall
coming to Williamston June 21-24 this year. It will be located at the WHS
football field.
Closed at 7:05PM
Consent Agenda
Trustee Williams moved to approve the consent agenda:
Minutes of January 10, 2018 Township Board meeting.
General Funds Accounts Payable Paid checks 22357-22361 for a total of
$14,404.89.
General Funds Accounts Payable Paid checks 22310-22331 and 22345-22349 and
22351 for a total of $14,273.30
Payroll Paid checks 44359- 44486 and EFTS 519-522 for a total of $27,267.69 .
Payroll Paid checks 44328-44358 and EFTs 512-518 for a total of $26,475.46.
General Funds accounts Payable for approval ,check numbers 22332-22344 and
invoice #7081 for a total of $8,180.88
General Fund Accounts Payable for approval, check numbers 22332—22344 and 22350
for a total of $8,180.88.
Revenue and expenditure report ending January 31, 2018.
Building Inspector’s Report
Police Report
Litigation Report
Acknowledge receipt of Treasurer’s Report
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion:
The McNamara bill was approved in January. The cost of a thermostat was added.
Poverty exemption CPI vs Tax increase amount to be adjusted in the future.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Williams, Treasurer Cutshaw, Clerk Steinberg and Supervisor
Bloomquist
Nays: Trustee Kane
Absent: Trustees Duffy and Eyster
Motion Passed
Planning Commission Minutes
Commissioner Dali Geise reviewed the Planning Commission meeting of January
24,2018:
Solar Energy Public Hearing: Lots of citizen input and interest
Barkham Creek Farms application for sup/site plan review was incomplete.
Applicant to have missing information to Township by February 28th to hold
Hearing on March 24th.
Distilleries to be discussed at March 24th meeting.
NEW BUSINESS
Trails- Blue way and River
Treasurer Cutshaw moved Williamstown Township Board support a Trails Committee
being formed to investigate and bring forward a plan for a blue way and
seasonal trail with the possibility of applying for a county/state grant.
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg
Discussion: Many residents have shown interest in being involved.
Motion Passed
Parks Master Plan
Clerk Steinberg movedthe Williamstown Township Board support the Parks and
Recreation Committee and Planning Commission to update the Parks and Recreation
Master Plan in anticipation of possible grant proposals at a cost not to exceed
$3000.
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion: Expense would be for Planning Consultant
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes Supervisor Bloomquist, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustees Kane and Williams and
Clerk Steinberg
Absent : Trustees Duffy and Eyster
Motion Passed
Park Landscaping
Clerk Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board ask the Parks and
Recreation Committee to work with the Williamston Sunrise Rotary on a tree
planting project that will not interfere with the goals of the Master Plan and
at no expense to the Township, with a plan of species and location to be
presented to the board.
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion:
Rotary will donate 100 trees. Focus will be on Native species
Tentative plan is to place them along the Southwest perimeter of the Township
Park
An Eagle scout has indicated an interest in being involved
Source of the trees will likely be the Conservation District
Motion Passed
Road Resurfacing Recommendations
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Supervisor
move forward in obtaining formal bids with the Ingham County Department of
Roads as outlined on the Roads Committee Recommendations for the 2018-19 and
2019-20 fiscal years, with the bids to be provided to the Board after receipt.
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg
Discussion:
Information will be presented to the board after bids received
Motion Passed
Board Meeting Dates for 2018-2019
Clerk Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Board meeting
dates as presented for 2018-19.
Seconded by Treasure Cutshaw
Discussion:
All dates are 2nd Wednesdays a usual except for the August meeting which is
moved to the 3rd Wednesday due to the Primary election.
Motion Passed
PC Appointment
Trustee Kane moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Supervisor’s
recommend appointment of Jim Flore to the Planning Commission for a term
expiring September 2020
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion:
Jim will replace Phil Korson, who resigned due to scheduling conflicts
Jim has expertise from an agricultural perspective
Motion passed
Travis Burn
Trustee Kane moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the requested
variance regarding size of brush pile in the Township Burning Ordinance and
allow Rick Travis to burn the tow brush piles on parcel No. 33-03-03-01-400-
005. Township to be notified of proposed dates at least a week in advance and
immediate neighbors are notified.
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg
Discussion:
Time frame allows Township to notify NIESA of the burn
Motion Passed
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Neighborhood Road Policy
Policy was presented for discussion. Attorney review broutht forth issues for
further consideration before adoption.
Budget Review
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Township board hold a public hearing
on both the 2018-19 Township Budget and ther Police Assessment Roll on March 7,
2018 at 6:00 PM at the Township Hall.
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion:
Income from Police Assessment
Assessors wages
Pay cemetery staff additional for weekend burials
Motion Passed
Wireless Communication Towers
Trustee Kane moved to defer a decision on the draft Wireless Communication
Towers Ordinance until Next month when the other twoTrustees are present.
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion:
Balancing needs of tower companies and residents
Motion Passed
Reports
Departments and Committees
DNR Correspondence: Received a thank you from the DNR Re: the deer check
stations
NIESA: Addressing staffing shortages
Mitchell Rd update: Meeting to be held on 3/21 to review a draft Resolution
Recycling:
Residents have come forward in past with offers of clean fill
Would like to be able to say yes for fill at site for future permanent recycle
on Township Hall property
Board was in consensus of obtaining fill
Public Comment for Agenda and non-agenda items
None
Closed at 8:28
Clerk Steinberg moved to adjourn
Trustee Williams Seconded
Supervisor Bloomquist adjourned the Meeting at 8:29 PM
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________________ ______________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor Date
_____________________________________________ _____________
Mark Steinberg, Township Clerk Date
March 14, 2018
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
March 14, 2018
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:04 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the Agenda.
Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustees Duffy, Eyster, Kane and Williams,
Clerk Steinberg and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Absent: None
Also present: Carolyn Burt, recording secretary
Public Comment for agenda and non- agenda items
Opened at 7:05
None
Closed at 7:05PM
Consent Agenda
Trustee Williams moved to approve the consent agenda:
Minutes of February 14, 2018 Township Board meeting.
General Fund Accounts Payable Paid 22357-for a total of $14,404.89.
General Funds Accounts Payable Paid checks 22352-22361 for a total of
$5,939.28.
Payroll Paid checks 44359- 44486 and EFTS 519-522 for a total of $27,267.69 .
Payroll Paid checks 44359-444386and EFTs 519-522 for a total of $26,642.69.
General Funds accounts Payable for approval ,check numbers 22332-22344 and
invoice #7081 for a total of $8,180.88
General Fund Accounts Payable for approval, check numbers 22362-22375 for a
total of $8,084.49.
Revenue and expenditure report ending February 28, 2018.
Building Inspector’s Report
Police Report
Litigation Report
Acknowledge receipt of Treasurer’s Report
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg
Discussion:
Pulled General Funds accounts Payable Paid and Payroll for correction
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustees Duffy, Eyster and Williams, Treasurer Cutshaw, Clerk Steinberg
and Supervisor Bloomquist
Nays: Trustee Kane
Motion Passed
NEW BUSINESS
Police Assessment Resolution
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Township Board approve Resolution
2018-98, confirming the 2018 Special Assessment Roll for Police Protection
within the Township with the Special Assessment Roll total of $211,675
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion:
Procedures for Assessment questioned
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Supervisor Bloomquist, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustees Duffy, Eyster and
Williams and Clerk Steinberg
Nays: Trustee Kane
Motion Passed
Budget Amendments
Trustee Williams moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve the following
Budget amendments
For the 2017-18 Budget:
Add to                  Reduce            Amount
209-276-980.000   209-276-000(contingency) $ 10,000.00
Capital improvement   fund balance   12,000.00
209-276-955.000 209-276-930.000 $ 200.00
Miscellaneous          Repairs & Maint.
209-276-920.000 same $ 100.00
Utilities
209-276-910.001   209-276-910.003   $ 300.00
Insurance workers comp       Gen. Liability
207-301-955.000 207-301-930.000 $ 150.00
Misc. Repairs & Maintenance
101-400-902.000 101-400-864.000 $ 500.00
Publications conferences & training
101-400-714.000 same $ 350.00
Health Insurance
101-294-714.000 101-294-728.000 $ 400.00
Health Insurance supplies
101-265-807.000 101-265-727.000 $ 300.00
Monthly services supplies-cleaning
101-191-714.000 101-191-725.000 $ 100.00
Health Insurance printing
209-276-702.000 209-276-701.000 $ 100.00
Salaries & Wages Salaries-office staff
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion:
Cemetery fence was paid out of the contingency account and cash account.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustees Williams, Eyster,
Duffy, Kane and
Clerk Steinberg
Motion Passed
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Budget 2018-2019
Clerk Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the 2018-2019
with a beginning
Township Total Fund Equity of $ 2,292,517.00. As of March 31, 2018 with
Department appropriations
As outlined:
Dept 101-Township Board $ 87,340.
Dept 171-Supervisor $ 43,425.
Dept 191-Elections $ 26,165.
Dept 209-Assessor $ 50,385.
Dept 215-Clerk $ 50,195.
Dept 247-Board of Review $ 2,723.
Dept 253-Treasurer $ 56,384.
Dept 265- Building and Grounds $ 64,865.
Dept 276- Cemetery $ 26,000.
Dept 294-Township Office $ 56,177.
Dept 371-Building Inspector $ 27,425.
Dept 400-Planning Commission $ 65,816.
Dept 411-Zoning Administrator $ 435.
Dept 420-Board of Appeals $ 3,031.
Dept 441-Public Works $ 19,721.
Dept 751-Recreation $ 55,594.
Dept 851-Other Expenses $ 500.
Dept 890-Contingency $ 40,000.
Total General Fund Appropriations $676,145.
Dept 301-Police $ 325,323.
Dept 276-cemetery $104,342.
401-Capital Project Fund
Dept 101-Special Projects $ 107,156.
Dept 441-Public Works $ 527.692.
Dept 751-Recreation $ 3,976.
Total 401 Fund Appropriation $ 638,824.
Total Fund Appropriations $1,744,634.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion:
401-751-884.001 is restricted funds for Playground
Road Funding will be addressed after audit.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Supervisor Bloomquist, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustees Duffy, Eyster,
Williams and Clerk Steinberg
Nay: Trustee Kane
Motion Passed
Neighborhood Road Policy
Clerk Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Williamstown
Township Neighborhood Road Policy.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion:
Common area road frontage is included
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustees Eyster, Williams and Duffy, Supervisor Bloomquist, Clerk
Steinberg and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Nay: Trustee Kane
Motion Passed
Wireless Communications
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Township Board adopt the proposed
regulations as presented by McKenna Associates on January 10, 2018.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion:
Too many restrictions.
Allow more height of existing towers
Question the use of “Shall” in wording instead of “Should”
Much of discussion could take place at public hearing
Question the requirement of bonds before building
Roll Call vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Clerk Steinberg, Trustee Eyster and Supervisor
Bloomquist.
Nays: Trustees Kane, Duffy and Williams
Motion Passed
Mitchell Road Resolution
Clerk Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Mitchell Road
Resolution
With further amendments to clarify the particular points made by collaboration
of the Clerk, Supervisor and Treasurer before presenting to the Ingham County
Road department and Ingham County Commissioners.
Seconded by Trustee Duffy
Discussion:
More examples of schools with similar situations
Suggestion of letters of support
Meeting with State Police on Friday at the Township office
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustees Duffy, Eyster, Kane and Williams, Supervisor Bloomquist,
Treasurer Cutshaw and Clerk Steinberg
Nays: none
Motion Passed
Workshop Meeting Dates
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Board
Workshop dates as presented
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg
Discussion: None
Motion Passed
Reports
Departments and Committees
NIESA: Estimate to replace aged fire trucks : $1.7 million/ leasing would cost
$ 154,000 / yr.
Trails
Great turnout at last meeting
April 5th next meeting
Meridian County willing to be involved
Resident willing to grant easement for river trail
Public Comment for Agenda and non-agenda items
Open at 9:13
Tom English, 2095 Mitchell Rd, thanked the Board for support of Mitchell Road
Speed Limit issue
Closed at 9:15
Clerk Steinberg moved to adjourn
Trustee Williams Seconded
Supervisor Bloomquist adjourned the Meeting at 9:16 PM
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________________ ______________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor Date
_____________________________________________ _____________
Mark Steinberg, Township Clerk Date
April 11, 2018
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the Agenda.
Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustees Kane and Duffy, Clerk Steinberg and
Treasurer Cutshaw.
Absent: Trustees Williams and Eyster
Also present, Recording Secretary, Deputy clerk Carolyn Burt.
Public Comment for agenda and non- agenda items
Opened at 7:02
None
Closed at 7:05PM
Consent Agenda
Treasurer Cutshaw moved to approve the consent agenda:
Minutes of March 14, 2018 Township Board meeting.
General Funds Accounts Payable Paid checks 22376-22396 for a total of
$7,333.91.
Payroll Paid checks 44387-44432 and EFTs 523-526 for a total of $34,816.08.
General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval, check numbers 22397-22407 for a
total of $2,923.80.
General Fund Acounts Payable for approval #2, check numbers 22408 and 22409 for
a total of $1,089.00.
Police services check number 1090 for $58,084.56.
Revenue and expenditure report ending March 31, 2018.
Building Inspector’s Report
Police Report
Litigation Report
Acknowledge receipt of Treasurer’s Report
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg
Discussion: None
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Clerk Steinberg, Trustee Duffy and Supervisor
Bloomquist
Nays: Trustee Kane
Absent: Trustees Williams and Eyster
Motion Passed
Police Quarterly Report
Chief Hall, Meridian Police reported:
Interim Chief will be Greg Frenger as Chief Hall is retiring in July
New Criminal Sexual Conduct training will take place for entire force beginning
next month
½ of Cars to be replaced this year and will bear new logo
Radios are scheduled to be replaced next year
Currently fully staffed
2 home invasions investigated and culprits apprehended
Perform Active Shooting drills at local schools
Planning Commission
Chair, Gerald Eidt reviewed the minutes of the March Planning Commission
meeting.
The Planning Commission recommended Ordinance language for small Wineries/ Hard
Cider producers and Small Distillers.
Questions regarding placement and lot size requirements.
Questions for the consultant should be to Wanda by April 18th.
NEW BUSINESS
Pre-Audit
Trustee Kane moved the WilliamstownTownship Board obtain bids for the fiscal
year 17-18 pre-audit and an RFP for pre-audit 18-19 fiscal year.
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Trustees Duffy and Kane, Clerk Steinberg
Nays: Treasurer Cutshaw and Supervisor Bloomquist
Absent: Trustees Williams and Eyster
Motion Passed
Police Contract
Trustee Kane moved the Williamstown Township Board request bids for Police
Services beginning 2019 to include Meridian Township Police, City of
Williamston and Ingham County Sheriff on the contracted services currently with
Meridian Township with a one year contract with option by the Board to extend
for an additional year.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion:
Meridian has had contract 8 years and has great relationship with Township
A one year contract rather than two with option for second year by Township
Motion Passed
Cemetery Mower
Additional bid/s will be brought to the May meeting for discussion regarding
the purchase of a replacement for one of the cemetery mower’s.
Restricted Donation
Trustee Duffy moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the restricted
donation from Prime Housing Group in the amount of $6,000. To be used at the
Township Community Park.
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg
Discussion: Rentals in the Township
Motion Passed
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
February Minutes
Trustee Duffy moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve the corrections to
the Accounts Payable Paid, Payroll Paid and Accounts Payable for Approval and
to reflect the absence of Trustee Duffy from the meeting for February14, 2018
Board Minutes.
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg
Motion carried
Reports:
Departments and Committees
NIESA
Getting bids on new Fire trucks
Promotions of Officers
Trails
Drain commissioner at recent meeting
Enthusiastic Trails group with many volunteers
Parks Committee
Map of species and tree location in board Packet
Planting begins on 21 st at 10 AM
Mitchell Road
Mr and Mrs. English met with the Supervisor and the State Police to discuss the
speed limit
Discussion of slowing traffic
Reflectors
Off road trail on North side
Share the road signs
Public Comment for Agenda & non-agenda items
Bob Barkham, 89 Granite Dr., spoke of his belief that his ongoing plans for
Barkham Farms should be grandfathered in. Is meeting with surveyor/engineer
regarding site plan
Nancy Horton, 5632 Shoeman Rd, stated that the minutes on the website are not
up to date (awaiting approval). Would like more notice of Public hearings on
Website and requests recording of minutes at Board meetings
Closed at 9:25
Announcements and Review
May 12 is Spring Cleanup
Art Tour is May 4-5
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn
Clerk Steinberg Seconded
Supervisor Bloomquist adjourned the meeting at 9:30
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________________ ______________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor Date
_____________________________________________ _____________
Mark Steinberg, Township Clerk Date
May 9, 2018
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Revisions in red on pages 2 and 3 per the June 13 Board meeting.
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 7:00 p.m. at the
Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, Michigan.
Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the Agenda.
Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustees Kane, Duffy, Eyster and Williams,
Clerk Steinberg and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Also present, Recording Secretary, Deputy Clerk Carolyn Burt.
Public Comment for agenda and non- agenda items
None
Closed at 7:03PM
Consent Agenda
Trustee Williams moved to approve the consent agenda:
Minutes of April 11, 2018 Township Board meeting.
General Funds Accounts Payable Paid checks 22410-22422 for a total of
$4,000.39.
Payroll Paid checks 44433-44463 and EFTs 527-533 for a total of $27,341.84.
General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval, check numbers 22423-22439 for a
total of $12,284.65.
Police services check number 109 1091 for $360.00.
Revenue and expenditure report ending April 30, 2018.
Building Inspector’s Report
Police Report
Litigation Report
Acknowledge receipt of Treasurer’s Report
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: Pull Revenue and Expenditure report
Police Services check number should be 1091
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Clerk Steinberg, Trustees Duffy, Eyster and Williams,
Supervisor Bloomquist
Nays: Trustee Kane
Motion Passed
Senior Center
Susan Cockerill, Board President and John Castillo, Director gave an annual
report:
5,000 meals served last year, open 3 days /week
Funded totally by donations
5 computers donated by a grant including introductory classes
Will try to get millage next year and would like input from Township on this
matter
Thanks to Township for donation of $3,000 last year
Capital Area District Library
Julie Chrisinski, Director of the Williamston Branch, presented a report:
Millage up for renewal in August, 1.56 Mils for a 4 year renewal
New location in old Middle School library area will double available space
Close June 3 and reopen at new location June 25
Additional Librarian to be employed
Action Items
Pre-Audit
Trustee Williams moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the engagement
letter with ST&K for the 17-18 pre-audit.
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg
Discussion:
Solicitation of 3 bids for expenditures by policy
Too late this for this year to meet all filing deadlines for Audit
 Division of services by Abraham and Gaffney into ST&K
Clerk Steinberg moved to amend the motion by adding the following: In addition,
the Board reaffirms its intent to conduct a competitive procurement process for
these services for FY 18-19.
Seconded by Trustee Duffy.
Motion passed
Roll Call Vote on the amended motion;
Ayes: Trustees Kane, Duffy, Eyster and Williams, Clerk Steinberg, Treasurer
Cutshaw and Supervisor Bloomquist
Nays: None
Motion Passed
Cemetery Mower
Trustee Duffy moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Purchase of one
Champion XT 25hp w/48” fab mower at a cost not to exceed $ 5,000.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Trustee Duffy moved to amend the motion to specify purchase from Deer Creek
Sales and in the amount of $4,850.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Discussion:  None.
Township has received exceptional services from Deer Creek Sales, and they are
familiar with the equipment to be purchased
The three bids considered were for $4,450, $4,500 and $4,859
Roll Call Vote: Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee
Williams, Trustee Eyster, Trustee Duffy, Clerk Steinberg.
Nays: Trustee Kane
Motion Passed
2018-19 Road Maintainence
Trustee Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board enter into a contract with
Ingham County for the proposed work to be completed 2018-19 with the Township
share not to exceed $478,000. For the following:
Complete any remaining paving prep and chip-seal previously paved/prepared
Barry, Shoeman to Lounsbury,
Complete any remaining paving prep and chip-seal previously paved/ prepared
Gulick, Shoeman to Zimmer,
Paving and prep Milton, Zimmer to Bentley (chip-seal next year),
Chip-seal previously paved/prepared Turner, Burkley to Meridian,
Chip-seal with minor prep Corwin, Twp line/CSX RR to Grand River,
Pave and prep Burkley,Twp line to Grand River,
Pave and prep Barton,Sherwood to Haslett’
Pave and prep Epley, Zimmer to Shaftsburg,
Pave and prep and chip-seal Milton,Williamston to Township line.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: ICRD will be paving Shaftsburg Road as part of their maintenance
program at no cost to Williamstown or Locke Township.
Roll Call vote
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Duffy, Supervisor Bloomquist,
Trustee Kane, Clerk Steinberg and Trustee Williams
Nays: None
Motion carried
DISCUSSION ITEMS
Meals on Wheels to be discussed at “Visioning” meeting in May
Donations for organizations that serve Williamstown residents such as the
Senior Center and Forster Woods.
Hard Cider, Distilleries and Breweries To be action item next month
The terms Cidery,Winery and Distillery refer to buildings and land
May “Visioning “ Meeting/ Workshop
Clerk Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board move the meeting from May
23 to May 30 at 6 PM.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Discussion:
Call it a Workshop
Have suggestions for agenda to Wanda ASAP
Motion passed
Reports
NIESA
Getting bids on new equipment/ possible leasing
Suggest commendation for firefighters from the Township
Trails
Grant proposal to be sought with several cooperating joint efforts
Clean-up from Williamston to Zimmer
Enthusiastic trails group and many volunteers
Parks Committee
75 Trees were planted at Grand River Park with an additional 25 to be planted
Friday May 11, supported by the Williamston Sunrise Rotary club.
Scouts planting seedlings and an Eagle Scout interested in working on benches
Mitchell Road
Resolution and supporting documents were delivered to the ICRD on May 2nd after
delivery of petitions was received. Placed on upcoming County Commissioners
Board meeting as correspondence.
State laws limit options available to the Township and ICRD on slowing traffic.
Speed study may be completed by the County
Road Department will extend paved shoulders as wide as possible during
maintenance.
Assessing
It has been proposed by the State that assessing be conducted at the County
level.
Public Comment for Agenda & non-agenda items
Bob Barkham, 89 Granite Dr., stated his belief that his ongoing plans for
Barkham Farms should be grandfathered in.
Announcements and Review
May 12th is Spring Clean-up and Recycle at the Township Hall
Clerk Steinberg moved to adjourn.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Supervisor Bloomquist adjourned the meeting at 9:11
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________________ ______________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor Date
_____________________________________________ _____________
Mark Steinberg, Township Clerk Date
May 30, 2018
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened a meeting at 6:00 p.m. at
the Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston,
Michigan. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the
Agenda. Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustees Kane, Duffy, Eyster and Williams,
Clerk Steinberg and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Public Comment for agenda and non- agenda items
None
Closed at 6:03PM
Meeting Purpose
The purpose of the meeting was to discuss Board members’ visions for the near
term future of the Township, and to discuss related ideas and strategies. No
policy decisions were made.
Suggested initiatives:
Update zoning ordinances to better conform with current residential and
commercial needs
Record all Board and Planning Commission meetings
Improve playing surfaces on the soccer fields
Prepare the township hall to serve as a shelter in the event of weather
emergencies and other emergencies, in coordination with other appropriate
agencies
Placing signage (message board) on Grand River Ave to inform people of upcoming
events
Support for older adults:
Development of affordable housing for seniors
Host a 5-k fundraiser
Help in hauling junk to the township’s spring clean-up
Protecting and enhancing revenue streams
Enroll with MiClass (an investment pool for township funds)? Need to clarify
our liability if the system crashes or for any reason we cannot access our
funds.
Collection of the tax administration fee. In discussion, concerns seemed to
outweigh support.
Recycling/sustainability
Plan for permanent recycling at the township – if this involves obtaining fill
material, will need a way to assure appropriateness of this material
Possibility of converting neighborhood streetlights to LEDs
Install repository for medications in the township hall
Further cooperation with the City of Williamston
Possible joint Master Planning
Overlay zone for transition area on Grand River Ave east of the city
Collaboration on the blue water trails project
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:58pm
Nancy Williams spoke in support of signage, senior housing, and help with
spring clean-up.
Closed at 8:01pm
Meeting adjourned at 8:03pm
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________________ ______________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor Date
_____________________________________________ _____________
Mark Steinberg, Township Clerk Date
June 13, 2018
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
June 13, 2018
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened a meeting at 7:03 p.m. at
the Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston,
Michigan. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the
Agenda. Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustees Kane, Duffy, Eyster and Williams,
Clerk Steinberg and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Absent: None
Public Comment for agenda and non- agenda items
Opened at 7:05 p.m.
Mickey Martin, 1561 Germany Road, stated opposition to contracting for lawn
mowing services.
Margaret Thornton, 4054 Thatcher Road, also spoke in opposition to contracting
for mowing.
Closed at 7:12 p.m.
Consent Agenda
Trustee Williams moved to approve the consent agenda:
Minutes of the May 30, 2018 Board meeting.
General fund Accounts Payable Paid, check numbers 22440-22454 for a total of
$8219.35.
Payroll Paid check numbers 44464-44498 and EFTs 534-541 for a total of
$29,960.42.
General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval, check numbers 22455-22466 for a
total of $13,552.63 and 22467-22473 for a total of $17,503.
Revenue and Expenditure Report ending May 31, 2018.
May Revenue activity report (GL activity).
Building Inspector’s report.
Litigation Report.
Police Report.
Acknowledge receipt of Treasurer’s Report.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Discussion: The minutes for May 9 were pulled for further discussion later in
the meeting.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Williams, Treasurer Cutshaw, Clerk Steinberg,
Trustee Eyster, Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: Trustee Kane.
Motion Passed.
MiClass – Presentation
Kristen Angel answered questions about MiClass.
MiClass are high quality securities, no stocks
Everything is backed up electronically and with paper copies
There are no transactional fees
Rated AAAm by Standard and Poors
Action Items
Hard Cider, Distilleries and Breweries
Trustee Williams moved that the Williamstown Township Board approve the
recommended Ordinance revisions by the Board for Hard Cider, Distilleries and
Breweries.
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg.
Discussion: Differences in terminology in the revisions are due largely to
State law.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Eyster, Supervisor Bloomquist, Treasurer Cutshaw,
Trustee Williams, Clerk Steinberg
Nays: Trustee Kane
Motion Passed.
Bank Signatories
Trustee Duffy moved that the Williamstown Township board approve the Bank
Signatories Resolution #73 Amendment – 2018.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Discussion: None
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Williams, Trustee
Eyster, Trustee Duffy, Clerk Steinberg, Trustee Kane.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Depository Designation Resolution #116
Trustee Kane moved to table this to the July 11, 2018 Board meeting.
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg.
Discussion: Recommended clarifying which funds to invest in MiClass and
amounts.
Motion Passed
Wayfinding County Grant Resolution
Clerk Steinberg moved that the Williamstown Township Board support by
resolution the grant application by the Ingham County Parks Department for a
county-wide signage plan and to develop a maintenance plan for the signage
system.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Discussion: This is in regard to a uniform signage system that will be used
throughout Ingham County and will not affect the Township’s budget.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Kane, Trustee Eyster, Trustee Williams, Supervisor Bloomquist,
Clerk Steinberg, Trustee Duffy, Treasurer Cutshaw
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
AT&T Right of Way
This is a renewal of a longstanding Right of Way agreement with AT&T related to
the METRO Act. The agreement has been referred to Township’s attorney for
review.
Discussion: Update signatories
Will bring this to the July Board meeting for further consideration.
Server Upgrades
Trustee Eyster moved that Williamstown Township approve the purchase of a
Township server by Secure Checkpoints to be paid out of Capital Outlay, at a
cost not to exceed $5,500.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Discussion: Two estimates were received from Secure Checkpoints to purchase a
new server for the Township. No other bids were sought due to the ongoing
responsibility of maintaining and updating the server, software and computers
by Secure Checkpoints. The current server is out of warranty.
Concern over consistency with Township bid policy
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Supervisor Bloomquist, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee
Williams, Clerk Steinberg
Nays: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Kane
Motion Passed.
Senior Services
Clerk Steinberg moved that the Williamstown Township Board approve support for
senior citizen services through contributions of $3,000 to the Williamston
Senior Center, $200 to the Tri-County Office on Aging for the Meals on Wheels
program, and $300 to St. Katherine’s Church for the Forster Woods Senior
Program following confirmation of their not-for-profit status, from GL 101-751-
883-000.
Seconded by Trustee Duffy.
   Discussion: Is the Township is setting precedent by funding these
organizations?
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Williams, Trustee
Eyster, Trustee Duffy, Clerk Steinberg
Nays: Trustee Kane
Motion passed
Resolution of Appointment
Trustee Williams moved that the Williamstown Township Board adopt the
Resolution Setting Forth Hearing for Loss or Damage to Livestock by a Dog,
Appointment of Special Master Pursuant to MCLA 287.280.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Discussion: A hearing was requested by a Township resident.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Duffy, Supervisor Bloomquist,
Trustee Kane, Clerk Steinberg, Trustee Williams.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
I-1 Zoning Discussion
A resident represented by Trustee Kane has expressed interest in expanding the
permitted use of his property
The current zoning requirements may be too restrictive and some of the
terminology may be out-dated
Consensus of the Board to have the Planning Commission review uses in the I-
1 district.
Mowing
Trustee Williams moved that the Williamstown Township Board continue the mowing
of the Township Park, Township Hall, and Branch school by staff as the duties
of staff, at these properties are inclusive of other work such as field
dragging, mulching, weeding, cleaning, etc., that is performed on a regular
basis which encompasses much more than just mowing and trimming.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Discussion:
In previous meetings there had been discussion of contracting for mowing and
trimming as a possible cost-savings measure.
Board members want to maintain current staff. In addition to mowing and
trimming staff perform many other duties, including maintenance and cleaning.
It was acknowledged that they do an excellent job
Contracting for mowing in addition to maintaining staff would be an unwarranted
cost increase.
Motion Passed.
May 9, 2018 Minutes
Trustee Eyster moved the Board accepted the minutes of the May 9 meeting with
two revisions: 1)in the discussion of Pre-Audit, page 2, add a third bullet
Division of services by Abraham and Gaffney into ST&K,” and add two discussion
points under Cemetery Mower, page 3, “Township has received exceptional service
from Deer Creek Sales and they are familiar with the equipment to be purchased”
and “The three bids considered were for $4,450, $4,500, and $4,859.”
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw
Motion Passed.
Reports
NIESA
NIESA is obtaining bids for equipment.
The next NIESA meeting is June 14, 2018.
Trails
Supervisor Bloomquist indicated that the Township is preparing a grant
application to obtain funds from the County. More information will come at the
July Board meeting.
Parks Committee
Discussion on the best way to schedule upcoming meetings.
Supervisor Bloomquist mentioned a possible Civil War Reenactment at the
Township Park next year. A proposal would need to come before the Board for
approval
Mitchell Road
Ingham County is doing a speed study on the road. The study will go to the
State Police for evaluation when completed.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 9:15 p.m.
Mickey Martin thanked the Board for the motion supporting staff duties
Margaret Thornton thanked the Board for supporting staff. She also commented on
removal of street signage on Grand River Ave.
Closed at 9:18 p.m.
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Eyster.
Motion Passed.
Meeting adjourned at 9:20 p.m.
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________________ ______________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor Date
_____________________________________________ _____________
Mark Steinberg, Township Clerk Date
July 11, 2018
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
July 11, 2018
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened a meeting at 7:00 p.m. at
the Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston,
Michigan. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the
Agenda. Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustees Kane, Duffy, Eyster and Williams,
Clerk Steinberg and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Absent: None
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:03 pm.
None.
Closed at 7:03 p.m.
Consent Agenda
Trustee Williams moved to approve the consent agenda:
Minutes of the June 13, 2018 Board meeting.
General fund Accounts Payable Paid, check numbers 22474-22486 for a total of
$12,795.67
General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval, check numbers 22487-22489 for a
total of $5,791 and 22490-22498 for a total of $4,324,36, and 22499 for a total
of $123.45.
Revenue and Expenditure Report ending June 30, 2018.
June Revenue activity report (GL activity).
Building Inspector’s report.
Litigation Report.
Police Report.
Acknowledge receipt of Treasurer’s Report.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Discussion: The Payroll Paid report was pulled for discussion later in the
meeting.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Williams, Treasurer Cutshaw, Clerk Steinberg,
Trustee Eyster, Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: Trustee Kane.
Motion Passed.
Quarterly Report by Meridian police
Assistant Chief Plaga gave the report, as Chief Hall has retired effective June
30. The annual Police Academy will begin on September 6 and run through
November; Township residents are invited to enroll. Calls for service are much
higher so far in 2018 compared to 2017. The Department will participate in
National Night Out on August 7. There has been an increase in reports of
counterfeit bills being passed at businesses along the interstate corridors.
MiClass Resolution
Trustee Williams moved the MiClass resolution be tabled until the Board adopts
a revised Financial Policy to address the requirements for investment in
MiClass.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Discussion: Treasurer will continue to gather information requested by the
Board.
Motion passed
AT&T Right of Way
Trustee Eyster moved the Board approve the extension of the Metro Right of Way
Permit for AT&T.
Seconded by Trustee Williams.
Discussion: the Township attorney reviewed the extension and saw no issues with
the language.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Eyster, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Kane,
Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Williams, Clerk Steinberg
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Park House Lease
Trustee Williams moved the Board offer to renew the lease for one year to
Matthew and Heather Euliss for $1,200/month beginning September 1, 2018 with
the same conditions as agreed to in the current lease.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Discussion: A Township resident has volunteered to develop recommendations as
to the long-term uses or disposition of the house.
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Trustees Kane, Wlliams, and Eyster, Clerk Steinberg, Treasurer Cutshaw,
Supervisor Bloomquist
Nays: Trustee Duffy
Motion Passed.
Cemetery Column Repair
Clerk Steinberg moved the Board approve the bid from Asper Masonry for the
necessary column repair not to exceed $10,000 to allow for the rebuild of the 6
main columns and the balance to be used to rebuild or repair the smaller
columns, as funding permits. Bid price to include all materials and supplies
necessary for the work.
Seconded by Trustee Williams.
Discussion: The Township Cemetery Committee is very interested in having this
work done.
Need to verify contractor license and insurance
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Williams, Trustee Kane, Clerk Steinberg,
Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Duffy, Truster Eyster
Nays: None
Motion Passed
Township Park Pavilion Piers
Trustee Eyster moved the Board approve the bid to install field stone on the
concrete piers of the park pavilion from Asper Masonry not to exceed $2,400 of
restricted funds, General Ledger 401-751-881.000 (Park Restricted).
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Williams, Trustee
Eyster, Clerk Steinberg, Trustee Kane.
Nays: Trustee Duffy
Motion Passed.
Reports
NIESA: There is further exploration of dry hydrants.
Red Cedar River Blueway: Supervisor Bloomquist indicated that the Township is
preparing a grant application to obtain funds from the County. More information
will come at the August Board meeting.
Parks Committee: Possibility of civil war reenactment during Jubilee week
Mitchell Road: Waiting for a response to our request for a lower speed limit
from Michigan State Police.
Review of Payroll Paid Report
Skip in check numbers is due to an unjournalized check to the Michigan
Department of Treasury for $457.55. Expenditures should be reported separately
for EFTs in future reports. The correct total payroll expenditures for June is
$28,724.46.
Trustee Williams moved to approve payment of payroll check numbers 44500-44538
and EFTs 542-547 for a total of $28,724.46.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Williams, Trustee
Eyster, Clerk Steinberg, Trustee Duffy.
Nays: Trustee Kane.
Motion Passed.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:35 pm.
None.
Closed at 8:35 pm.
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg
Motion Passed.
Meeting adjourned at 8:36 p.m.
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________________ ______________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor Date
_____________________________________________ _____________
Mark Steinberg, Township Clerk Date
August 15, 2018
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
August 15, 2018
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened a meeting at 7:00 p.m. at
the Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston,
Michigan. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the
Agenda. Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustees Kane, Duffy, and Eyster, Clerk
Steinberg and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Absent: Trustee Williams.
Public Comment for agenda and non- agenda items
Opened at 7:04 pm.
None.
Closed at 7:04 p.m.
Consent Agenda
Treasurer Cutshaw moved to approve the consent agenda:
Approve the minutes of the July 11, 2018 Board meetings.
Receipt of PC minutes of July 25, 2018
General Fund Accounts Payable Paid, check numbers 22500-22520 for a total of $
9,029.75
Payroll Paid check numbers 44539-44586 and EFTs 548—554 for a total of $
28,126.88 (phys. check amount.
General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval, check numbers 22521-22541 for a
total of $5,172.95 and 22542-22,547 for a total of $7698.63.
Police Accounts Payable for Approval, check number 1093 for $2,225.00.
Revenue and Expenditure report ending July 31, 2018
July Revenue activity report (GL activity)
Building inspectors report
Litigation Report
Police Report
Acknowledge receipt of Treasurer’s Report
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Discussion: Suggestion was made to include voided checks as a separate item.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Treasurer Cutshaw, Clerk Steinberg, Trustee Eyster,
Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: Trustee Kane.
Motion Passed.
Pavilion Rental Refund
Trustee Kane moved that the Williamston Township Board refund the rental fee of
$40 along with the deposit for the Pavilion rental by Rory Ward.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Discussion: Supervisor Bloomquist explained that the Pavilion had been cleaned
too far in advance of the event and that the renters had to clean the Pavilion
at the event.
Motion passed
Eagle Scout Project
Trustee Duffy moved that the Williamstown Township Board approve the
recommended expenditure of the Parks Committee for $500.00 from GL
101.751.881.000 toward Patrick Meehan’s Eagle Scout project of the construction
of five new benches, removal of deteriorated benches and repair of existing
benches.
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg.
Discussion: Patrick will do a presentation to the Board once the project is
completed and provide an accounting of expenditures.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Eyster, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Kane,
Treasurer Cutshaw, and Clerk Steinberg
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Annual Joint Meeting – City of Williamston
Clerk Steinberg moved that the Williamstown Township Board approve a Board
meeting on 8-29-18 at 6:30 p.m. for review and approval of grant application
resolution, followed by hosting a joint meeting with the City of Williamston on
8-29-18 at 7:00 p.m.
Seconded by Trustee Kane.
Discussion: At 6:30 the Board will review the final draft application for the
funding through the Ingham County Parks and Recreation grant program.
Motion Passed
Blueway Trail
Trustee Eyster moved that the Williamstown Township Board approve the submittal
of the Rotary Grant Application along with the commitment of $3000.00 match
from the 401 fund only if the Township is awarded a grant for the Red Cedar
clean up cost from the Ingham County Parks and Recreation Grant program.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Trustees Kane, Duffy, and Eyster, Clerk Steinberg, Treasurer Cutshaw, and
Supervisor Bloomquist
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
Reports
NIESA: The department had two recent deaths of firefighters. New trucks were
ordered as per their plan. NIESA is looking for qualified firefighters and
qualified EMS to join their staff.
Parks Committee: The civil war reenactment could be scheduled during Jubilee
week, working around Jubilee activities. Williamston Middle School will use the
park for cross country events, and the team will help with some tasks at the
park. There was a grass fire at the park but there was no damage.
Mitchell Road: Waiting for a response to our request for a lower speed limit
from Michigan State Police. There has been no further update.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:05 pm.
None.
Closed at 8:05 pm.
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg.
Motion Passed.
Meeting adjourned at 8:07 p.m.
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________________ ______________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor Date
_____________________________________________ _____________
Mark Steinberg, Township Clerk Date
September 12, 2018
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
September 12, 2018
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened a meeting at 7:00 p.m. at
the Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston,
Michigan. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the
Agenda. Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustees Kane, and Eyster, Clerk Steinberg and
Treasurer Cutshaw.
Absent: Trustees Williams and Duffy.
Public Comment for agenda and non- agenda items
Opened at 7:02 pm.
None.
Closed at 7:02 p.m.
Consent Agenda
Treasurer Cutshaw moved to approve the consent agenda:
Approve the minutes of the August 15 & 29, 2018 Board meetings.
General Fund Accounts Payable Paid, check numbers 22548 - 22557 for a total of
$2,768.17.
Payroll Paid check numbers 44587 - 44651 and EFTs 555 - 560 for a total of
$35,143.63 (physical check amount).
General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval, check numbers 22558-22565 for a
total of $5,460.77 and 22566-22570 for a total of $1,093.79. 
Revenue and Expenditure report ending August 31, 2018
August Revenue activity report (GL activity)
Building inspector’s report
Litigation Report
Police Report
Acknowledge receipt of Treasurer’s Report
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg.
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Clerk Steinberg, Trustee Eyster, Supervisor
Bloomquist.
Nays: Trustee Kane.
Motion Passed.
Eagle Scout Project
Patrick Meehan of Boy Scout Troup 63 presented about the five new benches he
built and the bench repairs he performed as an Eagle Scout project at the
Township park. There was a group of scouts who helped in the project, which
totaled over 100 hours. He received $500 from the Township for materials for
the project and obtained the remainder of the needed funds from a Go Fund Me
campaign he initiated.
Audit Review
Brenda Seelman of Layton & Richardson presented the audit report for the fiscal
year ending March 31, 2018. The township obtained the highest rated position
available. She called attention to the management discussion. Overall, there
was an increase in assets and decrease in liabilities, resulting in an improved
net position for the township. Police services are funded by a special
assessment which decreased slightly from last year. Recommendations going
forward include an increased segregation of duties in cash receiving.
Brookstone Estates Extension
Trustee Kane moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the requested one
year extension for the Brookstone Estates Preliminary Plat approval.
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg.
Discussion: None.
Motion Passed.
Ingham County Road Department Contract
Trustee Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Ingham County
Road Department (ICRD) contract as presented for 2018 and approved by the
Ingham County Board of Commissioners with combined estimated cost at $453,000.
Seconded by Trustee Kane.
Discussion: Ingham County will contribute $45,000 towards the 2018 contracted
work.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Clerk Steinberg, Trustee Eyster, Supervisor
Bloomquist, Trustee Kane.
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
Swingset Purchase
Clerk Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the purchase of a
3-bay swing set from Platinum Playgrounds LLC at a cost not to exceed $7,605.00
from the Art Tour restricted funds GL #401-751-884-001, to be placed at the
Township park with the location at the park to be determined by the Parks
Committee in conjunction with staff.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Clerk Steinberg, Trustees Kane and Eyster, Supervisor
Bloomquist.
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
Election Computer Upgrades
Trustee Kane moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the purchase of two
Inspiron 15 5000 computers at a cost not to exceed $1350.00 GL# 101-191-980.000
for elections.
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg.
Discussion: The two laptops will be used exclusively for the elections.
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Clerk Steinberg, Trustees Eyster and Kane, Supervisor
Bloomquist.
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
Planning Commission Appointments
Trustee Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the appointment of
Annette Davis, Dali Giese, and Rob Stanford, each to a three year term expiring
September 2021 on the Planning Commission.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Discussion: Membership terms are staggered.
Motion Passed.
Township Phones
Township phones are in need of an upgrade. Frontier’s service has been poor.
The Township is exploring the possible switch to VOIP for phone service. Rates
are comparable to Frontier and phones would be provided at no cost to the
Township.
Water Trail
The grant has been submitted to the County and we are getting letters of
support from various groups.
Reports
NIESA: NIESA is getting a command vehicle for use in on-the-job travel. Trustee
Kane reported on a house burn he arranged on his property for training purposes
which was attended by about 40 firefighters from Williamston, Webberville,
Dansville, and Perry.
Police Services: A request for bids is out for law enforcement agencies to
submit for services to the Township.
Parks Committee: There will be a middle school cross country meet at the park
on Thursday, September 13th.
MTA Workshop: There is Michigan Townships Association workshop for any
interested Board members on September 26th. Encourage attendance due to topics
covered by MTA legal counsel.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:35 pm.
None.
Closed at 8:35 pm.
Adjournment and Review
Clerk Steinberg moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Motion Passed.
Meeting adjourned at 8:35 p.m.
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________________ ______________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor Date
_____________________________________________ _____________
Mark Steinberg, Township Clerk Date
October 10, 2018
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
October 10, 2018
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened a meeting at 7:00 p.m. at
the Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston,
Michigan. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the
Agenda. Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustees Kane, Duffy, Williams and Eyster,
Clerk Steinberg and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Absent: None.
Public Comment for agenda and non- agenda items
Opened at 7:03 pm.
Barb Davidson, Ingham County 911 Center, on the 911 Central Dispatch
Proposition on the November 6 ballot.
This will be a surcharge on each phone in service. Funds will also cover all
equipment purchases throughout the county along with any cell towers that may
need to be installed to insure accurate coverage.
Closed at 7:12 p.m.
Consent Agenda
Clerk Steinberg moved to approve the consent agenda:
Approve the minutes of the September 12, 2018 Board meeting
General Fund Accounts Payable Paid, check numbers 22571-22587 for a total of
$9373.26, and 22595-22597 for a total of $1175.77, and 22602-22603 for a total
of $315.
Police Fund Accounts Payable Paid, check 1094, for $59,924.13
Payroll Paid check numbers 44652-44685and EFTs 561-564 for a total of
$27,530.75 (phys. check amount).
General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval, check numbers 22588-22594 for a
total of $7550.73 and 22598-22601 and 22604-22605 for a total of $4878.64.
Police Fund Accounts Payable for Approval, checks 1095-1096 for a total of
$1791.66.
Revenue and Expenditure report ending September 30, 2018
September Revenue activity report (GL activity)
Building inspector’s report
Litigation Report
Police Report
Acknowledge receipt of Treasurer’s Report
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Clerk Steinberg, Trustee Eyster, Trustee Williams,
Trustee Duffy, Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: Trustee Kane.
Motion Passed.
Ingham County Sheriff’s Office Report (Justice Complex), Sheriff Wrigglesworth
Sheriff Wrigglesworth reviewed the funding proposal that was passed in August
for the new jail, sheriff’s office, and district court. Jail will be done by
2022 and the remainder will be done as soon as possible after that, possibly
2023. There may be merit to building the complex closer to Lansing. There is no
longer deer pick-up service by his department. He is opposed to the marijuana
legalization initiative.
Police Report for Meridian Township, Chief Plaga
The Department will host a Halloween Open House on October 27. There is a
Certified car seat inspector to help residents learn how to install seats
appropriately. They have car seats available for people who can’t afford them.
There were 17 participants of the Citizens academy. There has been an uptick in
motor vehicle/deer collisions.
Planning Commission Report, Gerald Eidt
The October 3rd Planning Commission meeting recommended approval the Brookstone
final preliminary Plat, with conditions The PC has recommended solar regulation
for review and approval of the Township Board. The PC has formed a sub-
committee to address possible revisions in the I1 regulations,
ACTION ITEMS
Meridian Contract
Trustee Williams moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Meridian
Township Police Contract for 2019 through 2021.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: Three-year contract allows longer-term budget cost projection.
Reduced property owner assessment will continue in FY 2018-19.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Clerk Steinberg, Trustee Eyster, Supervisor
Bloomquist, Trustee Williams, Trustee Duffy.
Nays: Kane.
Planning Commission
Clerk Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board ask the Planning
Commission to recommend revisions to the Zoning Ordinance regarding Farm
Animals to be in compliance with GAAMPS, to allow Event Centers and to move
forward with a Public Hearing for revisions to the I-1 district.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: A subcommittee to look into the possibility of new signage for the
Township will consist of Mark Steinberg, Kevin Duffy and John Kane.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Clerk Steinberg, Trustee Eyster, Supervisor
Bloomquist, Trustee Kane, Trustee Duffy.
Nays: None.
Cemetery Pillars
Trustee Williams moved the Williamstown Township Board approve $3200.00 in
additional cost to the restoration of Summit Cemetery Pillars.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: Work initiated earlier than anticipated. 2019 cost will reflect the
work done in 2018.
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Treasurer Cutshaw, Clerk Steinberg, Trustee Kane,Trustee
Eyster, Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None.
Budget Meeting
Trustee Williams moved the Williamstown Township Board change the date for the
Budget workshop from October 24th to December 5th at 6:00 PM,
Seconded by Trustee Duffy.
Discussion: Board members please send comments, suggestions to Supervisor
Bloomquist.
Motion Passes
DISCUSSION
Phone system: Staff are working with Frontier to improve system maintenance and
performance.
Recreational Marijuana Ordinance: If recreational marijuana passes with the
upcoming election, the Township would have to opt out by ordinance if it wanted
to impose restrictions. Concesses of the Board that this is the direction the
Township should take at this time.
Dangerous Building Ordinance: We have at least 3 homes in the area that aren’t
being taken care of. We need to think about what to do when we have these. Put
on the agenda for November for further discussion. Sample language was provided
for review.
Reports
NIESA: Trustee Kane submitted an article to the Fowlerville newspaper about the
house burn. The need for firefighter recruits continues. Fire trucks have been
ordered. NIESA will obtain a new command vehicle through the State of Michigan.
Pancake breakfast is Saturday, 8-11 a.m.
Auditor Report: Treasurer Cutshaw explained the letter from the auditors to
improve financial controls. Smaller entities have issues with separation of
duties. Supervisor Assistant Kranz is now trained to do the relevant financial
tasks needed to conform to the Auditor recommendations.
Park House: Pam Shaheen has agreed to look into the future use of the recently
acquired land and house within the park and may be reaching out to Board
members for input.
Township Truck: The truck needs at least $3000 in repairs over the next few
months, and probably a good deal more in the coming year or so, based on
analysis by local mechanics. It is a 2006 truck that the Township has had for
10 years. It was recommended that the Township look into replacement of the
vehicle.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 9:21 pm.
None.
Closed at 9:22 pm.
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg.
Motion Passed.
Meeting adjourned at 9:23 p.m.
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________________ ______________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor Date
_____________________________________________ _____________
Mark Steinberg, Township Clerk Date
November 14, 2018
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
November 14, 2018
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened a meeting at 7:00 p.m. at
the Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston,
Michigan. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the
Agenda. Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustees Kane, Duffy, Williams and Eyster,
Clerk Steinberg and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Absent: None.
Public Comment for agenda and non- agenda items
Opened at 7:03 pm.
Terry Lutz, 6055 Lounsberry Rd., Williamston. Regarding the proposed Township
solar regulations, specifically height requirements.
Robert Barkham, Jr., 89 Granite, Williamston. Regarding Barkham Farms property
on Haslett Road and site plan required by the Township.
Closed at 7:20 p.m.
Consent Agenda
Clerk Steinberg moved to approve the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the minutes of the October 10, 2018 Board meeting
General Fund Accounts Payable Paid, check numbers 22606-22624, for a total of
$13,647.70.
Payroll Paid check numbers 44686-44716, and EFTs 565-573, for a total of
$30,250.68 (physical check amount).
General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval, check numbers 22625-22633 for a
total of $3442.58, and check numbers 22634-22637, for a total of $3,054.05.
Revenue and Expenditure report ending October 31, 2018
October Revenue activity report (GL activity)
Budget Amendment
Building inspector’s report
Litigation Report
Police Report
Acknowledge receipt of Treasurer’s Report
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Clerk Steinberg, Trustee Eyster, Trustee Williams,
Trustee Duffy, Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: Trustee Kane.
Motion Passed.
Special Use Permit Escrow Fee – Jackson Metal Cleaning
Trustee Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board approve a reduced
beginning escrow fee to $1500.00 for the special use permit application of
Jackson Metal Cleaning located at 1492 E. Grand River Rd. Williamston,
Michigan.
Seconded by Trustee Duffy.
Discussion: None. 
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Clerk Steinberg, Trustee Eyster, Supervisor
Bloomquist, Trustee Williams, Trustee Duffy, and Trustee Kane.
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
Police Assessment Roll
Trustee Duffy moved the Williamstown Township Board approve amending Resolution
2018-98, confirming the 2018 special assessment roll for police protection
within the Township with the special assessment roll total revised from
$211,675 to $211,775
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Clerk Steinberg, Trustee Eyster, Supervisor
Bloomquist, Trustee Williams, Trustee Duffy.
Nays: Trustee Kane.
Motion Passed.
Solar Regulations
Clerk Steinberg moved to table for one month for further study the Williamstown
Township proposed solar regulations as presented by the Planning Commission.
Seconded by Trustee Kane.
Motion Passed.
Truck
Trustee Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the expenditure of
up to a maximum of $35,500 towards the purchase of a replacement vehicle and
plow for the Township, to be paid out of contingency and allocated
appropriately. The Township Officers will use due diligence and agree on the
purchase
Seconded by Trustee Williams.
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Clerk Steinberg, Trustee Eyster, Supervisor
Bloomquist, Trustee Williams, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Kane.
Nays: None.
Dangerous Building Ordinance
The Board discussed a Dangerous Building Ordinance. The Board will do more
research before considering such an ordinance and continue discussion.
Roads
Trustee Eyster reported on the Road Committee findings. The Committee reviewed
the status of the condition of Township roads. The committee recommends the
Township hire a consultant to help the Township establish a long term plan on
maintaining the Township roads and to consider asking residents to approve a
road millage. Supervisor Bloomquist will look into what Meridian Township is
doing and what their RFP included related to the consultant they have recently
hired along with a suggested RFP for consulting services.
Proposed Budget
A preliminary budget was passed out to the Board members. Supervisor Bloomquist
stated the CPI is 2.5% for next year. She explained that there may be an
increase in recycling costs which is included in this budget. The assessors’
pay was increased and is reflected in the budget. The draft State bill is
considering making the 1% admin fee for assessing mandatory. At this time, the
Township does not collect an admin fee to cover the cost of assessing and tax
collection. A special Board workshop for the proposed budget will take place on
Wednesday, December 5, 2018 at 6:00 p.m. at the Township hall.
Recreational Marijuana Ordinance
Trustee Kane moved to hold a public hearing at the December Board of Trustees
meeting regarding the adoption of a recreational marijuana opt-out ordinance.
Clerk Steinberg seconded.
Discussion: An opt-out ordinance would prohibit marijuana facilities, such as
retail sales outlets, in the Township. It would not affect medical marijuana
use or personal use as allowed by the recent marijuana legalization initiative.
Motion Passed.
Reports
Election: Clerk Steinberg stated that our Township had a 73.9% turnout overall.
Results of the election for just the township are posted on the Township hall’s
doors and are available on the Township website.
NIESA: Trustee Kane said they are still waiting for delivery of the new trucks.
They’ve been trying to update their standard procedures, including mileage
reimbursements for training, etc. Paul Griffiths stepped down as chair And
Franz Wilbrink was appointed as interim chair until board elections. Sandy
Weldon was moved up as vice-chair in the interim. NIESA has been hiring full
time people to staff the center.
MTA Ingham County: Trustee Eyster and Supervisor Bloomquist went to the recent
meeting. Larry Merrill is retiring as Executive Director after 42 years.
Farmland Preservation: We have Township residents who have applied to the
program.
Supervisor Bloomquist thanked Trustee Williams for his service to the country
as well as his service on the Township Board.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 9:02 pm.
None.
Closed at 9:02 pm.
Adjournment and Review
Clerk Steinberg moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Motion Passed.
Meeting adjourned at 9:05 p.m.
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________________ ______________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor Date
_____________________________________________ _____________
Mark Steinberg, Township Clerk Date
December 12, 2018
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
December 12, 2018
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened a meeting at 7:00 p.m. at
the Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston,
Michigan. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the
Agenda. Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustees Kane, Duffy, and Eyster, Clerk
Steinberg and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Absent: Trustee Williams.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Public comment was opened at 7:02 p.m.
None.
Closed at 7:02 p.m.
Consent Agenda
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the minutes of the November 14, 2018 Board meeting
General Fund Accounts Payable Paid, check numbers 22638-22651, for a total of $
40,804.72.
Payroll Paid check numbers 44717-44777, and EFTs 574-577, for a total of
$$27,453.51 (phys. check amount).
General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval, check numbers 22652-22665 for a
total of $9,276.23, and check numbers 22666-22672, for a total of $1,519.37.
Revenue and Expenditure report ending November 30, 2018
November Revenue activity report (GL activity)
Building inspector’s report
Litigation Report
Planning Commission minutes
Acknowledge receipt of Treasurer’s Report
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Clerk Steinberg, Trustee Eyster, Trustee Duffy,
Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: Trustee Kane.
Motion passed.
Public Hearing: Marijuana Opt Out Ordinance
Supervisor Bloomquist opened the Public Hearing by noting that the Township
Board was considering adopting an ordinance opting out of approving
recreational marijuana facilities in the Township. This action, if adopted,
would not restrict personal recreational use as approved by the passage of
Proposal 1 in November. Before taking action, the Board wants to solicit
comments from residents. Supervisor Bloomquist asked that comments be limited
to 3 minutes, per established policy.
The following individuals made comments in person:
Andrew Stickle (speaking on behalf of his family farm, 5271 N. Williamston Rd.,
Williamston) – Supports the Township opting in to medical and recreational
marijuana. His family is interested in starting a grow operation on their
family farm and potentially employing people as well. He also provided
supplemental written materials.
Adam Spina, 401 Winding River Road, Superintendent, Williamston Community
Schools – Supports opting out of marijuana growing in the Township due to
potential impact on Williamston students.
Edward Shand, 1388 Milton Rd., – Supports opting out of recreational marijuana.
He doesn’t support recreational but is ok with medical marijuana, properly
controlled, for the protection of children and some adults.
The following residents submitted comments via e-mail:
Irene Foor-Bridges, 4030 Meridian Rd., Okemos – opposed to having recreational
marijuana facilities in the Township.
Mickey Martin, 1561 Germany Rd., Williamston – supports a decision to opt out
of recreational marijuana in the Township. Can be reconsidered once the State
decides implementation strategy.
Jonathan Brandt, 4725 N. Branch Rd., Williamston – asks the Township leadership
to prevent any marijuana dispensaries in the Township.
Rebecca Scott, 4301 Courtside Dr., Williamston – supports the Township opting
out of recreational marijuana, citing potential safety and addiction issues.
Howard Gregson, 1015 Gulick Rd., Haslett – Does not support the Opt out
ordinance if facilities can be restricted to commercial districts. Could be an
economic benefit to the Township.
John Merrill, 4223 Vanneter Rd., Williamston – Supports the Township not opting
out of marijuana facilities. The Township should honor the vote of the citizens
to allow recreational use.
Public Hearing Closed at 7:20 p.m.
Planning Committee Report
Gerald Eidt, Chair of the Planning Commission, recapped the meeting held
November 28, 2018. The Commission approved the election of the current Chair,
Gerald Eidt, Vice Chair, Rob Stanford, and Secretary, Jocelyn Brown-Timm. A
public hearing is scheduled for January 23, 2019 for Jackson Metal Cleaning.
The Commission reviewed draft language for use of an automatic pool cover in
place of a fence. The Commissioners want more information about the use of
automatic covers and what other communities are doing to address this issue. A
motion was passed to table this issue until the January 23, 2019 meeting.
Discussion will continue regarding Zoning Ordinance language for farm animals
and event centers at the January meeting. Board Trustees asked questions about
solar regulations.
Solar Regulations
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Township adopt the proposed solar
regulations as presented by the Planning Commission with the addition of GZ-
Planned Development and Planned Development Districts being added to PP(5)a(ii)
and height limitation of 15 ft. be changed to 20 ft.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Clerk Steinberg, Trustee Eyster, Supervisor
Bloomquist, Trustee Duffy, and Trustee Kane.
Nays: None.
Motion passed.
Recreational Marijuana Opt Out Ordinance
Trustee Kane moved the Williamstown Township Board table action on the
Marihuana Opt Out Ordinance to the February 13th Board Meeting.
Seconded by Cutshaw.
Discussion: Members of the Board wanted more time to gather information on the
subject before adopting the Opt out Ordinance. Uncertainty over how the State
will administer recreational marijuana is a factor.
Motion Passed.
Rental Refund
Clerk Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the refund of the
hall rental fee of $100.00 to Susan Gray due to unmitigated circumstances.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Discussion: None.
Motion Carried.
Discussion Items:
Dangerous Building Ordinance
Dangerous Building Ordinance will be discussed at the January 9, 2019 Board of
Trustees Meeting.
Proposed Budget
Supervisor Bloomquist reported on the December 5, 2018 Budget Workshop. The
Board discussed potential changes to the budget including some increases for
mileage and consulting costs. Also discussed was in which funds various items
should be placed. The new truck purchase launched discussion to create a line
item in 401 (Special Projects) for future large purchases to allow for savings
over time with Board consensus
Drains
Clerk Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board pay the balance of the
drain invoice that is over $20,000 out of Special Projects 401-101-982.000.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Discussion: The Board discussed paying it off to avoid paying interest, which
compounds similar to a mortgage.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Clerk Steinberg, Trustee Eyster, Supervisor
Bloomquist, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Kane.
Nays: None.
Motion passed.
Roads RFP
A proposed RFP will be presented at the January Board meeting.
Reports
County Parks Committee: Supervisor Bloomquist attended the meeting and reported
that out of 14 projects that applied for the grant, our application was ranked
#1 for the river project. Funds have not yet been awarded. Funding will be
determined by County Commissioners. The grant amount is $50,000. Thanks to Jeff
Potter for conducting a tour of river obstructions for County Park Committee
members.
Truck: Supervisor Bloomquist stated Red Cedar Auto sales found a replacement
for the current Township truck. It is a year older but only has 17,000 miles on
it. A plow will need to be purchased through D&G. It is a Ford F-250 and the
warranty can be transferred to the Township. The cost is $33,500, including the
plow. Red Cedar offered to buy our truck for $7,000. Consensus of the Board was
to sell it ourselves. The new truck will be taken to Bappert Auto Repair so
they can assess it to make sure there is nothing currently in need of repair.
Compensation Commission: There is a current opening for one or two people on
the Commission. An application is on the Township website and can be filled out
and sent to the Township.
NEISA: Trustee Kane reported on actions of the NEISA Board.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:18 pm
None.
Closed at 8:18 pm.
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg.
Motion Passed.
Meeting adjourned at 8:19 p.m.
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________________ ______________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor Date
_____________________________________________ _____________
Mark Steinberg, Township Clerk Date
2019 Meeting Minutes
January 9, 2019
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
January 9, 2019
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened a meeting at 7:00 p.m. at
the Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston,
Michigan. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the
Agenda. Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustees Kane, and Duffy, Clerk Steinberg and
Treasurer Cutshaw.
Absent: Trustees Eyster and Williams.
Public Comment for agenda and non- agenda items
Opened at 7:03 pm.
None
Closed at 7:03 pm
Consent Agenda
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the minutes of the December 12, 2018 Board meeting
General Fund Accounts Payable Paid, check numbers 22673-22687, for a total of $
125,410.53.
Police Accounts Payable Paid, check number 1097, for a total of $59,151.79.
Payroll Paid check numbers 44778-44812, and EFTs 578-579, for a total of
$25,846.59 (phys. check amount).
General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval, check numbers 22688-22692 for a
total of $1,302.49, and check numbers 22693-22698 for a total of $495.88, and
check number 22699 for a total of $100.
Revenue and Expenditure report ending December 31, 2018
December Revenue activity report (GL activity)
Building inspector’s report
Litigation Report
Acknowledge receipt of Treasurer’s Report
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg.
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Clerk Steinberg, Trustee Duffy, Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: Trustee Kane.
Motion Passed
Police Report:  
Chief Plaga presented the report for the Meridian Township Police Department.
He stated in comparison to the previous year, there was a 40% reduction in auto
accidents. Traffic stops increased from 360 in 2017 to 530 stops in 2018.
They are holding a Youth Academy for high school-aged students. They will meet
Wednesdays from 6:30 – 8:30 p.m. Feb 13 to March 27. There is no cost and
participants will get a Citizens Academy t-shirt. Williamstown Township will
publicize this on their website. The department has two vacancies to fill this
year and two who may retire next year.
Board members asked questions about what the department has seen related to the
recently passed recreational marijuana laws and what concerns the department
has about future trends in that area. Meridian Township has recently began
discussion of allowing Medical Marijuana facilities in the Township.
Poverty Exemption Resolution
Trustee Kane moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the 2019 Township
Poverty Guidelines Resolution #97 with the beginning income qualification set
at $18,795 (an increase to the 2018 Township level by the 2019 CPI multiplier
of 1.24)
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg.
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Clerk Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Duffy,
and Trustee Kane.
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
Road RFP
Clerk Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board move forward with the
request for proposal for consulting on Road Improvements and Maintenance
subject to review and approval by the Township Attorney.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Discussion: How other Townships are handling road maintenance issues.
Motion Passed.
Compensation Commission Appointments
Clerk Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board confirm the Supervisor’s
appointments to the Compensation Commission of Robert Hayes with a term to
expire on December 5, 2022 and Donna Zischke with a term to expire on December
5, 2023.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Discussion: The process for committee and commission appointments were
discussed.
Motion Carried.
Dangerous Building Ordinance
Tabled until February 13, 2019 meeting.
Budget
Trustee Duffy moved the Township Board schedule a Public Hearing for the
proposed budget on Wednesday March 6th at 7:00 pm.
Seconded by Trustee Kane.
Discussion: Trustees opted for a 7:00 pm start time rather than 6:00 pm.
Motion Carried.
Reports
NIESA: They have purchased protective gear for the ambulance staff, similar to
police gear, so that they will be able to enter a building that may be
dangerous. They are looking for more staff to hire for various positions. NIESA
is working on updating the fire code. They will be meeting with the surrounding
townships to discuss this and get input. The next meeting is Thursday, January
10, 2019.
Emergency Management Meeting: The Township Supervisor went to a meeting last
week and learned how the emergency management process works in our area. The
Red Cross coordinates shelters.
Michigan Townships Association: MTA Ingham Chapter is holding a meeting on
February 27th 6:30 pm.here at the township. Everyone is encouraged to attend.
MTA annual conference is April 2nd & 3rd in Grand Rapids.
Classes: The Township is considering hosting classes for residents on
sustainability. There are a variety of classes that would be beneficial and
informative to township residents.
Signs: There was discussion on ideas for signage as a way to publicize Township
events and meetings. 
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:28 pm.
None.
Closed at 8:28 pm.
Adjournment and Review
Clerk Steinberg moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Trustee Duffy.
Motion Passed.
Meeting adjourned at 8:28 p.m.
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________________ ______________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor Date
_____________________________________________ _____________
Mark Steinberg, Township Clerk Date
January 17, 2019
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
January 17, 2019
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened a special meeting at 3:33
p.m. at the Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston,
Michigan. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the
Agenda. Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Williams, Clerk Steinberg and Treasurer
Cutshaw.
Absent: Trustees Eyster, Kane, and Duffy.
Public Comment for agenda and non- agenda items
Opened at 3:34 p.m.
None
Closed at 3:35 p.m.
Compensation Commission Appointment
Clerk Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board confirm the appointment
of Aaron Porter to the Compensation Commission to replace Frank Seminski with a
term expiring 12/05/2020.
Second by Trustee Williams
Discussion:  The special meeting was called due to the desire to have a full
complement of Commission members.
Motion passed.
Adjournment
Treasurer Cutshaw moved to adjourn.
Second by Trustee Williams
Motion Passed.
Meeting adjourned at 3:39 p.m.
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________________ ______________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor Date
_____________________________________________ _____________
Mark Steinberg, Township Clerk Date
February 13, 2019
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
February 13, 2019
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened a meeting at 7:00 p.m. at
the Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston,
Michigan. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the
Agenda. Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Williams, Trustee
Eyster, Clerk Steinberg and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Absent: Trustee Kane.
Public Comment for agenda and non- agenda items
Opened at 7:03 pm
Andrew Stickle – representing his family’s farm at 5271 N. Williamston Rd.,
Williamston: Mr. Stickle commented on his family’s proposal to grow and process
cannabis on their farm in Williamstown Township.
Closed at 7:08 pm
Consent Agenda
Clerk Steinberg moved to approve the consent agenda consisting of:
Minutes of the January 9 and 17, 2019 Board meetings
General Fund Accounts Payable Paid, check numbers 22700-22717, for a total of $
6,326.75.
Payroll Paid check numbers 44813-44851, and EFTs 580-588, for a total of
$26,239.53 (phys. check amount).
General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval, check numbers 22718-22730 for a
total of $15,209.99, and check numbers 22731-22733 for a total of $503.
Revenue and Expenditure report ending January 31, 2019
January Revenue activity report (GL activity)
Building inspector’s report
Litigation Report
Police Report
Planning Commission minutes
Acknowledge receipt of Treasurer’s Report
 
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Clerk Steinberg, Trustee Duffy, Supervisor Bloomquist,
Trustee Eyster, Trustee Williams.
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
Planning Commission Report:  
Planning Commission Chair, Gerald Eidt, discussed the recent activities of the
Planning Commission, including recommended changes to the allowable uses in
Article 22 of the I-1 Zoning Ordinance. The Planning Commission has also been
considering policy on Right to Farm, wind and solar energy, and event barns.
I-1 Zoning Amendment
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Planning
Commission’s recommended revisions to the allowable uses in the I-1 District,
Article 22 of the Zoning Ordinance.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Steinberg, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Williams, Trustee Duffy,
Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster.
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
 
Police Assessment Roll
Clerk Steinberg moved the Township Board schedule a Public Hearing for the
proposed police assessment roll on Wednesday March 6th at 7:00 pm.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Discussion: None.
Motion Passed.
 
Recreational Marijuana
Trustee Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board adopt Ordinance 52 to
prohibit recreational marijuana establishments.
Seconded by Trustee Duffy.
Discussion: Board members expressed interest in revisiting this at a later date
when State and Federal policies are settled.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Williams, Trustee Duffy, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster,
Clerk Steinberg, Treasurer Cutshaw.
Nays: None
Motion Carried.
 
2019-2020 Board Meeting Dates
Clerk Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the proposed
meeting dates for the 2019-2020 fiscal year.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Discussion: None.
Motion Carried.
 
Budget Amendments
Treasurer Cutshaw moved that the Township Board approve the budget amendments
as presented and added an amendment of $50.00 from Contingency to Bank fees.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Steinberg, Treasurer
Cutshaw, Trustee Williams, Trustee Duffy.
Nays: None.
Motion Carried.
Discussion
Dangerous Building Ordinance: Discussion included potential Township liability,
due process considerations, and separation of dangerous building from blight
issues. Supervisor Bloomquist will consult with the Township attorney.
Budget: Supervisor Bloomquist will prepare a budget narrative in advance of the
public hearing to assist with the understanding of budget departments.
Firework Ordinance changes: The State has revised the law with respect to dates
when residents are entitled to use consumer fireworks and penalties for
violations. It seems advisable to amend Township ordinance to incorporate the
State’s changes. Supervisor Bloomquist will bring proposed amendments to the
March Board of Trustees meeting.
Reports
Photo Contest: The Township will be holding a photo contest for Williamstown
Township residents. It is intended to be a fun community activity with prizes,
that will also provide the Township with photos for a 2020 calendar.
 River Clean-up Grant: The Township has been awarded the Ingham County Parks
grant for river clean-up.
Board of Review Assessment Notices: Assessment notices went to the printer
today and will be mailed next week. The Board of Review is scheduled for March
11 & 12th.
Mitchell Road: The State is going to do another speed study on Mitchell Road in
the Spring before making a determination.
Emergency Management: Supervisor Bloomquist is working with local emergency
management organizations to put together exercises for emergency planning for
the Township along with NIESA, the city and police departments.
NIESA:  No report given.
Voting Changes: Election process changes are coming due to changes in the State
election laws (Proposal 3 of 2018). Clerk Steinberg informed the Board that
details will be presented ahead of the May election.
Taxes: Treasurer Cutshaw stated that taxes are due at 5:00 p.m. tomorrow
(February 14) to avoid penalties and interest. The office will be open from 9:
00 a.m. to 5:00 pm. tomorrow to process tax payments.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:20 pm.
None.
Closed at 8:20 pm.
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Motion Passed.
Meeting adjourned at 8:22 p.m.
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________________ ______________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor Date
_____________________________________________ _____________
Mark Steinberg, Township Clerk Date
March 6, 2019
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
March 6, 2019
 
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened a special meeting at 7:03
p.m. at the Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston,
Michigan. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the
Agenda. Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Kane, Clerk Steinberg and Treasurer
Cutshaw.
Absent: Trustees Eyster, Williams and Duffy.
Public Comment for Agenda and Non- agenda Items
Opened at 7:05 p.m.
None.
Closed at 7:05 p.m.
Public Hearing for the Police Assessment Roll
No comments.
Compensation Commission Report
Commission Chair Jim Conroy described the Commission’s findings and
recommendations as contained in the report.
Public Hearing for the Proposed Budget
No comments.
Public Comment for Agenda and Non-agenda Items
Opened at 7:27 p.m.
None.
Closed at 7:27 p.m.
Adjournment
Move to adjourn by Treasurer Cutshaw, seconded by Clerk Steinberg.
Motion passed.
Adjourned at 7:28 p.m.
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________________ ______________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor Date
_____________________________________________ _____________
Mark Steinberg, Township Clerk Date
March 13, 2019
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened a meeting at 7:00 p.m. at
the Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston,
Michigan. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the
Agenda. Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Kane, Trustee Williams,
Clerk Steinberg and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Absent: Trustee Eyster
Public Comment for agenda and non- agenda items
Opened at 7:05 pm
None.
Closed at 7:05 pm
Consent Agenda
Trustee Williams moved to approve the consent agenda consisting of:
   ∙   Approve the minutes of the February 13 and March 6, 2019 Board meetings
   ∙   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid, check numbers 22735-22745, for a
total of $ 4,119.13.
   ∙   Payroll Paid check numbers 44852-44877, and EFTs 589-592, for a total of
$23,308.29 (phys. check amount).
   ∙   General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval, check numbers 22746-22762
for a total of $7,213.11, and check numbers 22763-22765 for a total of
$4,284.87.
   ∙   Revenue and Expenditure report ending February 28, 2019
   ∙   February Revenue activity report (GL activity)
   ∙   Building inspector's report
   ∙   Litigation Report
   ∙   Acknowledge receipt of Treasurer's Report
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Discussion: There was discussion on the level of detail of financial reports.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Steinberg, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Williams, Trustee Duffy,
Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: Trustee Kane.
Motion Passed.
Rotary Grant
Brian Tort of the Williamston Sunrise Rotary Club presented a check for $3000
from the Club to match the grant from Ingham County Parks for the Blue Water
Trail project (river clean-up).
Trustee Duffy moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the acceptance of
the $3000.00 grant from the Williamston Sunrise Rotary Club with restricted use
along with the grant funds from Ingham County Parks for the Blue Water Trail
project..
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg.
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Steinberg, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Williams, Trustee Duffy,
Trustee Kane, Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
Compensation Commission
Trustee Kane moved that the Township reject the Compensation Commission
recommendations.
Seconded by Trustee Duffy.
Discussion: Trustee meeting pay and time to review the Commission's data base
were discussed.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Kane.
Nays: Clerk Steinberg, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Williams, Trustee Duffy,
Supervisor Bloomquist.
Motion Failed.
Budget Approval
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Township Board approve the 2019-2020 Budget as
presented with the Compensation Commission's recommendations.
Seconded by Trustee Williams.
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Williams, Trustee Duffy, Supervisor
Bloomquist, Clerk Steinberg.
Nays: Trustee Kane.
Motion Passed.
Budget Amendments
Clerk Steinberg moved to approve the budget amendments for the 2018-2019
budget.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Kane, Supervisor Bloomquist, Clerk Steinberg,
Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Williams.
Nays: None.
Motion Carried.
Road Proposal
Clerk Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board enter into a contract
with Mannik & Smith for the purpose of developing a Road Improvement Plan as
outlined in their proposal dated February 28, 2019, with a cost not to exceed
$10,500.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Discussion: Four responses to the RFP were received.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Williams, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Kane, Supervisor Bloomquist,
Clerk Steinberg, Treasurer Cutshaw.
Nays: None.
Motion Carried.
Dangerous Building Ordinance
Trustee Kane moved the Williamstown Township Board not move forward with the
development of a draft Dangerous Building Ordinance for consideration by the
Township Board.
Seconded by Trustee Duffy.
Discussion: Discussion about the difference between blight and dangerous
building ordinances. Questions were asked about how dangerous buildings were
handled in previous cases without the dangerous building ordinance.
Motion failed.
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Township Board move forward with the
development of a draft Dangerous Building Ordinance for consideration by the
Township Board.
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg
Motion Carried.
Soccer Field Maintenance
Clerk Steinberg moved the Board approve an expenditure of up to $6,400 for
maintenance of the Township soccer fields. The Township will attempt to procure
at least three bids for this work.
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion: Field reservation fees last year generated about $5,600 in revenue.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Supervisor Bloomquist, Clerk Steinberg, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee
Williams, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Kane.
Nays: None.
Motion Carried.
Discussion items
Pre-audit RFP
Treasurer Cutshaw explained how the RFP she wrote was prepared. Board members
were asked to get questions/comments about Financial Services RFP to Wanda by
Monday, March 18. The Township wants to get this out as soon as possible since
pre-audit completion deadlines are approaching. The draft will be sent to the
Township attorney for review before sending to potential pre-auditors.
Firework Ordinance changes: A revised ordinance is needed to comply with new
State regulations. Supervisor Bloomquist passed out a draft ordinance and will
be emailing it to Board members as well. A vote will be taken at the April
meeting.
Recycling Grant: Supervisor Bloomquist discussed the State recycling grant that
could be used for making a permanent recycling spot on the Township property.
She will send the Board a copy of the grant application to review so the Board
can determine if it is desired to move forward with the grant application.
Applications are due May 1, 2019. This could open up recycling (and perhaps
trash) options for our residents.
Reports
Civil War Reenactment: We have an application for a reenactment at the Township
park on May 17-19, 2019. The reenactment group will be setting up camp, doing a
night camp tour, and will have reenactment actors for Civil War education.
Liability forms will be signed by the group.
Trails: The Township received the grant from the Rotary to clean up the river.
Supervisor Bloomquist met with the Drain Commission and got maps and
information. The Ingham County Board of Commissioners approved to front the
Township $25,000 to help with expenses. We hope to use draft horses and oxen to
help remove the log jams. We will be working on liability waivers and access to
the river, etc.
NIESA: Treasurer Cutshaw went to the recent meeting in Trustee Kane's absence.
The NIESA Board voted on the officers. Franz Wilbrink is the Chair and Sandy
Weldon is Vice-Chair. The Board discussed its investments and potential
investment opportunities. They are also working on updating the fire code. Some
of the new fire equipment has arrived and they will be looking at it at the
next meeting.
Assessing: The Board of review meetings are completed. Getting information out
to the residents ahead of time on how to read their assessments and how to
appeal their assessment has been helpful. We will continue to try to think of
ways we can improve this process.
Treasurer's Department: Tax season is now over for the Township and everything
went well.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:58 pm.
None.
Closed at 8:58 pm.
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Meeting adjourned at 9:05 p.m.
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________________ ______________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor         Date
 
_____________________________________________ _____________
Mark Steinberg, Township Clerk               Date
April 17, 2019
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
April 17, 2019
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened a meeting at 7:00 p.m. at
the Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston,
Michigan. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the
Agenda. Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustees Duffy, Kane, Eyster and Williams,
Clerk Steinberg and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Absent: None.
Public Comment for agenda and non- agenda items
Opened at 7:04 pm
None.
Closed at 7:04 pm
Consent Agenda
Trustee Williams moved the consent agenda consisting of:
   ∙   Approve the minutes of the March 13, 2019 Board meeting
   ∙   Approve the minutes of the March 27, 2019 PC meeting
   ∙   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid, check numbers 22766-22784, for a
total of $3,370.67
   ∙   Payroll Paid check numbers 44878-44920, and EFTs 593-598, for a total of
$30,765.30 (phys. check amount).
   ∙   General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval, Revised, check numbers
22785-22802 for a total of $8,803.50.
   ∙   Police AP Paid check number 1098 for $60,743.41
   ∙   Police Report
   ∙   Revenue and Expenditure report ending March 31, 2019
   ∙   March Revenue activity report (GL activity)
   ∙   Building inspector's report
   ∙   Litigation Report
   ∙   Acknowledge receipt of Treasurer's Report
Minutes of the March 13, 2019 Board meeting and Payroll Paid Report were pulled
to be considered at the end of the meeting.
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg.
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Steinberg, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Williams, Trustee Duffy,
Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster.
Nays: Trustee Kane.
Motion Passed.
Police Report
Chief Ken Plaga, Meridian Township Police Department, reported an overall
decrease in crime in the Township this quarter, including a 50% decrease in
larcenies. Chief Plaga responded to questions about bicyclist laws. The
department is putting together written information for residents on this
subject.
Planning Commission (PC)
Planning Commission Chair Gerald Eidt discussed the Commission's recent
activities. The Commission held a Public Hearing for Jackson Metal Cleaning and
voted to recommend the Board approve the special use permit and site plan. The
Planning Commission continues to discuss issues such as event barns, and
automatic pool covers, They are considering revisions to their by-laws
regarding educational requirements and public hearing procedures, adopted their
meeting schedule for FY 2019-2020, and scheduled a special meeting for April
24, 2019.
Jackson Metal Cleaning
Trustee Williams moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Special Use
Permit application for Jackson Metal Cleaning.
Seconded by Trustee Duffy.
Discussion: None.
Motion Passed.
Clerk Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Site Plan for
Jackson Metal Cleaning located at 1492 E. Grand River Rd. Williamston, MI.
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion: None.
Motion Passed.
Police Assessment Roll
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve Resolution
2019-98, Confirming the 2019 Special Assessment Roll for Police Protection
Within the Township with the Special Assessment Roll total of $212,475.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: Clarifications were made regarding how the Roll is assessed.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Steinberg, Treasurer
Cutshaw, Trustee Williams, and Trustee Duffy.
Nays: Trustee Kane
Motion Passed.
Road Maintenance
Treasurer Cutshaw moved that the Williamstown Township enter into a contract
with Ingham County for the proposed work to be completed in 2019 with the
Township share not to exceed $447,770 for the following:
Repair/maintenance of
   ∙   Zimmer Rd. from Haslett to Milton
   ∙   Germany Rd. from Zimmer to Barton
   ∙   Milton Rd from Zimmer to Bentley
   ∙   Germany Rd. (from approximately Hart to Zimmer)
   ∙   Barton Rd. from Haslett to Sherwood
   ∙   Burkley from Zimmer to the township boundary.
Chip Seal of
   ∙   Beeman from Sherwood to Williamston city limit
   ∙   Germany from Barton to Williamston Rd.
   ∙   Lounsbury from Haslett to Milton
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg
Discussion: The Board discussed the importance of using money the Township has
already set aside for roads for maintenance and not waiting to fully fund all
road repairs so residents receive immediate benefit. It was also reiterated
that when a resident sees a pot hole they should call the County Road
Commission.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Kane, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk
Steinberg, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Williams.
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
Financial Services Agreement
Trustee Williams moved the Williamstown Township Board enter into an agreement
with Maner Costerisan for the years ending March 31, 2019, 2020, and 2021
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Kane, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Steinberg,
Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Williams, Trustee Duffy.
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
Fireworks Ordinance
Trustee Kane moved to postpone action on the Fireworks Ordinance until the May
meeting.
Seconded by Trustee Duffy.
Discussion: Discussion about the resident notification time requirements.
Motion Passed.
Senior Center and Tri-County
Clerk Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the expenditure
of $3,000 to the Williamston Senior Center as budgeted for the services offered
to township seniors and $245.00 to Tri-County Agency on Aging for the Meals-on-
Wheels program.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Steinberg, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Williams,
Trustee Duffy, Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: Trustee Kane.
Motion Passed.
Non-Partisan Township Elections
Clerk Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board convey to MTA a neutral
position on the topic of non-partisan township elections.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Discussion: None.
Motion Passed.
Items for Discussion
Recycling Grant: After looking more carefully at the grant and estimating
Township costs to implement, it was suggested that we consider this again if it
is available next year.
Resolution re: Alternative Energy Assessments: State bulletins have directed
Assessing departments to use the Marshall-Swift guidelines regarding
assessments of real property related to solar and wind. That includes the
properties we already have in the Township. We believe the current State
requirements may discourage wider use of solar and wind, while we should try to
encourage these sources of energy. The Township will prepare a resolution to
encourage the legislature to adopt revisions to the way solar and wind on
properties are assessed.
Reports
- Departments and Committees to use the Marshall-Swift guidelines
NIESA: NIESA has taken delivery of their new trucks. The NIESA Board is moving
forward with the International Fire Codes. Trustee Kane suggests the Township
should review ordinances for consistency with the latest version of the IFC.
The recent donation solicitation letter that was mailed to Township residents
wasn't from NIESA
River Clean-up: Some Red Cedar River log jams have disappeared on their own.
The Township hopes to use oxen or horses and volunteers to help clear the
remaining jams. Clean-up will start in July. There will be a public forum
before then for the residents. Volunteers are needed.
Upcoming Events:
   ∙   Recycling and Clean-up Day is May 11 for residents of the Township.
Information is available on the Township website.
   ∙   Township Art Tour takes place on May 4 and 5. Mary Fritz is the
volunteer chair. There are corporate sponsors this year, including Dean
Transportation as our largest sponsor. We are offering a VIP bus tour on
Saturday afternoon. Tickets for the Tour are available at the Township office.
   ∙   MTA Ingham County Chapter meeting is taking place on June 26. Board
members are encouraged to attend as there are new well and septic inspection
regulations being considered. More information on the location of the meeting
will be forthcoming.
   ∙   Civil War Re-enactment will take place in the Township park (on Grand
River Ave) on the weekend of May 17-19.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 9:13 pm.
Nancy Williams, 131 Bismark, Williamston: Questions about Art Tour and Civil
War Re-enactment.
Closed at 9:14: pm.
Minutes and Payroll
Clerk Steinberg moved to approve the March 13, 2019 minutes, with corrections
to remove the roll call vote on both Dangerous Buildings motions and replaced
with the resulting voice vote on each motion.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Discussion: The break in the sequential numbers of the payroll checks will be
examined and an explanation will be given to the Board at next month's meeting.
Approval of the March payroll will take place in May.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Williams, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Kane,
Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Steinberg.
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Meeting adjourned at 9:20 p.m.
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________________ ______________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor         Date
 
_____________________________________________ _____________
Mark Steinberg, Township Clerk            Date
May 15, 2019
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
May 15, 2019
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened a meeting at 7:00 p.m. at
the Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston,
Michigan. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the
Agenda. Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Trustee Kane, Trustee Williams,
Clerk Steinberg and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Absent: Trustee Duffy.
Public Comment for agenda and non- agenda items
Opened at 7:04 pm
None.
Closed at 7:04 pm
Consent Agenda
Trustee Williams moved the consent agenda consisting of:
   ∙   Approve the minutes of the April 17, 2019 Board meeting
   ∙   Approve the minutes of the April 24, 2019 PC meeting
   ∙   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid, check numbers 22803-22818, for a
total of $4,781.78.
   ∙   April Payroll Paid check numbers 44914, 44921-44963, and EFTs 599-604,
for a total of $22,609.29 (physical check amount)   
   ∙   March Payroll Paid check numbers 44878-44913 and 44915-44920 and EFTs
593-598 for a total of $30,765.30 (physical check amount)
   ∙   General Funds Accounts Payable for Approval, check numbers 22819-22831
for a total of $10,370.29, and check numbers 22832-22836 for a total of
$1,785.72
   ∙   Police Report
   ∙   Revenue and Expenditure report ending April 30, 2019
   ∙   April Revenue activity report (GL activity)
   ∙   Building inspector’s report
   ∙   Litigation Report
   ∙   Acknowledge receipt of April Treasurer’s Report and corrected March
Treasurer’s report
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Steinberg, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Williams,
Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: Trustee Kane.
Motion Passed.
Planning Commission
Trustee Eyster entertained questions from the Board regarding the Annual
Report. The PC is considering making a by-laws amendment to require ongoing
education for PC members. They are also planning to host an education event,
tentatively on October 23, 2019, that could be shared with other communities to
help defray costs. Board of Trustees and ZBA members would also be encouraged
to attend.
Prime Housing Group Restricted Donation
Clerk Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the restricted
donation from the Prime Housing Group, with $3000 for the artists’ restricted
playground equipment and $3000 restricted for the Township Park.
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion: None.
Motion Passed.
Firework Ordinance Revisions
Trustee Williams moved the Williamstown Township Board adopt the Fireworks
Ordinance Revisions as presented.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Williams, Trustee Kane, Supervisor Bloomquist,
Trustee Eyster, Clerk Steinberg
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
7:26 p.m.: Treasurer Cutshaw left the room to make copies of the Renewable
Energy Resolution for Board members. Returned at 7:28 p.m.
Renewable Energy Assessments
Clerk Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve the Renewable
Energy Resolution to be submitted to our State and County legislature. Seconded
by Trustee Eyster            
Discussion: The draft Resolution was adjusted to satisfy Board members’
concerns.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Williams, Trustee Kane, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster,
Clerk Steinberg, Treasurer Cutshaw
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Reports – Departments and Committees
River Trail Grant: Public forum is being planned to outline plans are for the
future of the river, is tentatively scheduled for June 13, 2019. County
officials will present information at this event. This will be open to all
residents, and residents who live along the river will get an invitation. A
river clean-up training is tentatively planned at a resident’s property for
July 9, 2019. There are four tentative dates set for clean-up. Supervisor
Bloomquist presented information on MGrow, Middle Grand River Organization of
Watersheds. She feels that it would be advantageous for the Township to become
members of MGrow to gain and share knowledge.
Cemetery: The Sexton’s report was presented regarding the activities of the
cemeteries. The Cemetery Committee met today and they are looking to update the
Ordinance to allow “green burials,” about which some residents have inquired.
They are considering replacing one of the mowers, and when they have the
pertinent information, it will come to the Board of Trustees for approval.
Park: The Civil War Re-enactment is this weekend, beginning on Friday, May 17
at the Township park. It will conclude on Sunday, May 19, 2019.
NIESA:  NIESA had their Board meeting last week. They are working on policy
with regards to the adoption of the National Fire Code. Local municipalities
are encouraged to adopt the National Fire Code. They still have grant money
available for fire alarms and CO2 detectors. They have installed over 250
alarms and detectors for local residents so far.
Mitchell Rd.: The County will be preforming the speed study before and after
school is finished in June.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:08 pm.
Frans Wilbrink, 4701 Zimmer Rd., Williamston: regarding the idea of eliminating
the use of fossil fuels.
Closed at 8:10 pm.
Adjournment and Review
Clerk Steinberg moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Meeting adjourned at 8:12 p.m.
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________________ ______________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor         Date
 
_____________________________________________ _____________
Mark Steinberg, Township Clerk            Date
June 12, 2019
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
June 12, 2019
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened a meeting at 7:00 p.m. at
the Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston,
Michigan. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the
Agenda. Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Eyster, Trustee Kane,
Clerk Steinberg and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Absent: Trustee Williams.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:03 pm
Kent Hall and Tom Hickerson, American Legion – Williamston Post 296, presented
Wanda Bloomquist with a certificate of appreciation for her keynote speech at
this year’s Williamston Memorial Day parade.
Adam Spina, Superintendent, Williamston Community Schools, provided highlights
of the 2018-2019 school year, including designation as a 2018 State of Michigan
Academic Champion District and increasing the fund balance from 3.6% to 6.9%.
Frans Wilbrink, 4701 Zimmer Rd.: stated concerns about mowing at Summit
Cemetery and about Trustee meeting attendance.
Closed at 7:14 pm
Consent Agenda
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the consent agenda consisting of:
   ∙   Approve the minutes of the May 15, 2019 Board meeting
   ∙   Approve the draft minutes of the May 22, 2019 Planning Commission
meeting
   ∙   Approve the draft minutes of the May 15, 2019 Cemetery Committee meeting
   ∙   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid, check numbers 22837-22868, for a
total of $18,123.50.
   ∙   April Payroll Paid check numbers 44964-44997, and EFTs 605-610, for a
total of $27,982.41 (phys. check amount).
   ∙   General Funds Accounts Payable for Approval, check numbers 22869-22883
for a total of $11,225.08, and check numbers 22884-22891 for a total of
$1,257.93.
   ∙   Police Report
   ∙   Revenue and Expenditure report ending May 31, 2019
   ∙   May Revenue activity report (GL activity)
   ∙   Building inspector’s report
   ∙   Litigation Report
   ∙   Acknowledge receipt of May Treasurer’s Report
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Trustee Duffy, Clerk Steinberg, Treasurer Cutshaw,
Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: Trustee Kane.
Motion Passed.
Capital Area District Library Annual Report
Julie Chrisinske, Head Librarian, Williamston Library delivered her annual
report to the Township Board. She introduced Jolee Hamlin, Senior Associate
Director of the Capital Area District Library. Ms. Chrisinske reviewed the
changes at the Williamston branch, including how people are using the library
since the branch moved to its current location. The library staff continues to
participate in community events, including regular visits to the Williamston
Senior Center. The number of customers using the branch has increased in this
past year. CADL’s millage passed in the last election and they will begin
remodeling soon.
Planning Commission Report
Gerald Eidt, Planning Commission Chair, gave highlights of the most recent
Planning Commission meeting. Eidt reviewed ordinance language presented by Carl
McIntosh “Cottage Cluster” that was discussed. A public hearing was held on
allowing automatic swimming pool covers in place of a fence. The language has
been recommended to the Township Board for an amendment to the zoning ordinance
to allow this type of pool cover. They also reviewed newest proposed language
regarding event barns/centers to allow the use in the Township. A Public
Hearing is set for July 24, 2019. A by-law amendment was approved regarding
continuing education for PC members. There was discussion about PODS and fabric
shelters permitting as they are considered temporary structures. Further
discussion will occur at the July meeting.
Swimming Pool Covers
Clerk Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Planning
Commission’s recommended revisions to Section 8.02.W.1.e(3) to add language
allowing automated swimming pool covers in place of a fence in some instances.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Steinberg, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Kane,
Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
July 3 rd Office Hours
Trustee Duffy moved the Williamstown Township Board approve closing the office
on Wednesday July 3rd at 4:00 pm.
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg
Discussion:  None.
Motion Passed.
Discussion
Dangerous Building Ordinance – 1 st Draft:
Board members discussed the questions and concerns they have about a Dangerous
Building Ordinance. Supervisor Bloomquist will have the Township attorney
review the draft with those questions and concerns in mind and will bring their
responses to next month’s Board of Trustees meeting.
Road Report:  
Supervisor Bloomquist talked to the road consultant today. They have gathered
all the data and are in the process of analyzing. They will do a presentation
in July. If the Board decides to go ahead with a road millage, the language
will need to be submitted to Ingham County by August 13 th to be placed on the
November ballot.
Reports – Departments and Committees
Park:
The house at the Township park is now vacant of tenants. Repairs will need to
be made before we rent it again. Pam Shaheen is exploring the options for the
park house and will present a report to the Board. A successful Civil War
reenactment event took place at the park in May, with plans to possibly come
back in two years with an expanded version of the event.
NIESA:  
NIESA is still working to encourage municipalities to adopt the national fire
codes, so that NIESA can enforce code deficiencies, making the community less
vulnerable to fires.
Mitchell Rd.:
One traffic study has been completed and another one will be done soon. A
streetlight was recommended, which would cost approximately $2000 to install
and $250 per year to maintain. It was suggested that the Township adopt a
policy or guidelines about approving streetlights. It was also discussed
whether reflectors could be used instead of a streetlight. Supervisor
Bloomquist will reach out to the Meridian Township Police to obtain crash data
for the intersection of Mitchell and Williamston roads. Discussion about
streetlights will continue after more information has been gathered.
Cemetery:  
Rick Asper from Asper Masonry recommended that we clean the top of the 26
columns at Summit Cemetery and seal them and submitted a bid to do the work. It
was discussed whether our seasonal help could do it. This item will be
addressed again after we have more information.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:21 pm.
Frans Wilbrink, 4701 Zimmer: commented on PODS and event barn policy.
Closed at 8:22 pm.
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg. 
 
Meeting adjourned at 8:25 p.m.
 
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________________ ______________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor Date
 
_____________________________________________ _____________
Mark Steinberg, Township Clerk Date
July 10, 2019
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened a meeting at 7:00 p.m. at
the Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston,
Michigan. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the
Agenda. Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Eyster, Trustee Kane,
Trustee Williams, Clerk Steinberg and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Absent: None.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:01 pm
Kurt Guter: 4045 Cygnet Court, Williamston: Mr. Guter commented on a possible
road millage for Township roads.
Closed at 7:03 pm
Consent Agenda
Clerk Steinberg moved the consent agenda consisting of:
   ∙   Approve the minutes of the June 12, 2019 Board meeting
   ∙   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid, check numbers 22892-22907, for a
total of $32,519.13.
   ∙   Police AP Paid, check number 1099, for a total of $59,370.77.
   ∙   April Payroll Paid check numbers 44998-45032, and EFTs 611-616, for a
total of $26,902.79 (phys. check amount).
   ∙   General Funds Accounts Payable for Approval, check numbers 22908-22913
for a total of $2,762.76, and check numbers 22914-22923 for a total of
$4,028.30.
   ∙   Police Report
   ∙   Revenue and Expenditure report ending June 30, 2019
   ∙   June Revenue activity report (GL activity)
   ∙   Building inspector’s report
   ∙   Litigation Report
   ∙   Acknowledge receipt of June Treasurer’s Report
Seconded by Trustee Williams.
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Williams, Clerk Steinberg,
Treasurer Cutshaw, Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: Trustee Kane.
Motion Passed.
Quarterly Police Report
Chief Plaga gave the quarterly police report for the Meridian Township Police
Department. He discussed the upcoming Citizens Academy and the Senior Watch
program. He left brochures for each at the Township hall. The department is
developing bicycle safety brochure and will share once completed.
Dangerous Buildings
Trustee Kane moved the Board postpone action on dangerous buildings until the
August meeting due to a full agenda.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Discussion: None.
Motion Passed.
Street Light Policy
Trustee Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board appoint a sub-committee to
develop a policy for presentation to the Board for the addition of streetlights
within the Township.
Seconded by Trustee Williams.
Discussion: Trustee Eyster and Treasurer Cutshaw will be on the sub-committee.
Motion Passed.
Cemetery Mower
Trustee Williams moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the purchase of
the Contender 25 HP Briggs 48” deck mower as recommended by the Cemetery
Committee, as bid from Deer Creek Sales for $4900.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Discussion: The Township will utilize the website to sell the old mower.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Williams, Trustee Duffy, Supervisor
Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Steinberg.
Nays: Trustee Kane.
Motion Passed.
Cemetery Columns
Clerk Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the expenditure
of $2,600 (at $100.00 each for 26 columns) to clean and seal the concrete caps
on the columns, and the rebuild of the entrance column for an additional
$2,500, totaling $5,100.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Williams, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Kane, Supervisor Bloomquist,
Trustee Eyster, Clerk Steinberg, Treasurer Cutshaw.
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
Cemetery Fill
Trustee Duffy moved the Williamstown Township Board approve moving forward with
obtaining free fill for the Cemetery Expansion area provided the Health
Department will approve the use for burial once completed.
Seconded by Trustee Williams.
Discussion: None.
Motion Passed.
Road Report
Aaron Hacker and Kevin McDevitt, from Mannik & Smith presented the draft report
on maintenance and repair of the 47 miles of Township roads, and the estimated
costs of maintaining, and not maintaining, the roads at various levels of
quality. The report is currently in draft form and will be made available to
the public when finalized.
Special Meeting
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Township Board schedule a special
meeting for July 17 th  at 6:00 p.m. to review the updated road report and to
discuss funding options available to the Township for road maintenance and
improvements.
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg.
Discussion: None.
Motion Passed.
Reports – Departments and Committees
Park: Supervisor Bloomquist is checking into possible asphalt millings for the
park drive.
NIESA:  Trustee Kane indicated that NIESA has hired a billing service for
insurances, etc.
Treasury: No report
Mitchell Rd. Speed Study: The final information is not yet available.
River Grant: Training was last night with 16 people in attendance. The plan is
to start log clearing the last week of July. Thanks to Marv Zischke for
allowing us to use his property for the training.
Township Hall Fill: There may be an opportunity to receive fill for the field
at the Township Hall.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:40 pm.
None.
Closed at 8:40 pm.
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg. 
Meeting adjourned at 8:40 p.m.
 
Minutes approved by:
 
____________________________________________ ______________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor Date
 
_____________________________________________ _____________
Mark Steinberg, Township Clerk Date
July 17, 2019
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened a special meeting at 7:00
p.m. at the Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston,
Michigan. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the
Agenda. Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Trustee Kane, Trustee Williams,
Clerk Steinberg and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Absent: Trustee Duffy.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:03 pm
One person commented on sources of funds for road maintenance.
Closed at 7:05 pm
Discussion
Aaron Hacker and Kevin McDevitt, both from Mannick&Smith (Consulting firm on
roads) provided a detailed summary of their draft report on the condition of
township roads and costs of maintaining and improving roads.
Board members asked many questions of the consultants and discussed options and
issues among themselves.
The Board agreed to schedule a second special meeting on roads issues for July
31, 2019 at 7:00pm.
Adjournment and Review
Meeting adjourned at 9:05pm.
 
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________________ ______________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor Date
 
_____________________________________________ _____________
Mark Steinberg, Township Clerk Date
July 31, 2019
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened a special meeting at 7:00
p.m. at the Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston,
Michigan. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the
Agenda. Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Trustee Kane, Trustee Williams,
Clerk Steinberg and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Absent: Trustee Duffy.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:02 pm
None.
losed at 7:05 pm
Discussion
Board members continued discussion of the draft report, with a focus on getting
significant input from residents on how to address road issues.
Board members agreed that there isn't enough time to consider doing a ballot
proposal for November 2019, given a desire to involve residents in decision-
making. A 2020 ballot proposal seems more doable.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened 8:05pm.
Joe Zoran and Nancy Williams commented on ways to obtain public involvement in
consideration of a road millage.
Closed 8:15pm.
Adjournment
Meeting adjourned at 8:19pm.
 
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________________ ______________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor Date
 
_____________________________________________ _____________
Mark Steinberg, Township Clerk Date
August 14, 2019
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
August 14, 2019
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened a meeting at 7:03 p.m. at
the Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston,
Michigan. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the
Agenda. Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Eyster, Trustee Kane,
Clerk Steinberg and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Absent: Trustee Williams.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:04 pm
Jonathan Brandt, Township resident – Question about follow-up meeting to the
recent roads meeting. Suggested ways the Township could notice residents about
meetings.
Closed at 7:05 pm
Consent Agenda
Trustee Eyster moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the minutes of the July 10, 2019 Board Meeting and July 17, July 31
Special Board Meetings
General Fund Accounts Payable Paid, check numbers 22924-22947, for a total of
$18,069.45.
Police AP for Approval, check number 1100-1101, for a total of $1,950.00.
July Payroll Paid check numbers 45033-45073, and EFTs 617-623, for a total of
$30,599.22 (phys. check amount).
General Funds Accounts Payable for Approval, check numbers 22948-22960 for a
total of $5,037.23, and check numbers 22961-22968 for a total of $11,638.52.
Police Report
Revenue and Expenditure report ending July 31, 2019
July Revenue activity report (GL activity)
Building inspector’s report
Acknowledge receipt of July Treasurer’s Report
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg
Discussion: Clarification of July and August police payments.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Trustee Duffy, Clerk Steinberg, Treasurer Cutshaw,
Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: Trustee Kane.
Motion Passed.
Planning Commission
Planning Commission Chair Gerald Eidt presented highlights of the Planning
Commission report (meeting minutes). The Planning Commission discussed the
following items at their July 24, 2019 meeting:
Event Barns: the PC is inviting experts to discuss issues of event barns.
Red Cedar Development and Compensating Cut: Presentation by the engineer of the
project prior to the next meeting.
Cottage Zoning: A subcommittee was formed to discuss cottage zoning.
PODS and Temporary Storage: ZBA ruled on the uses as temporary structures.
Farm Animals: There was discussion about the various ways other townships have
handled this issue. A sub-committee has been formed to review farm animals
within the Township.
Dangerous Building Ordinance
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Township Board call for a public
hearing to be held on September 11, 2019 to hear citizen comment on the
proposed Dangerous Building Ordinance.
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg.
Discussion: The hearing will be held during the regular Board meeting.
Motion Passed.
Cyber Security Insurance
Trustee Duffy moved the Williamstown Township Board postpone the purchase of
Cyber Security Insurance.
Seconded by Trustee Kane.
Discussion: Board members suggested the Township look into this further,
including inquiring with the Township’s attorney. Discussed vulnerabilities the
Township might have by doing EFT transfers on funds.
Motion Passed.
Mitchell Road Speed Study
Trustee Kane moved the Williamstown Township Board request the Ingham County
Road Department to postpone action on the request for a reduction on the
Mitchell Road speed limit due to the results of the latest speed study.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Discussion: It was suggested the Township Board draft a letter to State
Legislators to express disappointment regarding the ability to participate in
the determination of speed limits within school zones. Clerk Steinberg will
draft the letter. Trustee Duffy will draft a statement for the Township website
showing what the Board has done to try to get the speed limit lowered.
Motion Passed.
Road Millage
Trustee Duffy moved the Williamstown Township Board schedule a special meeting
for October 30, 2019 at 7:00pm to discuss funding options available to the
Township for road maintenance and improvements within the budget.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Discussion: The Board discussed the proposed timeline for determining a ballot
initiative for a road millage. If a millage question is put forth, it will be
on the March 10, 2019 ballot.
Motion Passed.
Trustee Eyster moved to allocate $2,000 for consulting by Mannik & Smith
relative to a Road Millage.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Trustee Duffy, Clerk Steinberg,
Treasurer Cutshaw.
Nays: Trustee Kane.
Motion passed.
Lighting Policy
The Sub-Committee will have a draft policy available for review in September.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NEISA:  Trustee Kane said the NEISA Board discussed a proposed millage. They
have building, vehicle and equipment needs that need to be addressed. NEISA is
changing to a new medical billing company,
Treasury - Taxes:
Treasurer Cutshaw stated the Summer property tax bills went out in July. The
Township will accept tax payments at the office through September 16 th .
Treasurer Cutshaw explained that residents often don’t understand that the
taxes the Township collects is not equal to the taxes the Township has
available to spend. The Township retains approximately 2.1% of the taxes it
collects.
River Grant: 
First river cleaning will be on August 24, 2019 at 9:00am. Training for
participants has already taken place. Emails went out to everyone who has
completed the training. To start, log jams will be taken out starting at the
Township park and moving downstream.
Park:
A local Eagle Scout is planning to propose a project to do a bridge over a
drain in the park that is collapsing. The park house is available for rent.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:30 pm.
Jonathan Brandt: 4725 N. Branch Rd., Williamston, MI – Discussed speed limits
in the Township.
Closed at 8:32 pm.
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster. 
Meeting adjourned at 8:33 p.m.
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________________ ______________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor Date
 
 
_____________________________________________ _____________
Mark Steinberg, Township Clerk Date
September 5, 2019
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
September 5, 2019
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened a special meeting at 10:02
a.m. at the Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston,
Michigan. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the
Agenda. Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Kane, Clerk Steinberg
and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Absent: Trustees Williams and Eyster.
Pet burials in Township Cemeteries
Trustee Duffy moved the Williamstown Township Board approve Bonnie Clark’s
request to bury her pet in Summit Cemetery with the stipulation that if a vault
is not to be used that green burial requirements be met.
Second by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Discussion: Board members recommended that the Township’s Cemetery Committee
consider proposing that the Cemetery Ordinance be revised to permit pet burial.
It was also suggested that the Committee consider size limits.
Motion carried.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened and closed at 10:22 a.m.
Adjournment
Clerk Steinberg moved that the meeting adjourn.
Second by Trustee Duffy.
Meeting adjourned at 10:23 a.m.
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________________ ______________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor Date
_____________________________________________ _____________
Mark Steinberg, Township Clerk Date
September 11, 2019
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
September 11, 2019
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened a meeting at 7:00p.m. at
the Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston,
Michigan. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the
Agenda. Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Eyster, Trustee
Kane,Clerk Steinberg, Trustee Williams and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Absent: None.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:04pm
None.
Closed at 7:04pm
Consent Agenda
Clerk Steinberg moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the minutes of the August 14, 2019 Board Meeting and September 5, 2019
Special Board Meetings.
General Fund Accounts Payable Paid, check numbers 22969-22980, for a total of
$5,789.37.
August Payroll Paid check numbers 45074-45129, and EFTs 624-629, for a total of
$34,174.81 (phys. check amount).
Police Accounts Payable Paid, check number 1102, for a total of $262.50.
General Funds Accounts Payable for Approval, check numbers 22981-22985, for
$593.05; AP for Approval #2, check numbers 22988-22993, for $2,172.78; and AP
for Approval #3, check number 22994, for a total of $185.
Revenue and Expenditure report ending August 31, 2019
August Revenue activity report (GL activity)
Building inspector’s report
Police Report
Acknowledge receipt of August Treasurer’s Report
Acknowledge receipt of August 28 th PC minutes
Seconded by Trustee Williams.
Discussion:None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Trustee Duffy, Clerk Steinberg, Treasurer Cutshaw,
Trustee Williams, Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: Trustee Kane.
Motion Passed.
Audit Report
Brenda Seelman with CSHCO presented the audit report. The auditors awarded the
Township the highest possible rating. She indicated that staff was cooperative
during the audit and that there is a good segregation of duties. In addition,
spending was down significantly from the previous year. The recommendations
they had from the previous fiscal year have been implemented in the current
fiscal year.
Budget Amendment / Funds Transfer
Trustee Eyster moved that the Williamstown Township Board authorize a transfer
of $254,161 from the General fund 101 account to the Capitol Project Fund 401
account as specified in Policy 012 dated 1-10-18 by authorizing the supervisor
to:
Amend the budget to increase line item 101-000-999.000 – Transfer out by
$254,161.
Amend the budget to increase the income line item 401-000-699.000 Transfer in
by $254,161.
Amend the budget to increase the expenditure line item 401-101-982.000 Special
Projects by $127,080 for a total of $242,799.
Amend the budget to increase the expenditure line item 401-441-814.000 Road
Improvements/Maintenance by $127,081 for a total of $574,851.00.
Board authorizes the Treasurer and Clerk to transfer $254,161 from General fund
101 line item 101-000-999.000 – Transfer out to Capitol Project Fund 401 line
item 401-000-699.000 Transfer in to the above accounts as budgeted.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Steinberg, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Williams, Supervisor
Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Trustee Duffy.
Nays: Trustee Kane.
Motion Passed.
Red Cedar Compensating Cut
Planning Commission Chair Gerald Eidt discussed the reasons for the Red Cedar
Compensating Cut, specifically the requirements about where excavation can take
place for this project. Alan Boyer,LSJ Engineers, gave a presentation about the
Red Cedar Compensating Cut for the Red Cedar (Frandor) Development. Excavators
will place approximately 10% of the excavation, or 16,000 yards into Summit
Cemetery for fill at the rear of the cemetery. DEQ already issued the permit
for this site and it is good for another 18 months. The County Drain office
permits are expected soon. Work will begin this fall, weather permitting.
Ideally, the project would be completed by Spring. Jason Hockstok of
Continental/Ferguson, LLC, and Tom Stover of Burton Holdings expressed
appreciation to the Township for helping to facilitate completion of the
project.
Clerk Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the revised site
plan for the Red Cedar River Compensating Cut in Williamstown Township with the
following conditions:
That discussions regarding an easement for the non-motorized trail continue;
That a grading permit is required;
That the project be evaluated for compliance with floodplain regulations;
That a copy of the revised Ingham County Drain Commission soil erosion control
permit be provided;
That a copy of the MDEQ/EGLE permit #WRP 001072 specific to the compensating
cut area be provided.
That the area be planted with native wetland seeds.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Discussion:
Question about the number of trees being cut down in the compensating cut area.
(Addressed in the plans)
Question about whether trees will be replanted. (The Township does not have a
tree ordinance)
Question about the amount of fill being put into Summit Cemetery
There will not be a loss of farmland.
Motion Passed.
Public Hearing – Dangerous Buildings Ordinance
Public Hearing Opened at 7:55 pm.
Jonathan Brandt, 4725 N. Branch Rd.: He cited the Residential Building Code and
spoke in opposition to the Dangerous Buildings Ordinance.
Larry Hughes, 5149 N. Williamston Rd.: concerns regarding arbitrary enforcement
of a Dangerous Buildings Ordinance.
Trustee Eyster moved to close public comment.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Public Hearing Closed at 8:05 pm.
Consumers Energy Ordinance
Trustee Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Consumers
Energy Company Electric Franchise Ordinance as presented.
Seconded by Trustee Williams.
Discussion:
Energy sources available to residents
Ordinance was reviewed by Township Attorney
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Williams, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Trustee Duffy,
Clerk Steinberg, Treasurer Cutshaw.
Nays: Trustee Kane.
Motion passed
Road Millage
Supervisor Bloomquist and Trustee Eyster discussed the process used and results
of the recently held road millage focus groups. A public forum will be held on
October 17, 2019 at 7:00 p.m. at the Township Hall. Results of the forum will
be presented at the October 30, 2019 Special Board meeting.
Waiver of Meeting Pay
At the September 5 special meeting the Board voted to not pay Trustees for the
special meeting. Clerk Steinberg reported that the vote should not have been
taken, for two reasons. First, Boards can’t add action items to a special
meeting agenda unless all board members are present (two were absent). Second,
theBoard cannot, by law, reduce compensation for board members, and the
Township is bound by the salaries set by the compensation commission.
Lighting Policy
Trustee Eyster and Treasurer Cutshaw presented information about street
lighting and possible criteria for approving funding for street lights. The
only statutes in place for street lighting are for Special Assessment Districts
for subdivisions. They will bring a proposed policy to next month’s meeting for
discussion and action.
Cyber Insurance
Clerk Steinberg presented the detailed information on cyber insurance. Premiums
are listed on the previous information distributed to the Board. This will be
discussed and voted on at the October Board meeting.
Reports – Departments and Committees
Joint Meeting with City of Williamston: Scheduled for Monday, September 30,
2019 with the City of Williamston at Williamston City Hall, 7:00 p.m.
Ingham County Chapter MTA: An Educational Night is scheduled for September 24 @
4:00 p.m., Vevay Township. Please RSVP to Wanda.
Planning Commission Risk Reduction Workshop: This workshop for the Board of
Trustees, Zoning Board of Appeals, and Planning Commission members is scheduled
for October 23, 2019 at 7:00 p.m. at the Township Hall.
Special Board Meeting: Scheduled for October 30, 2019 at 7:00 p.m. This is a
roads and budget workshop.
Park: The new playground equipment has been installed, and the woodchips are
being placed.
NIESA: Trustee Kane informed the Board about the NIESA meeting tomorrow night
featuring the budget and a potential millage. He reported they currently have
an unresolved issue with one of the trucks that may have manufacturing defects.
Treasury - Taxes: Property taxes are due by 5:00 p.m. on Monday, September 16,
2019. The Township Hall will be open for tax payments only from 9:00 am to 5:00
pm.
River Grant: More clearing days are being planned. The Township is also
planning a meeting with MDOT and the DNR on the roadside site for a launch
site. The Drain Commission will be responsible for the logjams that are too
large for volunteers to handle.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 9:02 pm.
None.
Closed at 9:02 pm.
Adjournment and Review
Clerk Steinberg moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Meeting adjourned at 9:04 p.m.
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________________ ______________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor Date
_____________________________________________ _____________
Mark Steinberg, Township Clerk Date
October 9, 2019
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
October 9, 2019
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened a meeting at 7:00 p.m. at
the Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston,
Michigan. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the
Agenda. Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Eyster, Trustee Kane,
Clerk Steinberg, Trustee Williams and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Absent: None.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:02 pm
Paul Weber - 1310 E. Sherwood: Requested the Township postpone action on the
proposed Dangerous Building Ordinance to allow for further review.
Carl McIntosh - 1145 Wild Cherry Dr.: Suggestions about the proposed Dangerous
Building Ordinance.
Jonathan Brandt - 4725 North Branch: Suggestions about the proposed Dangerous
Building Ordinance.
Kathy Scheathelm - 3840 Vanetter Road: Requested the Township find ways to
provide affordable senior housing.
Carl McIntosh – 1145 Wild Cherry Dr.: Requested the Board send the “cottage
cluster” community proposed development to the Planning Commission for
consideration.
Frans Wilbrink – 4701 Zimmer Rd.: Concerns about the condition of Summit
Cemetery.
John Powell – 790 Haslett Rd.: Concerns about the condition of Summit Cemetery
on Memorial Day.
Closed at 7:28 pm
Consent Agenda
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the minutes of the September 11, 2019 Board Meeting
General Fund Accounts Payable Paid, check numbers 22995-23010, for a total of
$7439.59, and GF Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 22986 and 22987,
totaling $325.45.
September Payroll Paid check numbers 45130-45163, and EFTs 630-633, for a total
of $27,025.61 (phys. check amount).
Police Accounts Payable Paid, check number 1104, for a total of $61,809.39.
General Funds Accounts Payable for Approval, check numbers 23011-23016, for
$5,719.96; AP for Approval #2, check numbers 23017-23022, for $3,383.16.
Police AP for Approval, check 1103, for 1025.00
Revenue and Expenditure report ending September 30, 2019
September Revenue activity report (GL activity)
Building inspector’s report
Police Report
Acknowledge receipt of September Treasurer’s Report
Acknowledge receipt of September 25 PC minutes
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Trustee Duffy, Clerk Steinberg, Treasurer Cutshaw,
Trustee Williams, Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: Trustee Kane.
Motion Passed.
Planning Commission Report
Planning Commission Chair, Gerald Eidt, discussed that the Planning Commission
approved proposed language for definition of PODS, semi-trailers, etc. to
provide clarification in the the Zoning Ordinance as temporary structures. A
public hearing is scheduled for November 27. 
Police Report
Assistant Meridian Township Police Chief, Brad Bach presented the police
report. They provided support for a house move through Williamstown Township.
The move took more hours than expected and those hours will be billed back to
the moving company. There was an accidental house fire at 263 Sherwood Rd. In
the report it indicates citations are up, but it was due to a software issue
incorrectly classifying the hours. This has been corrected and officers have
been retrained in its use.
Senior Housing
Clerk Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board request the Planning
Commission further explore the need for possible revisions to the zoning
ordinance to encourage housing for Seniors. Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: None.
Motion Passed.
Planning Commission Re-Appointment
Trustee Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board appoint Rex LaMore to
another 3-year term on the Planning Commission to expire on September 30, 2022.
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion: None.
Motion passed.
Dangerous Buildings Ordinance
Clerk Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board postpone action on the
Dangerous Building Ordinance until the November Board meeting.
Seconded by Trustee Duffy.
Discussion: 
Gary Bender, Township Attorney, addressed several concerns stated during public
comment:
The owner of record gets notified by certified/return receipt; it is in the
ordinance.
The Hearing Officer’s determination can be challenged.
The definitions of the Dangerous Buildings tracks with State Statute.
The Blight Ordinance is not a remedy, as it doesn’t talk about buildings, only
land, cars, trash, etc.
The Dangerous Building Ordinance is the appropriate remedy for a dangerous
building.
The ordinance is used as a method to force the property owner to deal with the
issues related to their property.
It helps protect the health, safety and welfare of the community.
There are three methods of appeal. If the Township does not set up a Dangerous
Building Board of Appeals, then it goes to the Township Board for appeal.
Old barns may be covered under the right to farm act; therefore, it would have
to be researched under the GAAMPS laws.
Trustee Eyster suggested that in Section 9 of the proposed Ordinance the
Township should add that the Board may not consist of members of the Board of
Trustees or employees of the Township.
Motion passed.
Cyber Insurance
Trustee Williams moved that the Williamstown Township Board purchase cyber
liability insurance as an add-on to the Township’s general insurance policy, at
a cost of $853.00 for the current fiscal year.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Discussion: There was discussion about whether or not the Township needs this
coverage considering that it has back-ups, etc. Township information sources
have indicated a rise in data hacks and ransomware attacks on public entities.
A previous Township breach was discussed and the implications, including legal
and costs, should resident or employee confidential data be breached.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Williams, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Steinberg,
Treasurer Cutshaw.
Nays: Trustees Duffy and Kane.
Motion Passed.
Discussion
Lighting Policy:
Trustee Eyster and Treasurer Cutshaw brought forward their recommendations for
handling requests for Township-paid streetlights. They suggested development of
special assessment districts for lighting. In lieu of street lighting, a
government entity could consider reflective additions to signage, such as
reflective tape. DTE indicated it would cost approximately $2100 to install a
streetlight. The proposed policy will be brought back to the Board for a vote
at the November meeting.
Road Millage:
There will be a public forum on Thursday, October 17 at 7:00 p.m. to gather
input from residents on a potential road millage. The recently commissioned
road report is on the Township website for people to read prior to the forum.
The Township Board is considering putting a millage proposal on the ballot in
March 2020. The Board encourages residents to get the word out to other
residents. There is also an article in the Williamston Enterprise advertising
the forum. Treasurer Cutshaw addressed what has happened with money earmarked
for road repairs in the past and how that money is accounted for now.
Basically, all monies earmarked for the roads are only spent on roads. The
County has not always been able to fulfill their part of the contract. Any
monies not spent in a given year are rolled over to the next year to be
utilized. If a road millage is passed, the law states that the money raised can
only be used for road expenditures.
Well and Septic Revisions to Code:
Currently the well and septic code is a “point of sale” system where the
wastewater systems are checked for conformance with requirements. Michigan is
the only state that doesn’t have a statewide system for wastewater. Ingham
County is considering doing away with the point of sale system and going
instead with a ten-year inspection schedule. The Ingham County Environmental
Health Department will ultimately be presenting the proposed revisions to the
county commissioners for adoption. The Township would like to have a public
meeting for the residents before that time so that our resident’s comments and
concerns can be included in the deliberations.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA: NIESA is working on bringing a millage proposal to the ballot in 2020 of
2 mils for 8 years to purchase equipment.
River Grant: Three Saturdays are planned for river log jam clearing, this
Saturday, October 19 and 26. The City of Williamston is submitting a grant for
a launch site and parking in downtown Williamston. Williamstown Township is
checking into a possible launch site at the park at Meridian Road.
Township Hall: The Township is currently getting estimates for the replacement
of the back doors and air wall curtains in the Township Hall.
Cemetery: We have received some complaints regarding the cemetery. Supervisor
Bloomquist stated that the Township has adopted procedures in response to
clarify expectations and improve communication. The Township encourages
residents to contact the Township in a timely manner with any concerns.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 9:00 pm.
Jonathan Brandt – 4725 North Branch Road: He disagrees with the purchase of
Cyber Insurance by the Township.
Paul Weber – 1310 E. Sherwood: Has concerns about the proposed Dangerous
Building Ordinance. He is opposed to raising taxes for Township road repair.
Gerald Eidt – 4115 Vanneter Rd: He complimented the Board on listening and
responding to residents’ concerns.
Frans Wilbrink – 4701 Zimmer Rd.: Concerns about how grounds maintenance is
allocated.
Carl McInosh: Concerns about “aerial pollution” due to unused cable TV lines.
Closed at 9:20 pm.
Adjournment and Review
Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Cutshaw . 
Meeting adjourned at 9:21 p.m.
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________________ ______________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor Date
_____________________________________________ _____________
Mark Steinberg, Township Clerk Date
Williamstown Township
October 30, 2019
Board of Trustees Special Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened a special meeting at 7:
00p.m. at the Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd.,
Williamston, Michigan, to discuss budget and roads. Supervisor Bloomquist
called the meeting to order and reviewed the Agenda. Supervisor Bloomquist led
the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Eyster, Trustee
Kane,Clerk Steinberg, Trustee Williams and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Absent: None.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:02pm
Jonathan Brandt, 4725 N. Branch, expressed concerns about the blight ordinance
and PODs.
Closed at 7:05pm
Budget
The Board discussed moving funds from Special Projects and Neighborhood Streets
to Road Improvements in the 2019-2020 budget, via budget amendment.
Roads
The Board agreed to consider proposed bond ballot language for road maintenance
and improvements at the November 13 Board meeting.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:35pm.
Nancy Williams, 131 Bismark, commented on a potential alternative to guardrails
on Township roads.
Closed at 8:37 pm.
Adjournment
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Meeting adjourned at 8:37 p.m.
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________________ ______________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor Date
_____________________________________________ _____________
Mark Steinberg, Township Clerk Date
November 13, 2019
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened a meeting at 7:00 p.m. at
the Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston,
Michigan. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the
Agenda. Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Eyster, Trustee Kane,
Clerk Steinberg, and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Absent: Trustee Williams.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:02 pm
None.
Closed at 7:02 pm
Consent Agenda
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the minutes of the October 9, 2019 and October 30, 2019 Board Meeting
General Fund Accounts Payable Paid, check numbers 23023-23040, for a total of
$32,041.63, and GF Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 30000-30004,
totaling $1,785.95.
October Payroll Paid check numbers 45164-45205, and EFTs 634-640, for a total
of $29,026.63 (phys. check amount).
General Funds Accounts Payable for Approval, check numbers 30005-30018, for
$5,553.85; AP for Approval #2, check numbers 30019-30026, for $5,089.31.
Revenue and Expenditure report ending October 31, 2019.
October Revenue activity report (GL activity)
Building inspector’s report
Police Report
Acknowledge receipt of October Treasurer’s Report
Acknowledge receipt of October 20, 2019 PC minutes
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg
Discussion: It was noted that the apparent gap in check numbers GF AP Paid
above was due to changing bank accounts from Chase to Independent, and starting
the new account with a clearly separated even number. There will be a similar
apparent gap in Payroll check numbers with the November report, for the same
reason.
Trustee Kane wishes to have his objection to the Consent Agenda noted in the
minutes because he perceives a lack of transparency by providing the items in a
Consent Agenda.
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Trustee Duffy, Clerk Steinberg, Treasurer Cutshaw,
Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: Trustee Kane.
Motion Passed.
Treasury Fee Resolution
Trustee Duffy moved the Williamstown Township Board approved Resolution #65-
2019, establishing Treasury Department fees and penalties.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: None
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Clerk Steinberg, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Kane,
Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster.
Nays: None
Budget Amendments
Trustee Eyster moved that the Board approve the budget amendments for 2019-2020
with clarification.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Duffy, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster,
Clerk Steinberg.
Nays: Trustee Kane.
Motion Passed.
Township Attorney Gary Bender arrives at 7:25 pm.
Lighting Policy
Clerk Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board adopt Lighting Policy 13-
2019 as presented to the Township Board.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Discussion: None.
Motion Passed.
Door Repair
Clerk Steinberg moved Williamstown Township contract with Door Pro to replace
the Community Room doors at the Township Hall with a single door and provide
automatic doors at a cost not to exceed $13,500.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Steinberg,
Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Kane.
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
Discussion: None.
Concrete Repair
Clerk Steinberg moved Williamstown Township contract with Concrete Raising and
Leveling to repair/replace the concrete surrounding the Township Hall at a cost
not to exceed $2,500.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Steinberg, Treasurer
Cutshaw, Trustee Duffy.
Nays: Trustee Kane.
Police Assessment
Trustee Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board approve Resolution 2019-
98, confirming the 2019 Special Assessment Roll for Police Protection within
the Township with the Special Assessment Roll total of $212,975.00.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Steinberg, Treasurer
Cutshaw, Trustee Duffy.
Nays: Trustee Kane.
Motion Passed.
Dangerous Building Ordinance
Trustee Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board adopt the Dangerous
Building Ordinance as presented in current draft form with the removal of “as a
last resort safety measure” from the first paragraph.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Discussion: Concerns about overreach and broad language in the Ordinance.
Amendment to the Dangerous Building Ordinance Motion: Trustee Duffy moved to
draft a policy for the enforcement of the Dangerous Building Ordinance by the
January 2020 Board meeting.
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg.
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote as Amended
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Steinberg, Treasurer Cutshaw, Supervisor
Bloomquist.
Nays: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Kane.
Motion Passed with Amendment.
Ballot Language
Trustee Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board approve preparation of
proposed language for a road bonding (millage) proposal to be placed on the
March 10, 2020 ballot, and to be voted on at the December 11, 2019 Board
meeting. The proposal parameters will be for borrowing $7.5 mils over 10 years,
with the first year estimate of 2.97 mills. In addition, the Board authorizes
the Township Officers to select a bond counselor to assist in development of
the ballot language, with the understanding that should the ballot proposal be
approved by the voters on March 10, 2020, there will be a counselor fee for the
duration of the bonding process.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Discussion: Trustee Duffy wish to clarify that his vote is due to the cost of
bonding.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Steinberg, Treasurer Cutshaw, Supervisor
Bloomquist.
Nays: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Kane.
Motion Passed.
Discussion
Budget: Supervisor Bloomquist attended a budget workshop last week and got some
good ideas. She has given the department heads their budgets to work on, due at
the end of November, so that she could work on the budget before the December
meeting. She estimated the State share for the Township and the property tax
that will be due to the Township. Supervisor Bloomquist passed out the history
of the Township budget for the past three years to compare to what is expected
in revenue. She asked the Trustees to contact her with questions or
suggestions. Supervisor Bloomquist will have a full budget prepared for the
December meeting.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA: Trustee Kane said that NIESA will be asking for two millages in 2020 for
operations and for buildings and equipment.
Cemetery: Supervisor Bloomquist stated that the Township is going through the
revisions to allow natural burials and pet burials in the cemeteries. The
Township is also changing some forms to address issues that have been raised by
residents. She is also getting quotes on replicating the wrought iron arch that
was at the cemetery at one time. Supervisor Bloomquist will research
information about the ratio of monies paid for the cemetery between the City of
Williamston and Williamstown Township.
Photo contest: Williamstown Township is hosting a reception on November 19 for
the participants in the 2019 Photo Contest. Winners will be announced at the
reception.
Branch School Open House: The Branch School Open House is taking place on
December 15, 2019 from 2:00 to 5:00 p.m. The Williamston Madrigals will perform
that day at 3:00 p.m.
Cyber Crime Workshop: There is a Cyber Crime Workshop for townships on Friday,
November 15. There is also a workshop entitled Zoning: Pitfalls and Protections
being. Both will be held in Kalamazoo.
Road Advisory Meeting: Supervisor Bloomquist and Trustee Eyster will be
attending a Road Advisory meeting tomorrow, November 14, for Ingham County
municipalities.
Treasury – Moving Accounts: Treasurer Cutshaw explained that the Township is
moving some accounts from Chase to Independent Bank. Both bank’s accounts will
stay open until all checks have cleared.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:53 pm.
John Pratt - 4421 Shaftsburg Rd., Williamston: Concerns about a citation
received for blight.
Closed at 8:58 pm.
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster. 
Meeting adjourned at 8:59 p.m.
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________________ ______________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor Date
_____________________________________________ _____________
Mark Steinberg, Township Clerk Date
December 11, 2019
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened a meeting at 7:00 p.m. at
the Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston,
Michigan. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the
Agenda. Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist Trustee Eyster, Trustee Kane, Clerk Steinberg,
Trustee Williams, and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Absent: Trustee Duffy.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:02 pm
None.
Closed at 7:02 pm
Consent Agenda
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the minutes of the November 13, 2019 Board Meeting
General Fund Accounts Payable Paid, check numbers 30027-30043, for a total of
$7346.54.
November Payroll Paid check numbers 50000-50031, and EFTs 641-646, for a total
of $24,751.33 (phys. check amount).
General Funds Accounts Payable for Approval, check numbers 30044-30053, for
$5367.70; AP for Approval #2, check numbers 30054-30058, for $562.59.
Revenue and Expenditure report ending November 30, 2019.
November Revenue activity report (GL activity)
Building inspector’s report
Police Report
Acknowledge receipt of November Treasurer’s Report
Acknowledge receipt of November 20, 2019 PC minutes
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg
Discussion: Concerns about transparency.
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Steinberg, Treasurer Cutshaw, Supervisor
Bloomquist.
Nays: Trustee Kane.
Motion Passed.
Trustee Williams entered meeting at 7:14 pm.
Road Improvement Resolution
Bill Danhof of Miller Canfield, counsel for the Township’s road bond proposal,
spoke about the details of the road bond. It is a $7.5 million bond, utilized
as needed. If the bond is passed by the voters, it doesn’t authorize the bond,
but the Board will need to come back to Miller Canfield for the actual bond.
Miller Canfield will do all authorizations, and other legal work if the bond
measure passes.
Clerk Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board adopt the Resolution
submitting the road improvement proposal for the March, 2020 election.
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion: Questions about when monies can be expended after the bond passes.
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Steinberg, Treasurer Cutshaw, Supervisor Bloomquist
and Trustee Williams.
Nays: Trustee Kane.
Motion Passed.
Temporary Structures Zoning Ordinance Amendments
Planning Commission Chair, Jerry Eidt, presented an overview of their
recommended amendments to the Temporary Structures Zoning Ordinance. This is to
clarify questions that have been asked about temporary structures permissions.
There was a public hearing on this subject by the Planning Commission and no
one from the public spoke at the hearing.
Due to questions about details in the ordinance, this was deferred to the
January 8, 2020 meeting.
Budget Amendments
Supervisor Bloomquist explained the reason for the budget amendments. Clerk
Steinberg explained the need for a third tablulator for anticipated increased
use of AV (absentee voter) ballots. It is possible the State may reimburse us
for the tabulator but we don’t know at this point. This third tabulator will be
used solely for AV ballots from both precincts and all AV ballots from both
precincts would be processed by an appointed Counting Board.
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Board approve the budget amendments for the 2019-
2020 budget.
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Steinberg, Treasurer Cutshaw, Supervisor
Bloomquist, Trustee Kane, and Trustee Williams.
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
March Meeting Date
Clerk Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board reschedule the March 11,
2020 board meeting to March 18 th due to the March 10 th election.
Seconded by Trustee Williams.
Discussion: None.
Motion Passed.
Discussion
Budget: Supervisor Bloomquist reviewed the budget by department. No questions
or comments were made during the review. Supervisor Bloomquist will develop a
narrative to go with the January budget discussion.
Phones: Supervisor Bloomquist is reviewing recent phone system vendor
incentives to determine if the Township can obtain a new system at a reasonable
cost.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA: Trustee Kane indicated that they are updating the bylaws. They continue
having issues with equipment. NIESA will have at least one ballot initiative on
the August ballot. Noah Belanger took Sandy Welton’s place and Dorothy Hart
replaced Paul Griffiths on the Board.
Cemetery: The compensating cut near the river on Beeman Road is going well and
they hope to have it complete by March.
Branch School Open House: The Branch School Open House is taking place on
December 15, 2019 from 2:00 to 5:00 p.m. The Williamston Madrigals will perform
that day at 3:00 p.m. Refreshments will be served.
River Log Jams: Volunteer crews went out five different times to remove log
jams. The Ingham County Drain Commission is bidding out the contract work for
the heavy work that can’t be done by volunteers.
Assessing: We are assisting eligible property owners to obtain Primary
Residence Exemptions (PREs), which lower their property taxes. Board members
are invited to attend the MTA training meetings on the subject of assessing. 
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:25 pm.
Donna Tocarchick – 9605 Deer Trail: Discussed temporary building amendment
proposal, road ballot initiative, phone systems, and solar assessments.
Closed at 8:29 pm.
Adjournment and Review
Clerk Steinberg moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster. 
Meeting adjourned at 8:30 p.m.
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________________ ______________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor Date
_____________________________________________ _____________
Mark Steinberg, Township Clerk Date
2020 Meeting Minutes
January 8, 2020
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened a meeting at 7:00 p.m. at
the Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston,
Michigan. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the
Agenda. Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Kane, Clerk Steinberg, Trustee
Williams, Trustee Duffy, and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Absent: Trustee Eyster
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:03 pm
Nancy Williams – 131 Bismark St., Williamston: She thanked the Board for
opening the Branch school for the Christmas Open House.
Closed at 7:04 pm
Consent Agenda
Trustee Williams move the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the minutes of the December 11, 2019 Board Meeting
General Fund Accounts Payable Paid, check numbers 30059-30077, for a total of
$8970.39
December Payroll Paid check numbers 50032-50057, and EFTs 647-652, for a total
of $25,506.65 (phys. check amount).
General Funds Accounts Payable for Approval, check numbers 30078-30083, for
$4718.50; AP for Approval #2, check numbers 30084-30091, for $4152.30.
Revenue and Expenditure report ending December 31, 2019.
December Revenue activity report (GL activity)
Building inspector’s report
Police Report
Acknowledge receipt of December Treasurer’s Report
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: A clarifying question was raised about the Treasurer’s Report.
Discussion ensued about the appropriate amount of detail in the Board meeting
minutes.
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Williams, Clerk Steinberg, Treasurer Cutshaw,
Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: Trustee Kane.
Motion Passed.
Police Report:
Chief Ken Plaga, Meridian Township Police Department (MTPD) gave the police
report. The annual police report will be provided to Williamstown Township next
month. MTPD came out very well on their assessment for State Accreditation.
Their annual Youth Academy for high school age students is starting on February
12, 2020. Prospective students can apply online. The canine officer, Yukon, has
recently retired. They will be getting a new canine as soon as one is fully
trained. Two new speed signs will be available for use in Williamstown Township
that will also transmit traffic data in real time.
Poverty Exemption
Clerk Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the 2020 Township
Poverty Guidelines Resolution #97 with the beginning income qualification set
at $12,490.
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion: Clarification questions about historical poverty exemptions in the
Township, the application process and documentation required.
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Clerk Steinberg, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Williams, Trustee Duffy,
Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: Trustee Kane.
Motion Passed.
Temporary Structures Zoning Ordinance Amendments
Trustee Williams moved the Williamstown Township Board adopt the recommended
amendments to Section 1.03- Definitions, Section 2.02 Allowable and Prohibitive
Uses and 2.07 Temporary Structures.
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg.
Discussion:  
Clarification of the time frame for temporary structures.
Issues with risks to property owners.
Need for clarification due to ruling by ZBA
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Williams, Supervisor Bloomquist, Clerk
Steinberg.
Nays: Trustee Kane, Trustee Duffy.
Motion Passed.
PC Appointment
Trustee Duffy moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Supervisor’s
appointment of Donna Tocarchick for a 3 year term to the Planning Commission
ending September 2022.
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg.
Discussion: None.
Motion Passed.
Budget Amendment
Clerk Steinberg moved the Board approve the budget amendments as presented, for
the 2019-2020 budget.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Add to                    Reduce                  Amount Note
101-191-728 Elections –                         $1,000 Due to change in
supplies                                                 language requirement
                          101-191-725.000         $800
                          Elections-printing
                          101-191-812.000         $200
                          Elections-consulting     
                          fees
101-751-881.003 Photo                             $1,500 Photo contest addition
contest restricted                                       GL
                          101-000-664.001 General $1,100
                          funds restricted
                          101-751-881.003         $400
                          Calendar Sales
101-294-729.000 Twp.                              $500   To cover the cost of 3
Office Newsletter                                        newsletters
                          101-294-728.000 Twp.    $500
                          Office-supplies
101-294-910.000           Twp. Office insurance-  $1,000 Per motion to approve
                          commercial crime               expenditure
101-101-802.000 Twp.      101-101-802.000 Twp.    $1,000
Board Legal Fees          Board Legal Fees
 
Discussion: None.
Roll Call
Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Kane, Supervisor Bloomquist, Clerk Steinberg,
Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Williams.
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
Budget
Clerk Steinberg moved the Township Board schedule a Public Hearing for the
2020-2021 proposed budget on Wednesday March 4th at 7:00 pm.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Discussion: None.
Motion Passed.
Financial Policy Discussion
The Township is setting up the availability for employees and commissioners to
utilize direct deposit or payroll. The financial policy with the necessary
amendments was distributed for review and discussion.
Discussion: Will be brought back to the February meeting.
Friends of the Red Cedar resolution
Township residents are in the process of creating a Friends group to work on
items related to the Red Cedar river such as getting designations, etc. A copy
of a proposed resolution was submitted to the Board for consideration. Please
submit comments prior to the February Board meeting.
Road Bonding Ballot
The Township will be holding two public forums in February to allow Township
residents to ask questions about the upcoming road millage that will be on the
March 10, 2020 ballot. Dates are still being worked out. The Board is requested
to submit comments and recommended changes to the Supervisor by the 16 th for
the information mailer being sent to residents. Notification of the forums will
be submitted to the local papers and on the website.
Trustee Williams left the room at 8:15 p.m.
Policy and Procedures – Dangerous Buildings:
Supervisor Bloomquist discussed the policy and procedure document that was
submitted to the Board. This mirrors our ordinance and State Law. She is also
suggesting the Township become a member of the Farm Preservation group for $50
annually.
Discussion: No objections to joining the Farm Preservation Group
    Comments and suggestions to Supervisor Bloomquist prior to the next
meeting.
Budget:
Supervisor Bloomquist submitted wage recommendations for the 2021 fiscal year.
The Township is fortunate to have an educated and dedicated staff. The Board
discussed various questions regarding the proposed budget.
Trustee Williams returned to the meeting 8:25 p.m.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA: Trustee Kane stated that NIESA has amended the bylaws. A millage
proposal is in the draft stage to be placed on the ballot this year. NIESA has
experienced some difficulty in hiring and retaining qualified personnel.
Ingham County Parks Grant -Log Jam Removal:  Supervisor Bloomquist stated that
the Ingham County Drain Commissioner awarded the contract for the removal of
the large log jams. Work will begin as soon as weather permits with completion
by the end of May, weather (river level) permitting .
Assessing:  Personal Property notices are going out tomorrow. The Board of
Review schedule will be modified this year due to the March election. The Board
of Review has been working to make sure property owners are getting the
Principal Residence Exemptions that they quality for. Supervisor Bloomquist and
Township Assessor, Steve Vaughn attended Assessing Continuing Education. Board
of Review members are enthused about the education offered.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:39 pm.
None.
Closed at 8:40 pm.
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg. 
Meeting adjourned at 8:40 p.m.
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________________ ______________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor Date
_____________________________________________ _____________
Mark Steinberg, Township Clerk Date
 
February 12, 2020
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened a meeting at 7:00 p.m. at
the Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston,
Michigan. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the
Agenda. Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Kane, Clerk Steinberg, Trustee
Williams, Trustee Duffy, and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Absent: Trustee Eyster
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:01 pm
None.
Closed at 7:01 pm
Eric Schertzing
Ingham County Treasurer Eric Schertzing discussed the County initiative to help
property owners avoid foreclosure due to nonpayment of property taxes.
Consent Agenda
Trustee Williams moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the minutes of the January 8, 2020 Board Meeting
General Fund Accounts Payable Paid, check numbers 30092-30116, for a total of
$339,223.54.
January Payroll Paid check numbers 50058-50101, and EFTs 653-659, for a total
of $29,422.91 (phys. check amount).
General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval, check numbers 30117-30133, for
$11,514.45; AP for Approval #2, check numbers 30134-30135, for $5182.10.
Revenue and Expenditure report ending January 31, 2020.
January Revenue activity report (GL activity)
Building inspector’s report
Police Report
Acknowledge receipt of January Treasurer’s Report
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg
Discussion: Clarification on the 425 Agreement, the Hazmat team, and BS&A.
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Clerk Steinberg, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Williams, Trustee Duffy,
Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: Trustee Kane.
Motion Passed.
Planning Commission
Planning Commission Chair Gerald Eidt reviewed topics addressed at the January
22 Commission meeting. He summarized progress in developing recommendations on
a policy on event barns, and described recent developments regarding “increased
density.”
Budget Amendments
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Board approve the amendments as presented for the
2019-2020 budget.
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Steinberg, Trustee Williams, Trustee Duffy, Supervisor Bloomquist,
Trustee Kane, Treasurer Cutshaw
Nays: None
Motion Passed (See Attached)
Board of Review Appointment
Trustee Duffy moved the Board approve the appointment of Brian Johnston for a
two-year term to the Board of Review ending January 2022.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: Posting of openings on the website.
Motion passed.
Friends of the Red Cedar Resolution
Trustee Duffy moved the Board adopt Resolution #123-2020
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg
Discussion: The Resolution expresses support for a River Trail but does not
commit Township resources.
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Clerk Steinberg, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Williams, Trustee Kane,
Trustee Duffy, Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
Policy and Procedures for Dangerous Building Ordinance
Trustee Williams moved the Board adopt the Policy and Procedures for the
Dangerous Building Ordinance.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Discussion: The language of the Ordinance is the same as in State law. State
law cannot be enforced locally unless an ordinance is adopted.
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Williams, Supervisor Bloomquist, Clerk
Steinberg.
Nays: Trustee Kane, Trustee Duffy.
Motion Passed.
Police Assessment Roll
Clerk Steinberg moved the Board schedule the Public Hearing for the Police
Assessment Roll on Wednesday, March 4 th at 7:00 PM.
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion: question on format of material.
Motion passed.
Financial Policy Amendment
Clerk Steinberg moved the Board approve the amendment to the Financial Policy
as presented to the Board.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: none
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Williams, Trustee Kane, Trustee Duffy,
Supervisor Bloomquist, Clerk Steinberg.
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA: Trustee Kane stated that NIESA is developing a dual millage proposal,
covering operations and equipment. They feel that more funding is needed to
attract qualified personnel.
Ingham County Parks Grant -Log Jam Removal:  Supervisor Bloomquist stated that
the contractor expects to begin work as soon as weather allows.
Public Hearing: Reminder of the Hearing on March 4, 7:00 pm, on the 2020-2021
Township budget and Police Assessment Roll.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:01 pm.
None.
Closed at 8:01 pm.
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg. 
Meeting adjourned at 8:03 p.m.
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________________ ______________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor Date
_____________________________________________ _____________
Mark Steinberg, Township Clerk Date
March 18, 2020
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened a meeting at 7:00 p.m. at
the Williamstown Township Hall located at 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston,
Michigan. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the
Agenda. Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Kane, Clerk Steinberg, Trustee Eyster
(arrived at 7:05 pm), and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Absent: Trustees Duffy and Williams.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:03 pm
Jonathan Brandt: Provided feedback on the recent road bonding proposal.
Closed at 7:04 pm
Consent Agenda
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the minutes of the February 12, 2020 Board Meeting and the March 4,
2020 Special Board Meeting.
General Fund Accounts Payable Paid, check numbers 30136-30150, for a total of
$10,148.07 and GF Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 30160-30163, for a
total of $1,518.78.
February Payroll Paid check numbers 50102-50133, and EFTs 660-666, for a total
of $23,975.67 (phys. check amount).
General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval, check numbers 30151-30159, for
$2202.23; AP for Approval #2, check numbers 30164-30169, for $1684.36.
Revenue and Expenditure report ending February 29, 2020.
February Revenue activity report (GL activity)
Building inspector’s report
Police Report
Acknowledge receipt of February Treasurer’s Report
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Steinberg, Treasurer Cutshaw, Supervisor
Bloomquist.
Nays: Trustee Kane.
Motion Passed.
Senior Center
Clerk Steinberg moved the Board approve $3000.00 to the Williamston Senior
Center as budgeted to aid in the cost for services provided to area Seniors.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Steinberg, Treasurer Cutshaw, Supervisor
Bloomquist.
Nays: Trustee Kane.
Motion Passed.
Budget Amendments
Clerk Steinberg moved the Board approve the following budget amendments for the
2019-2020 budget.
Add to                Reduce                Amount Purpose
101-209-728.000       101-209-864.000       $700   Update of Assessing Software
Assessing Supplies    Conference & Training        
                                                 
101-441-714.000       101-441-816.000       $50    To cover payroll expense
Health Insurance      Recycling/transfer           
                                                 
209-276-728.000       209-276-864.000       $200   Over Budget
Supplies              Conference & Training        
                                                 
101-101-956.000       101-101-864.000       $100   Over expended dues
Membership & Dues     Conference & Training        
                                                 
101-294-920.000       101-294-728.000       $1,000  
Utilities & Telephone Supplies                     
                                                 
209-276-705.000       209-276-704.000       $700   Wage transfer between
                                                   departments
Salaries & Wages -    Salaries & Wages -           
Caretaker             Temporary Help               
                                                 
101-191-703.000       101-191-980.000       $4,000 Miscalculation on election
                                                   worker cost
Salaries -            Capital Outlay -             
Election Workers      Elections                    
 
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Steinberg, Treasurer Cutshaw, Supervisor
Bloomquist.
Nays: Trustee Kane.
Motion Passed.
Police Assessment Roll
Trustee Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve Resolution 2020-
98, Confirming the 2020 Special Assessment Roll for Police Protection Within
the Township with the Special Assessment Roll total of $213,500.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Steinberg, Treasurer Cutshaw, Supervisor
Bloomquist.
Nays: Trustee Kane.
Motion Passed.
20-21 Budget
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve the 2020-21
Township Budget with a beginning Township Total Fund Equity of $2,419,357 as of
Feb 18, 2020, with department appropriations as outlined:
Dept 101- Township Board      $98,554
Dept 171- Supervisor      $47,262
Dept 191- Elections         $33,994
Dept 209- Assessor         $54,609
Dept 215- Clerk         $48,282
Dept 247- Board of Review      $3,088
Dept 253- Treasurer         $58,455
Dept 265- Building and Grounds   $75,518
Dept 276- Cemetery         $26,000
Dept 294- Township Office      $62,773
Dept 371- Building Inspector   $28,522
Dept 400- Planning Commission   $65,934
Dept 411- Zoning Administrator   $2,171
Dept 420- Zoning Bd of Appeals   $3,519
Dept 441- Public Works      $62,968
Dept 751- Recreation      $58,898
Dept 851- Other Expenses      $500
Dept 890- Contingency      $40,000
Total general fund appropriations   $771,097
Dept 301- Police fund      $342,330
Dept 276- Cemetery         $129,312
401- Capital Project Fund
Dept. 101-special projects      $105,000
Dept. 441 public works      $431,958
Dept. 751 recreation         $8,263
Dept 753 parks grant      $49,434
Dept 754 park house         $11,715
Total 401 fund appropriations      $606,370        
Total Fund Appropriations      $1,849,169
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Steinberg, Treasurer Cutshaw, Supervisor
Bloomquist.
Nays: Trustee Kane.
Motion Passed.
20-21 Meeting Dates
Clerk Steinberg moved the Township Board adopt the meeting dates as presented
for the 2020-21 fiscal year with the meeting time changed to 6:00 pm.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Discussion:  There was discussion about the time change to 6:00 pm.
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Steinberg, Treasurer Cutshaw, Supervisor
Bloomquist.
Nays: Trustee Kane.
Motion Passed.
Park Prairie Burn
Trustee Eyster moved the Township Board approve up to $8000.00 for the
controlled burn at the Township Park.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Discussion: Supervisor Bloomquist has received one bid for the burn and she is
awaiting another.
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Steinberg, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Kane,
Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
Hall Rental Refunds
Clerk Steinberg moved the Township Board refund deposits for hall rental
reservations through the end of April.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Discussion: None.
Motion Passed.
Correction to the February Board Meeting Minutes
Trustee Kane moved the minutes of February 12, 2020 be amended to include the
roll call vote on the consent agenda.
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg.
Discussion: None.
Motion Passed.
DISCUSSION ITEMS
Event Barns
The proposed Ordinance covering event barns was discussed. Board members
questioned the location for event barns and also whether the proposed Ordinance
may be too restrictive. It was suggested that the Board invite Planning
Commission Chair, Gerald Eidt to the next meeting to address the Planning
Commission’s discussions related to event barns. 
Roads
The road bonding proposal failed at the March 10 th election. The Board
discussed next steps to be taken, if any. It was suggested the Board ask the
Township Road Committee to attend the next Board meeting to get their thoughts
about the proposal and what they suggest for next steps.
Covid-19
Supervisor Bloomquist sent residents an email about closing the Township office
to the public in light of the Covid-19 pandemic. After receiving a recent email
about the appropriate use of online Board meetings, Supervisor Bloomquist will
explore what can be done in the event the pandemic is still an issue for
April’s Board meeting. The Township has cancelled all hall rentals and meetings
through the end of April, except for Board meetings. The Spring Cleanup, Art
Tour, and Photography Bootcamp have been postponed. Monthly recycling may be
temporarily Suspended as well.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA: Trustee Kane says NIESA has closed their office and are available by
phone only. There is a phone on the outside of the building. They are taking
measures for staffing in case any staff is affected by the virus. There will be
a millage coming at one of the upcoming elections in 2020.
River Clean-up: The river is still too high to attempt the continued clean-up
efforts.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:18 pm.
Frans Wilbrink: Discussed meeting time changes, prairie burn, event barns and
the road bonding proposal.
Jonathan Brandt: Discussed meeting time changes.
Closed at 8:22 pm.
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Eyster moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg. 
Meeting adjourned at 8:25 p.m.
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________________ ______________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor Date
_____________________________________________ _____________
Mark Steinberg, Township Clerk Date
April 8, 2020
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened a virtual meeting at 6:00
p.m. via Zoom (meeting ID 410-153-895) due to the COVID-19 virus. Supervisor
Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the Agenda. Supervisor
Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Kane, Clerk Steinberg, Trustee Eyster ,
Trustee Duffy, and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Absent: Trustee Williams.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 6:03 pm
None.
Closed at 6:04 pm
Consent Agenda
Clerk Steinberg moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the minutes of the March 18, 2020 Board Meeting.
General Fund Accounts Payable Paid, check numbers 30179-30183 (30179 void), for
a total of $3695.70 and GF Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 30170-30178,
for a total of $427.52.
March Payroll Paid check numbers 50134-50188, and EFTs 667-672, for a total of
$37227.31 (phys. check amount).
General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval, check numbers 30184-30187, for
$2043.96.
Revenue and Expenditure report ending March 31, 2020.
March Revenue activity report (GL activity)
Police Report
Acknowledge receipt of March Treasurer’s Report
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Steinberg, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Duffy,
Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: Trustee Kane.
Motion Passed.
Police Report
Chief Plaga gave an update. Officers will conduct wellness checks for senior
residents on a request basis. The Youth Academy was cancelled due to the COVID-
19 restrictions.
ACTION ITEMS
Trustee Duffy moved the Williamston Township Board recommend the following
roads be contracted with the Ingham County Road Department for maintenance/
improvement for the 2020 year at a cost not to exceed $390,000 from the 401-
441-814 fund:
Beeman/Rowley Rd. from Sherwood to Williamston City limits (1.9 miles) (up to
2” overlay)
Germany Rd. from Zimmer Rd. to Williamston Rd. (1.5 miles) (up to 2” overlay)
Germany Rd. East from Meridian Rd. (.5 miles) (up to 2” overlay)
Zimmer Rd. Haslett to Milton (repair work was begun in 2019, waiting for
recommendation on any further repair and chip seal).
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: Work on Beeman Road will not begin until the construction work is
done.
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Steinberg, Treasurer Cutshaw, Supervisor
Bloomquist, Trustee Duffy.
Nays: Trustee Kane.
Motion Passed.
DISCUSSION
COVID-19 has led to cancellation or the indefinite postponement of the spring
clean-up event, monthly recycling and the Art Tour, among other activities.
Updates will be posted on the Township website.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA: Per the DNR, a statewide burn ban is in effect.
There is no May election in the Township.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 6:42 pm.
None.
Closed at 6:43 pm.
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg. 
Meeting adjourned at 6:45 p.m.
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________________ ______________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor Date
_____________________________________________ _____________
Mark Steinberg, Township Clerk Date
May 13, 2020
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
May 13, 2020
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened a virtual meeting at 6:03
p.m. on May 13, 2020 via Zoom (meeting ID 867-0489-0538) due to the COVID-19
virus. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the
Agenda. Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Kane, Clerk Steinberg, Trustee Eyster ,
Trustee Duffy, Trustee Williams and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Absent: None.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 6:08 pm
None.
Closed at 6:09 pm
Consent Agenda
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the consent agenda consisting of:
   •   Approve the minutes of the April 8, 2020 Board Meeting.
   •   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid, check numbers 30188 to 30204 for a
total of $4,684.76
   •   April Payroll Paid check numbers 50189-50210, and EFTs 673-675, for a
total of $21,904.36(phys. check amount).
   •   General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval, check numbers 30205-30209,
for $6,762.30 and 30210-30212, for $714.40.
   •   Police AP Paid check number 1108 for $60,788.83
   •   Revenue and Expenditure report ending April 30, 2020.
   •   Police Report
   •   Acknowledge receipt of April Treasurer’s Report
   •   Receipt of Library Correspondence
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: None.
Note: Corrected month of Treasurer Report, should be April, not March.
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Steinberg, Trustee Williams Treasurer Cutshaw,
Trustee Duffy, Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: Trustee Kane.
Motion Passed.
Senior Center Presentation
The presentation did not take place. No representative of the senior center was
able to attend.
ACTION ITEMS
Spring Clean Up
Trustee Duffy moved the Williamstown Township Board reschedule the spring clean
up to September 12 2020, with the understanding that it may need to be
cancelled due to COVID-19.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Discussion: None.
Motion passed.
 
Prime Housing Group Donation
Clerk Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board accept the donation of
$6,000 from Prime Housing Group with the restricted use for Park improvements,
GL 401-751-881.000.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Supervisor Bloomquist, Clerk Steinberg, Trustee Williams,
Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Eyster, Trustee Kane
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
 
Road Maintenance
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Township Board revise the
recommendation to the Ingham County Road Department based on the review of the
Road Department for maintenance/improvements for the 2020 year to the following
roads at a cost not to exceed $100,000:
Germany Road east from Meridian Road (.5 miles)(up to 2 inch overlay)
Zimmer Road, Haslett to Milton (further skip paving and chip sealing)
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: How much funding will likely be available for future road work,
given the overall economy, and how will funding priorities be determined?
Township funds not be used to redo Germany Road following the panned culvert
replacement.
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Trustee Williams, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Treasurer
Cutshaw
Nays: Trustee Duffy, Clerk Steinberg, Trustee Kane
Motion passed.
DISCUSSION
COVID-19 update, and office policy and procedures. We are planning to bring
back office staff on a limited basis, beginning May 26. Preparation for summer
taxes and elections is beginning. At present, only elected officers and
maintenance staff are working. It is essential that there be Board-approved
policies and procedures in place before staff are called back. These are now
being drafted. Following legal review, these will be sent to the Board and a
special meeting will be called for next week.
The contract for office phones is about to expire. Supervisor Bloomquist will
solicit at least 2 bids for a new phone system.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA:  The statewide burn ban has been lifted. NIESA’s costs have increased
with the need to purchase personal protection equipment for staff. A millage
proposal will be on the August 4 ballot.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:03 pm.
One person expressed appreciation for the Zoom meeting, and suggested ways to
improve operation of the Zoom format.
Closed at 7:07 pm
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Meeting adjourned at &:09 pm.
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________________ ______________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor         Date
_____________________________________________ _____________
Mark Steinberg, Township Clerk               Date
May 21, 2020
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Special Meeting Minutes
May 21, 2020
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened a virtual special meeting
at 8:02 a.m. on May 21, 2020 via Zoom (meeting ID 829 6437 3879) due to the
COVID-19 virus. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed
the Agenda. Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Kane, Clerk Steinberg, Trustee Eyster,
Trustee Duffy, Trustee Williams and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Absent: None.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
None.
Closed at 8:06 am
COVID-19 Preparedness and Response Plan
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Board adopt the COVID-19 Preparedness and Response
Plan for office policies and procedures, with any revisions to be determined by
attorney review and recommendation.
Seconded by Trustee Duffy.
Discussion: Coordinator identification by name rather than position. Followed
the attorney’s recommendation.
Motion passed
Financial Services Engagement Letter
Trustee Eyster moved the Board approve the Financial Services Engagement Letter
proposed by Maner-Costerisan for the annual pre-audit.
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg
Discussion: Competitive procurement was discussed. Requests for bids were sent
out in 2019 along with posting on the website. The Maner Costerisan firm was
the only respondent and prepared the pre-audit materials in 2019. The agreement
is for 3 years.
Motion passed.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:28 am.
Jonathon Brandt, 4725 N. Branch Rd.: Regarding the speed signs placed on
Germany Rd.
Monica Schafer, 1691 Osprey: Regarding the Covid-19 preparedness plan.
Closed at 8:32 am.
Adjournment and Review
Clerk Steinberg moved that the meeting adjourn.
Seconded by Trustee Duffy
Meeting adjourned at 8:33 am.
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________________ ______________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor         Date
_____________________________________________ _____________
Mark Steinberg, Township Clerk               Date
June 10, 2020
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
June 10, 2020
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened a regular meeting at 6:01
p.m. on June 10, 2020. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and
reviewed the Agenda. Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Kane, Clerk Steinberg, Trustee Eyster,
Trustee Duffy, Trustee Williams and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Absent: None.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 6:02 pm
Adam Zynda commented on setting up a food truck outside Joey’s pet store.
Mark Marquandt of Joey’s pet store supported having a food truck in his lot.
Closed at 6:06 pm
Consent Agenda
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the consent agenda consisting of:
   •   Approve the minutes of the May 13 and May 21, 2020 Board Meetings.
   •   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid, check numbers 30213 to 30223 for a
total of $7463.81.
   •   May Payroll Paid check numbers 50211-50224, and EFTs 676-681, for a
total of $21,598.17 (phys. check amount).
   •   General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval, check numbers 30224-30231,
for $2611.86 and 30232-30235, for $518.38.
   •   Revenue and Expenditure report ending May 31, 2020.
   •   GL Activity Report
   •   Police Report
   •   Acknowledge receipt of May Treasurer’s Report
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: None.
 
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Steinberg, Trustee Williams Treasurer Cutshaw,
Trustee Duffy, Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: Trustee Kane.
Motion Passed.
Senior Center Presentation
Julie Rudd presented on the Senior Center’s request for Township support for a
millage to help pay for expanded programs. All local governmental units covered
by the senior center are being asked for support. The Board would have to vote
on the matter at its July 8 regular meeting.
ACTION ITEMS
Phone System
Clerk Steinberg moved the Board move forward with the Verizon/Masters Telecom
bid for providing phone service to the Township office, at $325/month.
Second: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: There was no response from AT&T.
 
Roll call vote 
Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Eyster, Supervisor Bloomquist, Treasurer Cutshaw,
Trustee Williams, Clerk Steinberg
Nays: Trustee Kane.
Motion passed.
 
MTA Educational Opportunities
Trustee Williams move the Board participate in the “Plus” educational package
offered by the Michigan Township Association.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: This package includes new officials training.
 
Roll call vote
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Williams, Trustee
Eyster, Trustee Duffy, Clerk Steinberg, Trustee Kane
Nays: None.
Motion passed.
 
Roads
Trustee Kane moved the Board recommend that the Transportation Committee review
the current Road Policy and Neighborhood Policy in light of expected reduced
revenues in future years.
Seconded by Trustee Duffy.
Discussion: Reference to funding was removed.
Motion passed.
 
Pop-Up Businesses
Trustee Duffy moved the Board ask the Planning Commission to review pop-up
businesses within the Township Zoning Ordinance.
Seconded by Trustee Kane.
Discussion: None.
 
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Trustee Williams, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Treasurer
Cutshaw, Trustee Duffy, Clerk Steinberg, Trustee Kane
Nays: None.
Motion passed.
 
Noise
Clerk Steinberg moved the Board ask the Planning Commission to review noise and
shooting issues in the Zoning and Blight Ordinances.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Discussion: The Township has received complaints from residents concerning
noise.
 
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Trustee Williams, Supervisor Bloomquist, Clerk Steinberg,
Treasurer Cutshaw
Nays: Trustee Kane, Trustee Duffy
Motion passed.
 
Reports – Departments and Committees
Budget: The State has advised to expect deep cuts in revenue sharing.
 
NIESA: Will conduct a board meeting via Zoom on June 11. Did not meet in April
or May.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:10 pm.
Jon Brandt expressed concern over the number of rules.
Closed at 8:13pm
Adjournment and Review
Clerk Steinberg moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Trustee Duffy.
 
Meeting adjourned at 8:14 pm.
 
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________________   ______________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor         Date
_____________________________________________   _____________
Mark Steinberg, Township Clerk                Date
July 8, 2020
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
July 8, 2020
 
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened a virtual meeting at 6:03
p.m. on July 8, 2020 via Zoom (meeting ID 82232264134) due to the COVID-19
virus. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the
Agenda. Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Kane, Clerk Steinberg, Trustee Eyster ,
Trustee Duffy, and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Absent: Trustee Williams.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 6:05 pm
Monica Schafer regarding her FOIA request.
Julie Rudd requested that the Board postpone voting on the senior center
millage.
Susan Cockerel commented on reasons the millage is needed.
Closed at 6:13 pm
Consent Agenda
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the consent agenda consisting of:
   •   Approve the minutes of the June 10, 2020 Board Meeting
   •   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid, check numbers 30236 to 30248 for a
total of $28,072.82.
   •   May Payroll Paid check numbers 50225-50262, and EFTs 682-683, for a
total of $23,205.57 (phys. check amount).
   •   General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval, check numbers 30249-30255,
for $2624.52 and 30256-30263, for $15,039.58.
   •   GL Activity Report
   •   Revenue and Expenditure report ending June 30, 2020.
   •   Police Report
   •   Acknowledge receipt of June Treasurer’s Report
 
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg
Discussion: Trustee Kane asked that the minutes be corrected to reflect his
“No” vote on the telephone purchase at the June 10 meeting. The June 10 minutes
were pulled from the consent agenda for a later vote.
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Steinberg, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Duffy,
Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: Trustee Kane.
Motion Passed.
Police Presentation
Chief Plaga gave the quarterly police presentation. He said his Department has
taken steps to prevent excessive violence, including specific training of
officers. National Night Out has been moved to October 6. Billable hours are
higher than usual due to the deceased body found at Waste Management and the
car crash at Zimmer and Grand River. The Department has seen increased larceny
from vehicles and yards, a trend sometimes seen in warmer weather.
ACTION ITEMS
Senior Center Resolution
Clerk Steinberg moved the Board postpone a vote on the senior center millage
resolution until July 29 at 6:00p.m. during a special meeting.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion:
   •   The City of Williamston and Locke and Leroy Townships are placing the
proposal on the ballot.
   •   Not set up as an Authority
   •   Seen as special interest
Motion Passed.
Revision of June 10 Minutes
Clerk Steinberg move the Board approve revising the June 10 meeting Minutes to
reflect Trustee Kane’s “No” vote on the purchase of new telephones.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: None
Motion Passed
DISCUSSION
Event Barns – Question as to the rationale for the acreage restriction.
Supervisor Bloomquist asked that Trustees send any further questions to her by
July15.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA: There will be a Zoom meeting on July 9.
Elections: There has been a large increase in requests for absentee ballots.
Revenue Sharing: The latest payment was better than expected, but a decrease.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:18 pm.
Jonathan Brandt suggested providing safety information for bicyclists and
keeping grass clippings off roads.
Ben Lei Chai is pleased to see movement on event barns.
Closed at 7:21 pm
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg.
Meeting adjourned at 7:22 pm.
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________________ ______________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor Date
_____________________________________________ _____________
Mark Steinberg, Township Clerk Date
July 29, 2020
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
July 29, 2020
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened a virtual special meeting
at 6:03 p.m. on July 29, 2020 via Zoom (meeting ID 881-3805-6955) due to the
COVID-19 virus. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed
the Agenda. Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Kane, Clerk Steinberg, Trustee Eyster ,
Trustee Williams, Trustee Duffy, and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Absent: None
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened 6:05 pm
Donna Tocarchick presented several questions and concerns about the senior
center Millage Proposal.
Monica Schafer expressed reservations about the Proposal.
Jonathan Brandt expressed reservations about the Proposal.
Closed 6:15p.m.
Resolution for Senior Center Millage
Discussion: Board members expressed their concerns regarding the Proposal, most
prominently related to financing.
Trustee Kane moved the Board not approve placing the Millage Proposal on the
November ballot.
Second: Clerk Steinberg
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Steinberg, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Duffy,
Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Kane, Trustee Williams.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened 6:39p.m.
Julie Rudd, Senior Center representative, commented on the effort involved in
developing the Millage Proposal.
Closed 6:43p.m.
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Eyster moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Trustee Duffy
Meeting adjourned at 6:44p.m.
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________________ ______________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor Date
_____________________________________________ _____________
Mark Steinberg, Township Clerk Date
August 12, 2020
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
August 12, 2020
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened a virtual meeting at 6:00
p.m. on August 12, 2020 via Zoom (meeting ID # 876 1548 8440) due to the COVID-
19 virus. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the
Agenda. Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Kane, Clerk Steinberg, Trustee Eyster,
Trustee Duffy, Trustee Williams, and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Absent: None.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 6:03 pm.
None.
Closed at 6:03 pm.
Consent Agenda
Clerk Steinberg moved the consent agenda consisting of:
   •   Approve the minutes of the July 8 & 29, 2020 Board Meetings
   •   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid, check numbers 30264 to 30289 for a
total of $124,878.03.
   •   July Payroll Paid check numbers 50263-50304, and EFTs 684--690, for a
total of $32,675.37 (phys. check amount).
   •   General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval, check numbers 30290-30302,
for $3908.92 and 30303- 30307, for $1256.86
   •   GL Activity Report
   •   Revenue and Expenditure report ending July 31, 2020.
   •   Police Report
   •   Planning Commission Minutes
   •   Acknowledge receipt of July Treasurer’s Report
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Steinberg, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Williams,
Trustee Duffy, Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: Trustee Kane.
Motion Passed.
ACTION ITEMS
Forster Woods
Treasurer Cutshaw moved that the Williamstown Township Board adopt the
resolution for the request by Forster Woods Adult Day Services, Williamston,
Ingham County, asking that they be recognized as a nonprofit organization
operating in the community for the purpose of obtaining charitable gaming
licenses be considered for approval.
Seconded by Trustee Williams
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Clerk Steinberg, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Williams, Trustee Duffy,
Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Kane.
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
Roads
Trustee Kane moved that Williamstown Township Board postpone moving forward
with engineering and cost estimating for Germany Rd.
Seconded by Trustee Duffy.
Discussion: The Road Committee recommended moving forward based on previous
Board planning.
Motion Passed.
Shoesmith Rd.
Trustee Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board acquire the bid documents
from ICRD for crack- sealing Shoesmith Rd. to be brought to the Board for final
approval to request bids for the 20-21 year.
Seconded by Trustee Williams.
Discussion: None.
Roll Call
Ayes: Trustee Williams, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Kane, Supervisor Bloomquist,
Trustee Eyster, Clerk Steinberg, Treasurer Cutshaw.
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
Policy 12 revisions
Trustee Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board adopt the recommended
revisions to Policy 12.
Seconded by Trustee Williams.
Discussion:  None.
Roll Call:
Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Kane, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk
Steinberg, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Williams.
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
Fall Cleanup
Trustee Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board cancel the September
Clean-up due to Covid.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Discussion:
   •   Suggestions were made that we scale down the event instead of complete
cancellation.
   •   Staff felt uncomfortable working event.
Motion Passed.
DISCUSSION
Event Barns: There were several questions or concerns among Board members,
including:
   •   Question as to the rationale for the acreage restriction.
   •   Hours inclusive of Set up and tear down details should be specifically
addressed.
   •   Parking and roadside parking needs to be prohibited.
   •   Number of total events per month.
The Board will ask the Planning Commission to clarify the above items and bring
it back to the Board.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA:
Trustee Kane reported that both NIESA millages passed.
Elections:
Clerk Steinberg reported there was an approximate 47% turnout. There was a
record number of absentee ballots for this election which was counted by our
first ever Absentee Ballot Counting Board. Election Inspectors, including some
emergency Inspectors worked a long day at risk of Covid-19 exposure. The
Precinct 1 tabulator broke down part way through the day and had to be
repaired.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:40 pm.
Jonathan Brandt commented on the Township website and the desire to obtain
Board packets prior to the Board meeting.
Monica Schafer commented that she would also like to obtain Board packets prior
to the Board meeting.
Closed at 7:42 pm
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg.
Meeting adjourned at 7:48 pm.
Minutes approved by:
 
____________________________________________ ______________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor         Date
_____________________________________________ _____________
Mark Steinberg, Township Clerk               Date
September 9, 2020
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
September 9, 2020
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened a virtual meeting at 6:00
p.m. on September 9, 2020 via Zoom (meeting ID #811 9767 6720) due to the
COVID-19 virus. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed
the Agenda. Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Kane, Clerk Steinberg, Trustee Eyster,
Trustee Williams, Trustee Duffy, and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Absent: None.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 6:02 pm
None.
Closed at 6:03 pm
Consent Agenda
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the consent agenda consisting of:
   •   Approve the minutes of the August 12, 2020 Board Meeting
   •   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid, check numbers 30308 to 30322 for a
total of $8124.89.
   •   August Payroll Paid check numbers 50305-50357, and EFTs 691--696, for a
total of $36,222.93 (phys. check amount).
   •   General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval, check numbers 30323-30324,
for $1394.50 and 30325-30332, for $3542.73
   •   GL Activity Report
   •   Revenue and Expenditure report ending August 31, 2020.
   •   Police Report
   •   Acknowledge receipt of August Treasurer’s Report
   •   Acknowledge receipt of correspondence.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Discussion: No building activity report for this month due to employee
furlough.
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Steinberg, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Duffy,
Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: Trustee Kane.
Motion Passed.
ACTION ITEMS
Brookstone Preliminary Plat Extension
Trustee Kane moved the Township approve the requested extension of the Final
Preliminary Plat for Brookstone Estates for 1 year.
Seconded by Clerk Steinberg.
Discussion: None.
Motion passed.
 
Shoesmith Road
Clerk Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board ask the Supervisor to
reach out to Meridian Township to inquire of the possibility to work with
Meridian on the crack sealing of Shoesmith Rd. at a cost of the crack sealing
not to exceed $2500.00.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Discussion: Questions about details of the project.
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Steinberg, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Duffy,
Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Williams.
Nays: Trustee Kane.
Motion Passed.
 
Budget Amendments
Trustee Eyster moved the board approve the following budget amendments for the
2020-2021 budget due to the Covid–19 pandemic.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Budget amendments
Budget amendments
 
Add to          Reduce          Amount      
                                         
101-191-703.002                $ 800.00   additional election workers
Wages-training                            
                                         
101-191-728.000                           
Supplies                       $ 400.00   due to Covid-19 safety measures
                                         
101-191-730.000                           
Postage                        $ 1,800.00 due to increase in AV Ballots
                                         
               101-890-965.000            
               Contingency     $ 3,000.00  
 
Discussion: Taking out of contingency to easily track monies spent due to Covid
19 pandemic
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Steinberg, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Duffy,
Trustee Kane, Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
 
Cemetery Committee Appointment
Clerk Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the appointment
of Gabriele Mayer to the Cemetery Board.
Seconded by Trustee Williams.
Discussion:
   •   Applications for serving on Township committees and boards is on line.
   •   Posting of openings on website.
   •   Gabriele has been attending the Cemetery meetings for the past year and
has been involved in the Green Burial revisions.
Motion Passed.
 
Accept Clerk Steinberg’s Resignation
Trustee Kane moved the Williamstown Township Board accept the resignation of
Clerk Steinberg effective September 30, 2020.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Discussion: Mark announced in April that he would not be seeking re-election as
Clerk
Motion Passed.
 
Appointment of Robin Cleveland to the Remainder of the Clerk’s Term
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Township Board appoint current Deputy
Clerk Robin Cleveland to the Township Clerk position for the remainder of the
current term beginning October 1, 2020.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: Robin will be appointing a new Deputy Clerk
Motion Passed.
DISCUSSION
Reports – Departments and Committees
Dangerous Buildings: Trustee Kane asked about progress on the Waste Management
building. Supervisor Bloomquist indicated that they pulled a permit for their
repairs and improvements. She will update Trustee Kane on progress and plans.
NIESA: Trustee Kane indicated they had to update their budget due to COVID. The
change to a new billing company has improved collection of costs. NIESA has
hired a new Deputy Chief, Rod Fiester. Staffing and retention continues to be
an issue.
Elections: Clerk Steinberg stated the Township will likely have a record number
of absentee ballots. Ballots are due to be delivered to the Township at the end
of September and will be mailed shortly thereafter. Voters are encouraged to
contact the Township by mid-October if they do not receive their ballot so the
situation can be remedied.
River Clean-Up: Supervisor Bloomquist participated in a project to clean
plastic out of the river along with approximately 20 volunteers. The
contractors will start removing the large log jams soon. Rotary will be
reaching out for volunteers to help with small log jams. Looking at having
someone do a drone video along the river of before and after log jam removal.
Anticipated completion date of November.
Audit: Auditors will attend the October Board meeting to discuss the audit
results.
Summer Taxes: Summer taxes and deferments are due by Monday, September 14th by
5:00 p.m. The office will be open on Monday 9 am to 5 pm for tax payments only.
Residents can also pay at Independent Bank.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:07 pm.
None.
Closed at 7:07 pm
Adjournment and Review
Clerk Steinberg moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw
 
Meeting adjourned at 7:10 pm.
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________________ ______________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor         Date
_____________________________________________ _____________
Mark Steinberg, Township Clerk               Date
October 14, 2020
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
October 14, 2020
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened at 6:00 p.m. on October
14, 2020. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the
Agenda. Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Kane, Clerk Cleveland, Trustee Eyster,
Trustee Duffy, and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Absent: Trustee Williams.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 6:02 pm
None.
Closed at 6:03 pm
Consent Agenda
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the consent agenda consisting of:
   •   Approve the minutes of the September 9, 2020 Board Meeting
   •   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid, check numbers 30333 to 30346 for a
total of $4776.13.
   •   August Payroll Paid check numbers 50358-50351, and EFTs 697--698, for a
total of $21,991.85 (phys. check amount).
   •   General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval, dates 9-30-2020 to 10-15-
2020, for a total of $ 8593.99.
   •   GL Activity Report
   •   Revenue and Expenditure report ending September 30, 2020.
   •   Police Report
   •   Building Inspector’s report
   •   Draft Planning Commission minutes
   •   Acknowledge receipt of September Treasurer’s Report
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Discussion:
   •   Question on Money Market interest;
   •   Revenue and Expenditure report;
   •   and the Bluewater Grant.
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Duffy,
Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: Trustee Kane.
Motion Passed.
 
Police Update: Assistant Chief Bach provided the quarterly report and mentioned
the accident rate going up, and speeding. Three officers have been lost in the
last 6 weeks. Concern regarding people passing farm tractors with implements on
a double yellow. Asst. Chief Bach mentioned they can do directed patrols or
shadowing. Concern about bicycles following rules of the road.
Audit Review: Brenda Seelman from Clark Schaefer Hackett reviewed the audit
findings which reflected a highest rating (unmodified) for the Township. She
mentioned that taxes collected have increased this FY compared to last, that
the township had no debt and no departments were over budget. Also discussed
was the fact that government expenditures were going down, the continuation of
a 9 year trend.
Planning Commission minutes: Trustee Eyster mentioned the Rec Plan and that no
public comment had been received during the public comment period or the public
hearing.
ACTION ITEMS
Grant Acceptance
Clerk Cleveland explained the process and parameters of the program, and that a
formula was used involving the size of the budget and number of voters; she
also mentioned that training alone for the workers involved would run about
$1,000.
Trustee Kane moved to reject the grant agreement.
Motion died for lack of a second.
Motion by Eyster that the Township accept the grant funds awarded in the amount
of $5,000 from the Center for Tech and Civic Life to be utilized for the public
purpose of planning and operationalizing safe and secure election
administration in 2020.
Seconded by Clerk Cleveland.
Discussion:
   •   Possible purchase of a second tabulator for AV Ballots;
   •   Concern over source of the grant.
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Duffy, Supervisor Bloomquist,
Trustee Eyster.
Nays: Trustee Kane.
Motion approved.
 
Shoesmith Road
Discussion included:
   •   crack sealing and coordinating with Meridian Township;
   •   timing not good for this year;
   •   doing it prior to county doing chip sealing;
   •   putting out bids earlier;
   •   the County charging for engineering (20%);
   •   the Township hiring its own engineer;
   •   Mannik Smith using the recent road report;
   •   The County doing another PASER report.
Motion by Treasurer Cutshaw to have Mannik-Smith look at the roads for 2020-
2021 and prioritize the projects for an amount not to exceed $2,500.  
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Discussion: Questions about details of the project.
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Duffy,
Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: Trustee Kane.
Motion Approved.
 
Planning Commission Re-appointments
Discussion ensued about the expiring terms and whether they should be posted.
Further discussed that there were no vacancies and that the three members had
agreed to continue their service.
Motion by Trustee Eyster to reappoint Toby Weston to the Planning Commission
for a three year term.
Second by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Motion approved.
Motion by Trustee Eyster to reappoint Jerry Eidt to the Planning Commission for
a three year term.
Second by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Motion approved.
Motion by Trustee Eyster to reappoint Jim Flore to the Planning Commission for
a three year term.
Second by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Motion approved.
 
Cemetery Improvements
The point was made that the 50 year plan for the cemetery that was completed
several years ago is gradually being implemented; also discussed was the fill
that was brought in to better utilize the western portion of the cemetery,
which was free and a great cost-saving.
Trustee Eyster moved that the Williamstown Township Board approve the
preparation of a bid packet for the purposes of solicitating for a Landscaping
Plan for the Green Burial expansion of Summit Cemetery, and a separate bid
packet for drive maintenance/improvements at Summit Cemetery.
Second by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Discussion:
   •   Action items outlined in Master Plan almost complete;
   •   Expansion of green burial section completed at no cost to township.
Motion approved.
DISCUSSION
Cemetery Ordinance: Revised ordinance was presented for review to include pets
and green burials. Discussion:
   •   the contribution from the City and township;
   •   a scattering garden for cremains;
   •   indexing the fee schedule to inflation;
   •   maintenance of burial plots/ planting shrubs.
Supervisor Bloomquist stated they do compare fees regularly with other
communities.
Please send any/all questions or comments to Supervisor Bloomquist by the end
of the month.
 
Parks and Recreation Plan: Board members received the draft plan in their
packet for review prior to the next meeting. Please send questions or comments
to Wanda one week prior to the November 11 meeting. Question about linear
parks.
 
Waste Management Facility:
Discussion:
   •   odor problem;
   •   fire damage;
   •   doors – health and safety;
   •   Health Department involved?
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA:
Trustee Kane indicated they had an in-person meeting.  Staffing and retention
continues to be an issue, also turnout gear depreciation.
Elections:
Absentee (AV) Ballots very high, using existing staff for processing AV
Ballots. Will be using Branch School for counting AV ballots. Approximately
2500 Absentee Ballots sent out so far with approximately 1/3 returned.
River Clean-Up:
The contractors are starting to remove the large log jams. Rotary will be
reaching out for volunteers to help with small log jams/new log jams.
Anticipated completion date of November. A Friends of the Red Cedar group has
been formed. There will not be any dredging of the river.
Red Cedar Manor Subdivision (North of Grand River) is considering setting up a
special assessment district for road improvements.
A question about duplexes in the Cluster PD being proposed.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:20 pm. Jon Brandt of 4725 N. Branch Rd., re: the grant for election
support and an e-mail from Supervisor Bloomquist.
Monica Schafer of 1621 Osprey, re: concerns about the grant and the way it was
dispersed.
Closed at 8:25 pm
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw
Meeting adjourned at 8:26 pm.
 
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________________ ______________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor         Date
_____________________________________________ _____________
Robin Cleveland, Township Clerk               Date
November 11, 2020
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting
Minutes of November 11, 2020
CALL TO ORDER
The Williamstown Township Board met remotely via Zoom at 6:00 pm on November
11, 2020 (Meeting ID 841 8090 5935) due to the COVID-19 virus. Supervisor
Bloomquist led the Board in the Pledge of Allegiance.
ROLL CALL
PRESENT: Supervisor Bloomquist, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustees
Eyster, Duffy and Kane.
ABSENT: Trustee Williams. Quorum established.
AGENDA APPROVAL
Review of Agenda added Dead Deer Pickup under Reports.
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR AGENDA AND NON-AGENDA ITEMS:
Opened at 6:05 p.m.
None.
Closed at 6:06 p.m.
CONSENT AGENDA:
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the consent agenda consisting of:
   •   Approve the minutes of the October 14, 2020 Board Meeting
   •   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid, check numbers 30347 to 30380, and
30384-30387 for a total of $14,378.72.
   •   August Payroll Paid check numbers 50392-50417 for a total of $20,482.20
(phys. check amount).
   •   General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval, check numbers 30371-30376,
and 30381-30383, for a total of $4,750.15.
   •   GL Activity Report
   •   Revenue and Expenditure report ending October 31, 2020.
   •   Police Report
   •   Building Inspectors report
   •   Acknowledge receipt of October Treasurer’s Report
Seconded by Clerk Cleveland.
Discussion: None.
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Duffy,
Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nayes: Trustee Kane.
Motion approved.
ACTION ITEMS
Copier: Maintenance Agreement for Current vs. Rental/Purchase of Replacement
After discussion, consensus was to continue with existing copier/maintenance
agreement and revisit the issue in 6 months.
Cemetery Ordinance
Motion by Treasurer Cutshaw that the Wiliamstown Township Board approve the
proposed revisions to the Cemetery Ordinance.
Discussion: None.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Kane, Supervisor Bloomquist,
Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None.
Motion approved.
 
Police Assessment Roll
Motion by Clerk Cleveland that the Williamstown Township Board approve amending
Resolution 2020-98, confirming the 2020 Special Assessment Roll for Police
Protection within the Township with the Special Assessment Roll Total from
$213,500 to $213,820.
Discussion:
   •   Parcel splits accounted for difference in amounts;
   •   Consider different method of sorting for the public.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Duffy, Supervisor Bloomquist,
Trustee Eyster.
Nays: Trustee Kane.
Motion approved.
 
Neighborhood Road Policy Amendment
Discussion:
   •   If neighborhood assesses themselves via a Special Assessment District
(SAD) and township later passes millage, what happens?
   •   How to pay off bond/would be reducing special assessment;
   •   Township millage paying for subdivision’s special assessment;
   •   Fairness if for life of assessment owner is not paying for other roads.
Issue was postponed to December meeting for further clarification.
 
Community Park Drive Repair
Discussion:
   •   Weather conditions too dry to get road graded;
   •   Rieth Riley provided 2nd estimate, waiting on a third;
   •   Suggestion to talk to Culver Excavating out of Webberville who has own
pit.
Issue was postponed to December meeting with grading to be done when possible.
 
Banking Policy Amendment
Motion by Trustee Duffy that the Williamstown Township Board approve the
Banking Policy Amendment addressing the use of online banking.
Discussion:
   •   Auditor suggested a “view only” status;
   •   Taken directly from State of Michigan Treasury Template;
   •   Township doing monthly, suggestion was to do quarterly;
   •   Need to go through the process;
   •   Retention schedule is for 7 years;
   •   Section 9 is required to be in the ordinance.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Ayes:  Trustee Duffy, Trustee Kane, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster,
Clerk Cleveland, and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Nays: None.
Motion approved.
 
Hazard Pay
Motion by Treasurer Cutshaw that the Williamstown township Board approve hazard
pay of $100.00 per election worker that worked the November 3rd election, and
$2.00 per hour for Supervisor’s Assistant and Deputy Treasurer retroactive from
August 1, 2020 to November 12, 2020, all to be paid from the Center for Tech
and Civic Life (CTCL) grant.
Discussion:
   •   Involves pay for the 39 election workers due to Covid-19;
   •   Grant will cover this cost.
Seconded by Trustee Duffy.
Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Kane, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk
Cleveland, and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Nays: None.
Motion approved.
DISCUSSION ITEMS
Parks and Rec Plan
Board members should review the plan for the December meeting. The plan will be
sent to the incoming trustees for their review.
Strategic Planning and Budget
A Board Workshop is scheduled for December 2nd at 6:00 p.m. for the new Board
of Trustees.
Dead Animal Pickup
   •   Chronic Wasting Disease in deer, many deer by side of road;
   •   Township consider a Dead Animal pick-up program;
   •   DNR program or Meridian township program / MSU has composting program;
   •   Suggestion to call Ingham County Sheriff’s Office;
   •   Township will look into issue.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA:  
Trustee Kane reported that NIESA is back to doing Zoom meetings. A policy
change pending regarding people who work for NIESA in other capacities doing
work on fire vehicles, as it may be a conflict of interest. Revenue has
increased due to grant and new billing firm. They are increasing employee
cross-training.
Elections:
Clerk Cleveland reported that Williamstown Township currently has 4,624
registered voters, up from previous years. For the November 3rd election the
Township had 1,200 in person voters, 2,628 absentee voters, for a total of
3,828. Voter turnout in the Township was about 82%. The Absent Voter Counting
Board (AVCB) completed their tasks at about 5:00 a.m., November 4th. The
Clerk’s office is still working on reports and election wrap-up. At this point,
it looks like everything went well. The Deputy Treasurer, Kim VanErp, and the
Supervisor’s Assistant, Sharon Anway, were extremely helpful with election
tasks in the office leading up to Election Day.
River Clean Up:
The team is still working on the small log jams. Work is expected to be
completed around the end of November, weather permitting.
Covid 19 - Office:
Given the uptick in Covid-19 numbers, Township employees will start working
from home whenever possible, starting next week. Office hours will be limited,
but residents needing to come in person can make an appointment. For residents
needing to pay their taxes, if paying by cash, we prefer they go to Independent
Bank to pay, but cash will still be accepted at the Township. Staff will be
staggering schedules and forwarding phone calls. The logistics are still being
worked out, but there will be a reduction of Wednesday hours to close at 4:00
p.m. instead of 7:00 p.m.
Money Market Funds:
An adjustment was made to the Money Market per the Board discussion at the last
meeting.
Outgoing Board Members:  
Supervisor Bloomquist thanked the outgoing Board members, Trustee John Kane for
his four years of service, and Trustee Rick Williams for his 16 years of
service to the Township.
Public Comment
Opened at 7:44 p.m.
Monica Schafer, 1691 Osprey, Williamston: Congratulated Supervisor Wanda
Bloomquist and Trustee Kevin Duffy on their re-election. She had questions
about subdivision roads; she was concerned that a Special Assessment District
(SAD) and Township millage, would cause residents to have to pay twice. She
would like meetings to be recorded.
Closed at 7:48pm.
Supervisor Bloomquist reviewed the Township Board’s actions.
Motion by Trustee Eyster to adjourn.
Meeting adjourned at 7:52 p.m.
Minutes approved by:
_____________________________________      _________________________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor      Date
____________________________________      _________________________
Robin Cleveland, Township Clerk            Date
December 2, 2020
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Special Meeting Minutes
December 2, 2020
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened a virtual meeting at 6:00
p.m. on December 2, 2020 via Zoom (meeting ID 861 7143 5739) due to the COVID-
19 virus. All Board members present were calling into the meeting from
Williamstown Township, Ingham County, in Michigan. Supervisor Bloomquist called
the meeting to order and reviewed the Agenda. Supervisor Bloomquist led the
Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee
Creagh, Trustee Steinberg, and Trustee Eyster.
Absent: Trustee Duffy
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 6:02 pm
None
Closed at 6:03 pm
Oath
All Board Members present took the Oath of Office for the new four year term.
Strategic Planning Review
Educational Opportunities:
Supervisor Bloomquist discussed educational opportunities for Board of Trustees
members as well as Planning Commission and Board of Review members. The
Michigan Townships Association (MTA) has a New Officials Training taking place
for Board of Trustees members in December and January. All are encouraged to
attend to learn about up to date laws and best practices related to Township
governing. The Township office will order current the up to date version of the
Authorities and Responsibilities of Michigan Townships from MTA for each Board
member.
Supervisor Bloomquist queried the Board about areas of interest with regard to
special topics Board members would like to learn more about. Zoning was
mentioned as one possibility.
New Trustee, Keith Creagh, asked for a one on one meeting with Township
officers in order to understand better their roles in governing the Township.
Board members discussed doing a tour of the Township’s properties and physical
assets, once it is safe to do so, in order to gain understanding on what the
Township owns and maintains.
The Board discussed developing an “ethics” resolution for outlining ethical
expectations for the Williamstown Township Board. Other Township have done this
and found it to be helpful guidance for their Board members.
The Board also discussed the general role of Board members and the importance
of working together as a Board.
Website, Branding and Social Media:
Supervisor Bloomquist informed the Board the staff has been discussing the
Township’s branding (logo, etc.) and began the process of identifying ways that
the website could be improved as well as other ways the Township (staff and
Board) could improve communication with its residents. A committee is being
created to study these issues and make recommendations to the Board.
Parks:
Supervisor Bloomquist provided background on the Township park and the update
of the Parks and Recreation Master Plan, which is currently before the Board
for adoption. Board members had previously been asked for comments on the
updated plan. The Board discussed various aspects of the park upkeep including
doing a controlled burn, maintaining the park drive, and grant opportunities.
Considerations for the future could include trail development/expansion, river
respite along the trail, educational opportunities at the park, expansion of
active uses, and potential designation of Branch School as a state historic
site.
Resident Educational/Engagement Opportunities:
As part of a Community Block Grant the Township was awarded educational
opportunities were developed for residents with topics that included
alternative energy solutions, composting, rain gardens, etc. Some programs have
been held including the Branch School open house, the Art Tour, the Photo
Contest, and more, however many have been postponed until the Covid virus is
under control. Potential future opportunities include promoting Township
businesses, community art projects, and more programs of interest to residents.
Cemetery:
The Township recently expanded the cemetery for natural burials and it is in
the process of landscape design. Drives are also slated to be resurfaced/
repaired in 2021. Other items under consideration is the re-creation of the
metal arch that once was at the main entrance, expansion of the barn for an
office, and restoring damaged headstones.
Policies:
The updating of the employee manual was started but needs to be completed so
procedures can be put in place to ensure consistent implementation and fairness
to employees, particularly in the areas of pay and duties. Other policies will
be developed regarding meetings and (possibly)social media for the Board to
review. The Township will also be review policies regarding road funding and
maintenance, as well as the Neighborhood Road Policy.
Budget Review
The Board began its review of the 2021-2022 budget. Supervisor Bloomquist
explained the current understanding of what the Township’s revenue and expenses
might be in the upcoming year. Board members will be discussing this at each
regular Board meeting. A public hearing will be held early next year, followed
by the final adoption of the budget. Board members and residents are encouraged
to reach out to Supervisor Bloomquist with any questions or concerns related to
the budget.
Chromebooks:
Among items under consideration is Chromebooks for Board members use that would
be loaded with Township policies, ordinances, meeting packets, etc. for easy
access.
Roads: The Township is currently working with Mannik Smith to make
recommendations on road maintenance for 2021. Review of road funding,
maintenance, and neighborhood road policy will be taking place soon. The
Township also has the ability to adopt an ordinance that would limit truck
routes on certain roads, which will also be discussed.
Sustainability:
Under discussion is the creation of an Environmental Committee which could
review ordinances for the protection of the environment and promotion of
sustainability to help the Township lessen its carbon footprint. The committee
could also help provide education on environmental issues to Township
residents. This will be discussed further at the January Board of Trustees
meeting on January 13, 2021.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:50 pm
None
Closed at 7:51 pm
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Steinberg moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Meeting adjourned at 7:54 pm.
 
Minutes approved by:
_____________________________________      _________________________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor      Date
____________________________________      _________________________
Robin Cleveland, Township Clerk            Date
December 9, 2020
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
December 9, 2020
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened a virtual meeting at 6:02
p.m. on December 9, 2020 via Zoom (meeting ID 835 3946 2565) due to the COVID-
19 virus. All Board members present were calling into the meeting from
Williamstown Township, Ingham County, in Michigan. Supervisor Bloomquist called
the meeting to order and reviewed the Agenda. Supervisor Bloomquist led the
Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee
Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, and Trustee Eyster.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 6:05 pm
None
Closed at 6:06 pm
Consent Agenda
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the consent agenda consisting of:
   •   Approve the minutes of the November 11, 2020 Board Meeting
   •   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid, check numbers 30347 to 30387 for a
total of $14,378.72 check number 30398 for a total of $522.74
   •   November Payroll Paid check numbers 50418 to 50493, and EFTs 699-705,
for a total of $39,746.34 (physical check amount).
   •   General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval, check numbers 30399 to
30418, for a total of $9365.39.
   •   GL Activity Report
   •   Revenue and Expenditure report ending November 30, 2020.
   •   Police Report
   •   Building Inspectors report
   •   Planning Commission Draft Minutes
   •   Acknowledge receipt of November Treasurer’s Report
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion:
None
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh,
Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Planning Commission
Planning Commission Chair Gerald Eidt reviewed topics addressed at the November
11 Planning Commission meeting. The Commission recommended board approval of
Zoning Ordinance Amendments to allow residential care facilities in the B-
2 District. After much discussion, polling local businesses and receiving
feedback, the Commissioners voted to recommend the Board maintain the current
ordinance language relating to pop up businesses.
ACTION ITEMS
Zoning Ordinance Amendment
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Board approve the recommended revisions to the
Zoning Ordinance allowing residential care facilities within the B-2 District.
Seconded by Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: Board discussed approvals needed from other entities for adult
foster care.
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy,
Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Compensation Commission Appointments
Clerk Cleveland moved the Board reappoint Jim Conroy with a term expiring 12/5/
2024 and Lora Bruder to replace Aaron Porter with a term expiring 12/5/2023 to
the Compensation Commission
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: Board members asked about Compensation Commission process and
Supervisor Bloomquist provided an overview.
Motion Passed.
Budget Amendments
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Board approve the following budget amendments for
the 2020/2021 budget as presented.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Add to Reduce Amount Note
Add to               Reduce                 Amount      Note
                                                        Transfer out of
                    101-000-999.000        $340,362.00 General Fund 101 to
                                                        401 Fund
401-000-699.000                            $340,362.00 Transfer into 401 Fund
                                                        from General Fund
401-101-982.000 -                          $170,181.00 Per Policy 12
Special Projects
401-441-814.000 -
Road Improvement/                          $110,181.00 Per Policy 12
Maintenance
401-441-814.002 -                          $ 60,000.00 Per Policy 12
Neighborhood Roads
101-191-702.000 -                                       Due to significant
Salaries Election                          $ 245.00    increase in mail-in
Deputy                                                  balloting and Covid-19
                                                        mitigation
101-191-703.000 -                                       Due to significant
Salaries Election                          $ 1,229.00  increase in mail-in
Workers                                                 balloting and Covid-19
                                                        mitigation
                                                        Due to significant
101-191-703.002 -                          $ 733.00    increase in mail-in
Wages-Training                                          balloting and Covid-19
                                                        mitigation
101-191-703.003 -                                       Due to significant
Election Worker                            $ 1,113.00  increase in mail-in
Hazard Pay                                              balloting and Covid-19
                                                        mitigation
                                                        Due to significant
101-191-703.004 -                          $ 3,900.00  increase in mail-in
Hourly Hazard Pay                                       balloting and Covid-19
                                                        mitigation
                                                        Due to significant
101-191-728.000 -                          $ 929.00    increase in mail-in
Supplies                                                balloting and Covid-19
                                                        mitigation
101-191-981.000 -                                       Additional Rental for
Rental Fee                                 $ 200.00    St. Katherine's voting
                                                        site.
                     101-890-965.000 -                  Reduction in
                    Contingency            $ 8,349.00  contingency to balance
                                                        election increases
                    101-371-702.000 -      $ 17,400.00
                     Salary- Bldg Inspector             Change how building
101-371-811.000 -                          $ 10,000.00 inspector is paid. Not
Inspection Fees                                         an increase or
101-371-811-001 -                                       decrease in the
Plan Review                                $ 7,400.00  budget.

401-000-699.000 -                                       Amend income budget
Restricted Donations                       $ 6,000.00  due to $6,000 donation
                                                        this FY20-21
401-751-881.000 -                          $ 3,000.00  Raise Park Lands line
Park Lands                                              item to $6000
 
Discussion: Supervisor Bloomquist provided overview of budget amendments.
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist,
Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Neighborhood Road Policy Amendment
Trustee Eyster moved the Board approve the amendment of the Neighborhood Road
Policy as related to Section 7 to allow the Board discretion to amend the SAD
(Special Assessment District) rolls the assessed amount should a Township road
millage be approved.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Discussion: Supervisor Bloomquist outlined her discussion with the Township
attorney on this subject.
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh,
Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Red Cedar Manor Resolution
Trustee Duffy moved the Board pass Special Assessment Resolution #1 for Red
Cedar Manor proposed road improvements and hold a Public Hearing on January 14,
2021 at 6:00 p.m.
Seconded by Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: Supervisor Bloomquist summarized resident feedback on the
resolution.
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster,
Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Park Drive Repair
Trustee Duffy moved the Board approve the bid from Contractors Landscape and
Development Services at a cost not to exceed $4,462 for maintenance to the park
drive and North parking lot.
Discussion: Board discussed longevity, setting timeline with contractor for
completion, and placing a sign at the site indicating coming improvements.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk
Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Board of Review Appointments
Trustee Cutshaw moved the Board approve the recommended appointments of Mike
Rice, Jerry Eidt, and Brian Johnston to the Board of Review, and Kurt Guter as
an alternate to the Board of Review, for the years 2021 and 2022.
Discussion: None.
Motion Passed.
DISCUSSION
Parks and Rec Master Plan
– Members should review the plan for the January meeting and return comments to
Supervisor Bloomquist by December 31, 2020. The plan will be sent to everyone.
Committee Appointments –
Appointments to various committees will be finalized in January to begin in
March.
Budget
– Supervisor Bloomquist will reach out to Board members individually to see if
there are questions about the budget.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA:
Trustee Duffy will replace Trustee Kane on NIESA board.
River Clean-up.:
Clean up is now complete almost to Meridian Road. Easements are obtained from
property owners for placement of log jam materials.
Board of Review:  
The Board will meet on December 15, 2020 for corrections only on qualified AG,
veteran, poverty exemptions, and PRE’s
Covid-19:
Continuing reduced staff with one officer in the office each day. All employees
have remote access to work from home and this is working well overall.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:22 PM
Monica Schafer, 1691 Osprey, Williamston: Recommended bids from local
contractors for projects and liked idea of placing sign at Park regarding drive
repair. She had questions about $800 amount for special assessment and Parks
and Recreation Master Plan regarding trail access on private property.
Closed at 7:24 pm
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Steinberg moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Meeting adjourned at 7:25 pm.
Minutes approved by:
_____________________________________      _________________________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor      Date
____________________________________      _________________________
Robin Cleveland, Township Clerk            Date
2021 Meeting Minutes
January 13, 2021
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened a virtual meeting at 6:00
p.m. on January 13, 2021 via Zoom (meeting ID 865 4459 4627) due to the COVID-
19 virus. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the
Agenda. Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg,
Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, and Clerk Cleveland. Board members
called in from Williamstown Township except Trustree Eyster called in from
Northport, Florida.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 6:05 pm
None.
Closed at 6:06 pm
Consent Agenda
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the consent agenda consisting of:
   •   Approved the minutes of the December 2, 2020 Board Meeting
   •   Approved the corrected minutes of the December 9, 2020 Board Meeting
   •   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid, check numbers 30419 to 30423, for a
total of $2,294.57.
   •   December Payroll Paid check numbers 50494-50525, and EFTs 706-707, for a
total of $30,441.59 (phys. check amount).
   •   General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 30424-30435
for a total of $9,432.64, and GF Accounts Payable for Approval #2, check
numbers 30436-30444 for a total of $4,471.37.
   •   GL Activity Report for December 2020
   •   Revenue and Expenditure report ending December 31, 2020.
   •   Police Report
   •   Building Inspectors Report
   •   Acknowledge receipt of December 2020 Treasurer’s Report
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion:
December 9 minutes had previous month’s numbers for AP Paid necessitating
correction.
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer
Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Meridian Police Update – Chief Plaga
Chief Ken Plaga, Meridian Township Police Department (MTPD) gave the police
report. The annual police report will be provided to Williamstown Township next
month. Increased calls for service and increase in domestic and mental health
calls attributed to Covid-19. Billable hours are down and injury accidents are
up slightly. Meridian Police are working with Community Mental Health on a
pilot program utilizing technology in the field to interface with counselors
for crisis help. Two new officers have been added with two more being added
soon. Two new radar signs have been purchased and they can be requested
electronically on webpage or by email for deployment at problem areas.
Discussion: Chief Plaga was asked about concerns with accidents at the
Williamston Rd./Sherwood Rd. and Zimmer Rd./Sherwood Rd. intersections.
Supervisor Bloomquist has already reached out to the Ingham Country Road
Commission regarding Zimmer Rd/Sherwood Rd and will follow up; Chief Plaga will
also reach out to them.
ACTION ITEMS
Compensation Commission Appointments
Trustee Duffy moved the Williamstown Township Board re-appoint Robert Hayes to
fill the resignation of Donna Zichke with a term expiring 12/5/2022 and Jim
Brinker with a term expiring 12/5/2025 to the Compensation Commission.
Seconded by Clerk Cleveland
Discussion: None
Motion Passed.
Budget Amendments
Trustee Eyster moved the Board approve the following budget amendments for the
2020-2021 budget to add $3,500 to Wages-Caretaker 209-276-705.000 and subtract
$3,500 from Cemetery Contingency 209-276-965.000.
Seconded by Trustee Steinberg
 
Add to          Reduce                   Amount    Note
209-276-705.000                          $3,500.00 Due to overbudget in
Wages-Caretaker                                    Cemetery
                209-276-965.000 Cemetery $3,500.00
                Contingency
 
Discussion: Decision was made to move additional funds for Wages-Caretaker from
cemetery contingency rather than from wages in general fund.
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy,
Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Designated Assessor Resolution (in packet)
Clerk Cleveland moved the Williamstown Township Board adopt the Designated
Assessor Resolution #125
Seconded by Trustee Creagh
Discussion: Each county must have a designated assessor. If townships fails
AMAR audit and doesn’t make corrective action, then the designated assessor can
be appointed the assessor for the Township. Supervisor Bloomquist advised that
the Township always does well on the AMAR audit.
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg,
Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, and Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Parks and Recreation Master Plan
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board adopt the resolution for
the Parks and Recreation Master Plan as recommended by the Planning Commission
and approved by the Parks and Recreation committee with the following
amendment:
Goal 9: Acquire additional land or easement “in cooperation with affected
landowners” 
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: Goal 9 was added in response to resident concern. Discussion
regarding being responsive to making changes to the Plan due to changing
demographics. It was commented that some long-range goals in the Plan are there
so if opportunities arise, such as property becoming available, the Township
the Township has reason to move forward if the property fulfills a goal in the
master plan.
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist,
Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Poverty Guidelines
Due to the State’s new poverty law the township’s resolution is no longer
valid. Details are expected in February.
This be brought back to the February meeting.
Senior Center Contribution
The Township has contributed to the Williamston Senior Center at a level of
$3000 for the last several years.
Discussion surrounded the millage that was recently passed and how that affects
the financial needs of the Senior Center. Request will be made for the Senior
Center to present at the February Board meeting before a decision on continuing
Township’s contribution is made. A request was made that a larger discussion
regarding serving seniors in the community be revisited.
Mannik and Smith Road Proposals
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Mannik &
Smith proposal for 2021 Road Review, not to exceed $5000.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: Supervisor Bloomquist explained that If work can be done in
conjunction with county, the Township would go that route first. Mannik & Smith
may make recommendations for maintenance the County does not perform. Mannik &
Smith will be able to complete recommendations to present to the board based on
Township Policy and budget. Discussion about potential unspecified costs caused
a decision to place a cap of $5000.
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer
Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, and Trustee Steinberg.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Treasurer Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the proposal
from Mannik & Smith for services related to the Red Cedar Manor Road
Improvements.
Seconded by Trustee Creagh
Discussion: Supervisor Bloomquist explained that Mannik & Smith works with
Meridian Township and their estimate came in at $23,400. Mannik & Smith will do
everything that the county will do and would be working directly for us. Plans
are submitted to the Ingham County Road Department for approval.
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk
Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Banking Resolutions
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board approve Banking Resolution
#73-2021.
Seconded by Trustee Duffy
Discussion: Treasurer Cutshaw explained that new bank and credit union
signature cards are required any time changes occur to any of the Clerk,
Treasurer, and Deputy positions.
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh,
Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, and Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Clerk Cleveland moved the Williamstown Township Board approve Banking
Resolution #116-2021.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: Treasurer Cutshaw explained that when there is a new board the
Resolution is updated with current financial institutions.
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy,
Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
DISCUSSION
Resident Engagement Committee –
Discussed establishing a subcommittee of the Board to look at all things media
and communication related, such as social media, recording meetings, website,
Township logo and mission statement. Committee will consist of Clerk Cleveland
as chair and Trustee Steinberg. Committee will bring a set of goals to the
Board to ensure adherence to a timeline.
Environmental Committee –
Supervisor Bloomquist will bring to the Board at February meeting.
Ethics Resolution –
Supervisor Bloomquist will bring to the Board at February meeting
Budget –
Supervisor Bloomquist submitted wage recommendations for the 2022 fiscal year.
The Township is fortunate to have an educated and dedicated staff. The Board
discussed various questions regarding the proposed budget. Budget and AFLAC
discussion will be brought to February meeting.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA:
Trustee Duffy stated that his first meeting was a whirlwind. He reported that
there have been a lot of Covid-19 patient transfers.
River Clean-up:
Supervisor Bloomquist stated that they hope to wrap up next month. Volunteers
will be needed as additional clean-up is needed.
Township Park Roadwork: 
Work has been completed and Supervisor Bloomquist will be reaching out to
contractor regarding new potholes.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:58
Monica Schafer, 1691 Osprey, Williamston: Expressed concerns with the $800 per
resident contribution from the Township for road work.
Closed at 8:08 pm
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Trustee Steinberg
Meeting adjourned at 8:09
 
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________________ ______________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor         Date
 
_____________________________________________ _____________
Robin Cleveland, Township Clerk               Date
January 14, 2021
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Public Hearing for Red Cedar Manor Special Assessment District
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened a virtual meeting at 6:00
p.m. on January 14, 2021 via Zoom (meeting ID 872 8284 7983) due to the COVID-
19 virus. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order, reviewed the
agenda, and stated the reason for the meeting/public hearing. Supervisor
Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg,
Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, and Clerk Cleveland. All Board members
called in from Williamstown Township except Trustee Eyster who called in to the
meeting from Northport, Florida.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 6:05 pm
None
Closed at 6:06 pm
Supervisor Bloomquist outlined the proposed road improvement plan for the Red
Cedar Manor Special Assessment District (SAD) and shared the improvement map on
the screen.
Public Hearing
Opened at 6:08 p.m.
The following residents asked questions or made statements regarding the
Special Assessment District:
Jim Brinker: Mr. Brinker wanted to know the amount each property would need to
pay for the SAD. Supervisor Bloomquist shared the breakdown on the screen and
explained that it is approximate until the work is completed.
Melissa Wood: Ms. Wood requested a list of petitioners and stated that she
objects to the project.
Terry Smith: Mr. Smith requested the approximate timeline for the project and
asked if it would be completed in 2021. Supervisor Bloomquist explained next
steps and approximate start dates, indicating that it would likely be completed
in 2021. He also asked for an approximate interest rate.
Debra Borgman: Ms. Borgman asked about the interest rate and when we will know
what the rate will be. Supervisor Bloomquist explained that the Township will
not know for certain what the interest rate would be until all the paperwork is
completed and it is accepted. However, when the Township looked at the millage
rate for the recent road millage proposal the rate was three percent.
Gary Wright: Mr. Wright asked about how the payments are made by the residents
affected. Treasurer Cutshaw explained that it would appear as a Special
Assessment on the Winter tax bill that is mailed in December each year. Once
the Special Assessment is paid off, it would no longer be listed on the tax
bill.
Public Hearing closed at 6:27 p.m.
Public Comment for Non-Agenda Items
Opened at 6:28 p.m.
Melissa Wood: Asked about other roads in the Township that would be repaired
this year.
John McLaughlin: Mr. McLaughlin explained that the roads need to be fixed and
the residents need to pay for them. He stated the Township set up a policy to
allow for the SAD to happen so the subdivision roads could be repaired.
Sharon Day: Ms. Day offered appreciation to the Township Board for the work on
behalf of the residents of the Township.
Closed at 6:32 p.m.
Supervisor Bloomquist thanked the residents for their participation and
statements in both the Public Hearing and Public Comment.
Adjournment
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw
Meeting adjourned at 6:33 p.m.
 
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________________ ______________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor         Date
 
_____________________________________________ _____________
Robin Cleveland, Township Clerk               Date
February 10, 2021
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
February 10, 2021
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened a virtual meeting at 6:03
p.m. on February 10, 2021 via Zoom (meeting ID 883 7371 0730) due to the COVID-
19 virus. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the
Agenda. Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg,
Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, and Clerk Cleveland. All Board members
called in from Williamstown Township except Trustee Eyster who called in from
Northport, Florida.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 6:04 pm.
None.
Closed at 6:05 pm.
Consent Agenda
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the consent agenda consisting of:
   •   Approved the minutes of the January 13 & 14, 2021 Board Meetings
   •   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid, check numbers 30445 to 30458, for a
total of $30,772.04.
   •   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid, check numbers 30445 to 30458, for a
total of $30,772.04.
   •   January Payroll Paid check numbers 50526-50557 for a total of $18,687.43
(phys. check amount).
   •   General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 30459-30463
for a total of $7,884.39, and GF Accounts Payable for Approval #2, check
numbers 30464-30475 for a total of $24,531.23.
   •   GL Activity Report for January 2021
   •   Revenue and Expenditure report ending January 31, 2021.
   •   Police Report
   •   Building Inspectors Report
   •   Acknowledge receipt of January 2021Treasurer’s Report
   •   Planning Commission Meeting Minutes – 1-27-21 Draft
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Discussion:
None. 
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer
Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg.
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
ACTION ITEMS
Senior Center
Julie Rudd and John Roy Castillo provided an update on the budget and
programming at the Williamston Senior Center. The 11-member Board makeup after
the millage will now be one member each from 3 municipalities (City of
Williamston, Wheatfield and Leroy townships) and 8 voted in from the Senior
Center membership. Most recent data show 57 of 1066 seniors in the Township are
utilizing the Senior Center.
Discussion: Increasing usage by seniors will require more programming including
physical activities and lectures which will likely require a different
location. Senior Center is exploring options for assisting seniors with signing
up for Covid-19 vaccine.
Trustee Duffy moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the contribution of
$3,000.00 to the Senior Center to be utilized for services provided to Township
residents.
Seconded by Trustee Creagh.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh,
Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
Poverty Exemption Resolution
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board adopt the 2021 Township
Poverty Guidelines Resolution #97-2021.
Seconded by Trustee Steinberg.
Discussion: Supervisor Bloomquist explained that change was necessitated by
changes to State guidelines. Changes to the income limits and exemption amount
are based on 1.5x and 2x the poverty guidelines.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy,
Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster.
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
Board of Review Petition Resolution
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board adopt the Petition
resolution #126-2021 for the 2021 March Board of Review.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Discussion: Supervisor Bloomquist explained the resolution is needed to expand
the ways in which residents may protest their assessment due to Covid-19.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg,
Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
Neighborhood Road Policy
Trustee Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the recommended
changes to the Neighborhood Road Policy.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Discussion: Supervisor Bloomquist explained that the changes add the
definitions of types of roads and clarify which local roads would be considered
priority. It was reiterated that it is not the intent to double charge
residents should there be a millage. The $800.00 match per subdivision property
is appropriate after review of the calculations supporting the amount.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist,
Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw.
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
Red Cedar Manor Resolution 2
Trustee Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board adopt the Red Cedar Manor
Special Assessment Resolution #2 to move forward with the road maintenance
project and the creation of the Special Assessment District.
Seconded by Trustee Steinberg.
Discussion:  None.
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster,
Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh.
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
Red Cedar Manor Resolution 3
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Township Board adopt the Red Cedar
Manor Special Assessment Resolution #3 calling for a Public Hearing on March 3,
2020 at 6:00 pm on the establishment of the Special Assessment District.
Seconded by Trustee Steinberg.
Discussion: Supervisor Bloomquist proposed holding the Red Cedar Manor and
Budget/Police Assessment public hearings at the same time. Suggestion made to
indicate order in which they will be discussed.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk
Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy.
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
Police Assessment & Proposed Budget Public Hearing
Trustee Duffy moved the Williamstown Township Board schedule the Public Hearing
for 2021 Police Assessment Roll and 2021-2022 draft budget on Wednesday March
3, 2020 at 7:00.
Seconded by Trustee Creagh.
Discussion: Supervisor Bloomquist explained that the Police Assessment roll
reflects new construction and any changes in business. Change was made to
budget due to Policy 12 road funding guidelines. There were small revenue
shortages in hall and field rentals but overall revenues much better than
expected and spending was conservative. Pre-audit will take place the end of
June. The draft budget will be posted to the Township website for residents to
review.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer
Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg.
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
DISCUSSION
Committee Appointments – Trustee Creagh is replacing Trustee Eyster on the
Planning Commission. Trustee Eyster will be the Board representative for the
Transportation Committee. Trustee Duffy will be the Board representative for
NIESA with Treasurer Cutshaw continuing as alternate. Trustee Steinberg will be
the Board representative for the Parks and Recreation Committee. Treasurer
Cutshaw and Supervisor Bloomquist will be the Board representatives for the
Cemetery Committee. Clerk Cleveland will be the Board representative for the
Historical Committee.
Environmental Committee – Supervisor Bloomquist explained that the idea is for
this to be an educational committee to provide information to residents and the
Board for ways to reduce carbon footprint. She suggested that the committee be
comprised of a Board member, Planning Committee member, and three community
representatives. Supervisor Bloomquist will revise the committee description
based on input from Board members and requested additional suggestions.
Supervisor Bloomquist will bring back to board at March meeting and reach out
to the Planning Commission for a member to serve.
Spring Clean-Up – Supervisor Bloomquist suggested changes to the Spring Cleanup
due to the Covid-19 pandemic. Rather than one day for everything, it will be
spread over several months beginning in July. Some items, such as paint and
tires will be eliminated, but the Township will still offer recycling for
electronics, metal, sensitive documents, as well as trash disposal.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA: Trustee Duffy stated that major topics were feasibility of requiring any
vendors and contractors to be current on local taxes and that three
defibrillators are being replaced due to cracks being found during routine
inspection.
River Clean-up: Supervisor Bloomquist reported that the project is considered
complete. Friends of the Red Cedar may have an event next year to celebrate and
Williamston Rotary is working on coordinating volunteer log jam removal for
future log jams that occur.
Planning Commission: Trustee Eyster reported that there will be upcoming public
hearings regarding event barn and cluster housing proposed regulations. Event
barn language has been amended to clarify the number and time of events.
Board of Review: Supervisor Bloomquist advised that assessment notices will be
going out soon and the Board of Review will be conducted via Zoom due to the
Covid-19 pandemic. Information will be provided to residents on how to appeal
remotely and the sales study will be on the website to utilize for their
appeals.
Property Taxes:  Treasurer Cutshaw advised that the final day to pay taxes
before they are delinquent will be March 1. The Treasurer’s Department will be
working 9-5 that day to receive and process payments.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:07 pm.
None.
Closed at 8:08 pm. 
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Trustee Steinberg
Meeting adjourned at 8:09 pm.
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________________   ______________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor         Date
____________________________________________   ______________
Robin Cleveland, Township Clerk            Date
March 3, 2021
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Public Hearing for Proposed Budget and Police Assessment Roll
March 3, 2021
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened a virtual meeting at 7:01
p.m. on March 3, 2021 via Zoom (meeting ID 824 2550 1021) due to the COVID-19
virus. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order, reviewed the agenda,
and stated the reason for the meeting/public hearing. Supervisor Bloomquist led
the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg,
Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, and Clerk Cleveland. All Board members
called in from Williamstown Township except Trustee Eyster who called in to the
meeting from Northport, Florida and Trustee Creagh, who is calling from
Jacksonville, Florida.
Public Comment for non-agenda items
Opened at 7:02 pm
None.
Closed at 7:02 pm
Public Hearing for the Police Assessment Roll and Proposed Township Budget for
2021-2022
Trustee Eyster moved to open the public hearing for the Police Assessment Roll
and the Proposed Township Budget.
Seconded by Trustee Steinberg.
The Public Hearing was opened at 7:04 p.m.
Jim Conroy, Chair of the Compensation Commission, outlined the Commission’s
recommendations which includes pay increases for the Supervisor, Clerk, and
Treasurer, from $29,700 to $31,000 annually. The recommendation is for a single
increase for the period of April 1, 2021 through March 30, 2023.
They also recommended pay increases for the Trustees from $5328 to $5400
annually, plus the existing $65 monthly stipend for any Trustee who attends
more than two authorized meetings in a month. A review of the past two year’s
data by the Commission showed minimal use of the meeting stipend. Mr. Conroy
shared that the Compensation Commission felt the slight increases are well-
justified based on increased cost of living and the difficulty of continuing to
work and keep the Township going through the pandemic.
No residents asked questions or made statements during the Public Hearing.
Trustee Creagh moved to close the public hearing.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Public Hearing closed at 7:23 p.m.
Public Comment for Non-Agenda Items
Opened at 7:24 p.m.
None.
Closed at 7:24 p.m.
Adjournment
Trustee Steinberg moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Meeting adjourned at 7:25 p.m.
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________________   ______________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor         Date
____________________________________________   ______________
Robin Cleveland, Township Clerk            Date
March 3, 2021
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Public Hearing for Red Cedar Manor Special Assessment District Roll
March 3, 2021
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened a virtual meeting at 6:02
p.m. on March 3, 2021 via Zoom (meeting ID 824 2550 1021) due to the COVID-19
virus. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order, reviewed the agenda,
and stated the reason for the meeting/public hearing. Supervisor Bloomquist led
the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Supervisor
Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, and Clerk Cleveland. All Board members present
called in from Williamstown Township except Trustee Eyster who called into the
meeting from Northport, Florida and Trustee Creagh, who called in from
Jacksonville, Florida.
Public Comment for non-agenda items
Opened at 6:04 p.m.
None.
Closed at 6:04 p.m.
Supervisor Bloomquist outlined the reason for the public hearing is to hear
objections or omissions to the proposed assessment roll for the Red Cedar Manor
road improvement project.
Public Hearing for the Red Cedar Manor Assessment Roll
Treasurer Cutshaw moved to open the public hearing.
Seconded by Trustee Creagh.
Opened at 6:05 p.m.
 
The following residents asked questions or made statements regarding the
Special Assessment District:
Melissa Wood, 4432 Wilfors – She would like something in writing that says
they’re not going to be double taxed if the Township passes a millage.
Supervisor Bloomquist explained that the Board took action at the February 10,
2021 meeting allowing them to address the issue, but that nothing can be
guaranteed.
Jim Brinker, 21 Oliver – He recently became aware of a law that he says
Townships cannot pay for subdivision roads because they are considered private
roads. Supervisor Bloomquist said that she was unaware of any such law and will
check into this before going forward.
 
Trustee Eyster moved to close the Public Hearing.
Seconded by Clerk Cleveland.
Public Hearing closed at 6:15 p.m.
Public Comment for Non-Agenda Items
Opened at 6:15 p.m.
None.
Closed at 6:15 p.m.
Adjournment
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Meeting adjourned at 6:16 p.m.
 
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________________   ______________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor         Date
____________________________________________   ______________
Robin Cleveland, Township Clerk            Date
March 10, 2021
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
March 10, 2021
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened a virtual meeting at 6:02
p.m. on March 10, 2021 via Zoom (meeting ID 849 5022 8663) due to the COVID-19
virus. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the
Agenda. Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg,
Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, and Clerk Cleveland. All Board members
called in from Williamstown Township except Trustee Eyster who called in from
Northport, Florida, and Trustee Creagh who called in from Fredericksburg,
Virginia.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 6:04 PM
None.
Closed at 6:04 pm.
Consent Agenda
Trustee Steinberg moved the consent agenda consisting of:
   •   Approved the minutes of the February 10 Board Meeting and March 3, 2021
Public Hearings
   •   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid, check numbers 30476 to 30498, for a
total of $15,211.39.
   •   February Payroll Paid check numbers 50558-50583, and EFTs 708-712 for a
total of $29,018.26 (phys. check amount).
   •   General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 30499-30505
for a total of $1,894.45, and GF Accounts Payable for Approval #2, check
numbers 30506-30511 for a total of $60,039.57.
   •   GL Activity Report for February 2021
   •   Revenue and Expenditure report ending February 28, 2021
   •   Police Report
   •   Building Inspectors Report
   •   Acknowledge receipt of February 2021Treasurer’s Report
Seconded by Clerk Cleveland.
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer
Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg.
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
ACTION ITEMS
Compensation Commission Recommendations
Supervisor Bloomquist explained that the recommendation from the Commission
stands unless a motion is made and 2/3 of the Board members vote to reject the
recommendation. Trustees cannot refuse their raise or the additional $65 for
3rd or more meetings in a month without voting to refuse the entire
recommendation.
Discussion:  Some Trustees expressed that they would have preferred no increase
for the themselves and also would prefer if the increases for Officers and
Trustees were not linked. No motion was made to reject the recommendations from
the Commission; therefore, they will be added to the 2021-2022 budget. Since
the recommendation encompasses two fiscal years, they will also be added to the
2022-2023 budget.
Budget Adoption
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the 2021-2022
Township Budget with a beginning Township Total Fund Equity of $2,805,403 as of
March 09, 2021, with department appropriations as outlined:
Dept 101- Township Board          $99,222
Dept 171- Supervisor          $48,554
Dept 191- Elections             $28,757
Dept 209- Assessor             $57,579
Dept 215- Clerk             $52,507
Dept 247- Board of Review       $3,538
Dept 253- Treasurer          $61,639
Dept 265- Building and Grounds       $78,818
Dept 276- Cemetery          $26,000
Dept 294- Township Office          $63,973
Dept 371- Building Inspector       $28,122
Dept 400- Planning Commission       $66,874
Dept 411- Zoning Administrator       $9,624
Dept 420- Zoning Bd of Appeals       $3,519
Dept 441- Public Works          $53,185
Dept 751- Recreation          $64,233
Dept 851- Other Expenses          $500
Dept 890- Contingency          $40,000
Total general fund appropriations    $786,694
Fund 207- Police fund          $347,998
Fund 209- Cemetery          $135,062
Fund 401- Special Project
Dept 101- Township Board          $185,000
Dept 441- Public Works          $982,319
Dept 751- Recreation          $11,263
Dept 753 Ingham County Grant       $49,434
Dept 754 Park House          $27,011
Total Fund 401            $1,255,027
Total Fund Appropriations      $2,524,781
The following provisions to apply:
1.   No expenditures from 401-441-814.000 may be used without Board approval.
2.   Items with estimated total cost over $1000.00 must be preapproved by the
Board.
3.   Contributions over $1000.00 shall be approved by the Board before
accepting.
4.   Salary caps for each position may not be changed without a vote of the
Williamstown Township Board with the exceptions provided in Board Policy 008.
5.   Board salaries will reflect the recommendations of the Compensation
Commission unless rejected by 2/3 vote of the Board.
6.   Amend the budget to include $320,000 to be added to 101-000-999.001
(transfer out) and 401-000-699.000 (transfer in)
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy,
Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster.
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
Police Assessment Role
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board approve Resolution 2020-
21, confirming the 2021 Special Assessment Roll for Police protection within
the Township with the Special Assessment Roll total of $214,170.00.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Discussion: Supervisor Bloomquist will bring forward to November meeting to
confirm the Special Assessment roll.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh,
Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
Red Cedar Manor Resolution 4
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board adopt the Special
Assessment Resolution #4 for the Red Cedar Manor Road Improvements Special
Assessment.
Seconded by Trustee Duffy.
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg,
Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
BS&A Special Assessment District Software
Trustee Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the purchase of
the BS&A Special Assessment District Software at a cost of $2,945 and an annual
service fee of $420.00.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Discussion: Supervisor Bloomquist explained that the software will perform many
functions for the Township’s special assessments, including spreading a special
assessment over several years, calculating interest and more. This software
will interface with the Township’s existing systems and includes training. It
was mentioned that this will also provide continuity if board members change.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist,
Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw.
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
Prairie Burn
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board contract with Davide
Borneman LLC to perform the prairie burn at the Williamstown Township Community
Park at a cost of $7,785.00.
Seconded by Trustee Duffy.
Discussion: Supervisor Bloomquist explained that a burn was approved last
spring but postponed due to Covid-19. The price of services is the same as was
quoted in 2020. Prescribed burns protect the prairie and eliminate invasive
species.
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster,
Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh.
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
21-22 Calendar Dates
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board adopt the proposed
meeting dates for the 2021-22 fiscal year with meetings to start 7:00 PM.
Seconded by Clerk Cleveland.
Discussion: Discussion regarding the 6:00 p.m. meeting time and a friendly
amendment was made by Trustee Duffy and seconded by Trustee Creagh to have
meetings start at 7:00 p.m.
Motion Passed.
Budget Amendments
Clerk Cleveland moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the following
budget amendments for the 2020/2021 budget:
Add to Reduce Increase Department
Add to                Reduce    Increase  Department
101-191-980                     $1,010.00 Elections
Capital Outlay
101-191-728                     $100.00   Elections
Supplies
101-191-725                     $800.00   Elections
Printing
101-191-902                     $40.00    Elections
Publications
101-191-930                     $50.00    Elections
Repairs
101-890-965.000       $2000.00            Elections
Contingency
101-101-801                     $1,200.00 Trustees
Audit fees
101-101-910                     $300.00   Trustees
Public Officials
101-101-802           $1,500.00           Trustees
Legal fees
101-209-711.030                 $150.00   Assessor
Medicare
101-209-728           $150.00             Assessor
Supplies
101-215-711                     $200.00   Clerk
Social Security
101-215-713           $200.00             Clerk
Pension Plan
101-215-956                     $150.00   Clerk
Membership & Dues
101-215-980           $150.00             Clerk
Capital Outlay
101-265-807                     $1,000.00 Building and Grounds
Monthly Services
101-265-910.002                 $700.00   Building and Grounds
Auto Insurance
101-265-910.003       $700.00             Building and Grounds
General Liability
101-265-900.000       $1,000.00           Building and Grounds
Fuel
101-294-920                     $2,000.00 Township Office
Utilities & Telephone
101-294-930           $2,000.00           Township Office
Repair & Maintenance
101-265-704                     $1,000.00 Buildings and Grounds
Salary & Wages- Snow
101-751-703           $1,000.00           Buildings and Grounds
Salary & Wages Park
 
Seconded by Trustee Steinberg.
Discussion: None
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster,
Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh.
Nays: None.
DISCUSSION ITEMS
Environmental Committee – Supervisor Bloomquist explained details of how the
Environmental Committee will conduct itself and how that relates to the
Governor’s Directive 2020-10 to reduce Michigan’s carbon footprint by 50% by
2030. A suggestion was made that the Board should have more details about the
Governor’s Directive before making a decision about the committee. Supervisor
Bloomquist will provide the Board with the Governor’s Directive and any other
information desired, then will bring this to the April Board meeting for a
vote. This committee was suggested by Township residents. Supervisor Bloomquist
asked the Board members to give feedback and ask questions before the next
meeting.
Ethics – In 2016, the Board pledged to abide by and signed a Principles of
Governance document. Supervisor Bloomquist believes an ethics policy would be
useful for this Board going forward. The policy could help ensure
accountability to Township residents and others. Supervisor Bloomquist will put
a draft policy together and send it to the Board for input, then bring the
resulting document to the April meeting.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA: Trustee Duffy reported that that 2021/2022 officers were elected, and
all stayed the same. The Chief wants to begin a research and bid process to
utilize millage funds for a new ambulance to increase to three staffed full
time with one in reserve. Ultimately plans call for having a total of five
ambulances. In response to questions, Trustee Duffy will provide information on
the process used if assistance is needed from other departments.
Board of Review: Supervisor Bloomquist reported that the meetings are being
held virtually via Zoom and that has gone well for the petitioners and the
Board of Review members. Due to holding the meetings electronically, much work
was done in advance, which was helpful for efficiency.
MTA Conference:  Supervisor Bloomquist advised that the Michigan Township
Association (MTA) will hold their 2021 annual conference virtually from April
19th through 21st. This provides a great opportunity for those who have not
attended in the past, since sessions will be available after the conference to
those who are signed up to go. The cost to attend is $159 per Board member and
it is already budgeted for Board members to attend. Board members should check
the MTA website for details and advise Supervisor Bloomquist if they would like
to attend.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:07
Monica Schafer - 1691 Osprey, Williamston: Expressed disappointment about pay
increases for Trustees, Officers, and staff.
Closed at 7:11
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Clerk Cleveland
Meeting adjourned at 7:12 PM
 
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________________   ______________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor            Date
____________________________________________   ______________
Robin Cleveland, Township Clerk               Date
April 14, 2021
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
April 14, 2021
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened a virtual meeting at 7:00
p.m. on April 14, 2021 via Zoom (meeting ID 843 5264 9571) due to the COVID-19
virus. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order and reviewed the
Agenda. Supervisor Bloomquist led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg,
Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, and Clerk Cleveland. All Board members
called in from Williamstown Township except Trustee Creagh who called in from
Fremont, MI.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:04 PM
None.
Closed at 7:04 pm.
Consent Agenda
Trustee Creagh moved the consent agenda consisting of:
   •   Approved the minutes of the March 10, 2021 Board meeting
   •   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid, check numbers 30512-30529, for a
total of $8,398.49.
   •   March Payroll Paid check numbers 50584-50619, and EFTs 713-714, for a
total of $26,407.67 (phys. check amount).
   •   General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 30530-30538
for a total of $2,763.03, and GF Accounts Payable for Approval #2, check
numbers    •   30539-30545 for a total of $4,429.02.
   •   Police Paid, check number 1117 for a total of $61,776.94.
   •   GL Activity Report for March 2021
   •   Revenue and Expenditure report ending March 31, 2021.
   •   Police Report
   •   Building Inspectors Report
   •   Draft March Planning Commission minutes
   •   Acknowledge receipt of March 2021 Treasurer’s Report
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer
Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg.
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
Meridian Police Update – Chief Plaga
Chief Ken Plaga, Meridian Township Police Department (MTPD) gave the police
update. Chief Plaga reported that over the past 5 years there were 14 accidents
at the Sherwood Road and Zimmer Road intersection, and 9 accidents at the
Sherwood Road and Williamston Road intersection. Roughly half of those
accidents were single car. A traffic study will be conducted at those
intersections to determine if they warrant making them 4 way stops. Chief Plaga
reported that overall billable hours are down due to Covid-19 and a majority of
billed hours were the two large structure fires in the last quarter. Drunk
driving arrests are increasing in the area in general, but not specifically in
the Township. Four new officers are being hired. Assistant Chief Brad Bach is
retiring on May 14 and they are looking to promote from within for his
replacement.
Planning Commission Update – Chair Eidt
Chair Eidt reported that the commission was pleased to welcome Trustee Creagh
as Township Board representative. Two public hearings were held March 24th and
proposed ordinances have been forwarded to the Board for action - Cluster
Zoning Amendment for Article 25/Planned Development and Event Barns Amendment
for Article 8/Site Development Standards for Specific Uses. Supervisor
Bloomquist will put the proposed Amendments on the Township website for the
public’s review. The commission reviewed the site plan for Ark LLC/Odd Fellows
Contracting and approved the meeting schedule for 2021/2022. The commission
received the initial draft of farm animals on non-farm parcels proposed
amendment and formed a sub-committee for further review. The Planning
Commission will continue review at the May meeting.
ACTION ITEMS
Ark LLC Site Plan
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve the Ark LLC
Site plan for 1000 E. Grand River Rd. as recommended by the Planning
Commission.
Seconded by Trustee Creagh.
Discussion: None
Motion Passed.
Budget Amendments
Trustee Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the following
budget amendments for the 2021- 2022 budget:
General Ledger     amount change Amount        
                                            
101-000-999.001                 $ 310,000.00 to show movement of funds from
                                              101 to 401
Transfer out                                based on Policy 12
                                            
401-000-699.000                             to show movement of funds to 401
Transfer in                     $ 310,000.00 based on Policy 12
                                            
401-101-982.000    $ 89,161.00   $ 269,161.00 due to policy 12
                                            
                                            
401-441-814.000    $ (95,181.00) $ 767,138.00 due to policy 12
Road Improvement                             
                                            
401-441-814.002    $ (29,600.00) $ 60,000.00  to correct amount budgeted.
Neighborhood Roads                           
                                            
401-751-881.000    $ 3,000.00    $ 9,000.00   to adjust for carryover
Parklands                                    
                                            
Grant              $ (49,434.00) $ -          final payment of grant made in
                                              2020-21
                                            
House Restricted   $1,959        $ 24,615.00  to adjust for carryover
                                            
                  $ (80,095.00)               
 
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Discussion: Supervisor Bloomquist explained that the amendments are needed due
to year end numbers, as happens yearly.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh,
Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
Annual Yard Sales
Discussion: Supervisor Bloomquist explained that yard sales have taken place
during recycling as part of a block grant and was popular with the residents.
They did not take place last year due to Covid-19 and a decision needs to be
made for this year. Consensus was that they should not occur until after Covid-
19 is under control and the Board will revisit this in a few months.
Environmental Committee
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the creation of
an Environmental Committee as outlined in the document that was included in the
board meeting packet, dated 4-8-21.
Seconded by Clerk Cleveland.
Discussion: Supervisor Bloomquist asked for recommendations for committee
members.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy,
Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster.
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
Generator Repair
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board contract with CAT for the
necessary generator repairs at a cost of $3,185.84.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Discussion: Supervisor Bloomquist advised that the radiator sprung a leak and
needs to be fixed or replaced. There was an initial quote form Wolverine Power
to repair or replacement as well as one for replacement from CAT.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg,
Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
Road Maintenance
Clerk Cleveland moved the Williamstown Township Board request from the County
the following road work be completed from the 2019 contract in 2021 at a cost
not to exceed $350,000:
1. Germany Road from Zimmer Road to Barton Road – Hot Mill Asphalt (HMA)
wedging & Chip Seal.
2. Burkley Road from Grand River (M-43) to Township Line – HMA overlay.
3. Beeman Road from Sherwood Road to Williamston City Limit – HMA overlay.
4. Germany Road from Barton Road to Williamston Road – HMA wedging & Chip Seal.
5. Lounsbury Road from Haslett Road to Milton Road – HMA wedging & Chip Seal.
6. Shoesmith Rd. - Chip Seal 60 days after crack sealing is completed.
7. Gulick Rd. - Chip Seal 60 days after crack sealing is completed.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Discussion: Ingham County Road Commission has been advised that these approvals
were coming and that the Township would like them done this year. It was
mentioned that crack sealing will have to be contracted out to be followed by
chip sealing by the County.
Roll Call Vote
Ayes: Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist,
Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw.
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board work with Meridian
Township and/or Mannik & Smith to move forward with crack sealing Gulick and
Shoesmith Rd. at a cost not to exceed $25,000.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Discussion: Supervisor Bloomquist will be clarifying if an RFP is needed or
just estimates. Supervisor Bloomquist clarified that the crack sealing will be
followed by chip seal. The timeline is to have this completed ASAP and Mannik &
Smith did not think that would be an issue.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster,
Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh.
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
Emergency Resolution
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board adopt the Resolution to
Authorize the Continuation of the State of Emergency for Williamstown Township
through June 30, 2021.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Discussion: Supervisor Bloomquist explained that Ingham County declared a state
of emergency and extended virtual meetings through the end of April. Many
townships are doing their own resolutions to allow for continuing to meet
virtually. Consensus was that doing this incrementally was a good idea with
review in June.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk
Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy.
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
DISCUSSION ITEMS
Event Barns – Comments included appreciation that the question regarding
frequency of events was addressed and that this final version is much clearer
than earlier versions. 
Cluster Zoning –Chair Eidt stated that since it is private land it wasn’t
appropriate to limit the potential development to senior citizens. The
developer could implement age restrictions. Clarification on the size of the
accessory building for use of a garage, perhaps that number should be modified
to be 24x24 which would be for a 2-car garage. It was mentioned that saying
that the development is “affordable” is a misnomer. A suggestion was made that
replacing “affordable” with “moderately priced” might be more appropriate.  
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA: Trustee Duffy reported on the March meeting which had a light agenda. No
action items, and main discussion item was on the use of public funds for
providing water and food to public employees, such as when a fire happens that
goes on for an extended amount of time. A previous NIESA Board member said that
it was illegal to use public funds to feed public employees. Other local
departments, such as Mason and Leslie, were able to feed their people with no
problem during the multi-department fire call. Chief Yanz will research to see
if the Board member was correct that the public funds couldn’t be used. Trustee
Duffy also reported that there is fundraising and grant writing happening
currently for new CPR equipment. Trustee Duffy will update the board on the
April NIESA meeting at the May board meeting.
Parks: Trustee Steinberg reported that during a recent trip in the river from
the Williamston put-in down to the MDOT park, only one portage was necessary.
There is a new log jam forming west of the Township park. He reported that the
prescribed burn company did a great job of controlling the fire and burning
just what was intended. Prescribed burn kills off invasive species that are
more susceptible to fire. Supervisor Bloomquist reported she could not find
trees for an Arbor Day project but could perhaps try an Adopt a Tree project.
Supervisor Bloomquist had a meeting with Tri-County and Ingham County Parks
regarding signage on the river and their wish to include all municipalities on
signage design and placement.
Roads: Trustee Eyster advised that there are three main roads that were not
looked at with the County in 2019 – Epley, Hart, and part of Barry where it is
swampy and partly gravel. The road most prevalent with houses is Epley Road.
Supervisor Bloomquist advised that Red Cedar Manor engineering is nearly done
and RFPs should be going out soon. Meadowdale is going to move forward with
letter of intent to determine if the residents will move forward with work on
Meadowdale Dr. Subdivision roads have been getting worse as time goes on.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:26 PM
Dan Robinson – Mr. Robinson commended the board on the work they do. He stated
that he is a Gold Star father and requested the Township look into a program
for veterans for burial assistance. (Supervisor Bloomquist advised that the
request will be forwarded to the cemetery committee for discussion.)
Closed at 8:34 PM
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Clerk Cleveland.
Meeting adjourned at 8:35 PM.
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________________   ______________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor            Date
____________________________________________   ______________
Robin Cleveland, Township Clerk               Date
May 12, 2021
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened a virtual meeting at 7:00
p.m. on May 12, 2021 via Zoom (meeting ID 840 2995 7090) due to the COVID-19
virus. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order, reviewed the agenda,
and led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg,
Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, and Clerk Cleveland. All Board members
called in from Williamstown Township.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:03 PM
Pamela Shaheen, Township resident: Stated concerns regarding the Event Barn
Zoning Ordinance Amendment and asked the Board to consider doing an assessment
at the end of the year to evaluate, if it is passed.  
Jill Sweeney, Township resident: Stated concerns regarding the Event Barn
Zoning Ordinance Amendment and suggested any board member who is an owner or
has interest in any property considered for an event barn abstain from voting.
She voiced a concern about the roads where event barns may be permitted. On
Cluster Zoning, she stated the term “affordable” may not be an appropriate word
to use in the ordinance.
Vicki Potter, Township resident: Commented that she will be attending meetings
as both a resident and an observer on behalf of the League of Women Voters.
David Kenney, Township resident: Stated agreement with everything Jill Sweeney
said and said he supports her suggestions.
Closed at 7:09 pm.
Consent Agenda
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approved the minutes of the April 14, 2021 Board meeting
General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 30546-30555, for a total
of $6,655.04, and Accounts Payable #2, check numbers 30567-30568, for a total
of $1,085.87.
April Payroll Paid check numbers 50620-50646, and EFTs 715-718, for a total of
$$26,136.92 (phys. check amount).
General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 30556-30566 for a
total of $9,378.90, and GF Accounts Payable for Approval #2, check numbers
30569-30572, for a total of $5,598.53.
GL Activity Report for April 2021
Revenue and Expenditure report ending April 30, 2021.
Police Report
Building Inspectors Report
Acknowledge receipt of April 2021 Treasurer’s Report
Seconded by Clerk Cleveland.
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer
Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg.
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
CADL Yearly Update – Julie Chrisinske
Capitol Area District Library (CADL) Head Librarian, Julie Chrisinske, gave an
update on the library. During the Covid-19 pandemic numerous new services and
protocols were developed such as door side service, a computer appointment
system, and Grab and Go bags of books and movies. Demand for online services
increased, and additional online content and programs were created. She
reported that they were also able to help students by providing Internet
hotspots to local schools. They are hoping to open by appointment on June 1,
2021.
ACTION ITEMS
Event Barns Zoning Ordinance Amendments
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board postpone action on the
proposed Zoning Ordinance amendments regarding Event Barns to the June 9th,
2021 meeting.
Seconded by Trustee Duffy.
Discussion: Supervisor Bloomquist reported that information regarding the
Ordinance was posted on the website and comments were received. Items discussed
were possibility of an assessment, density of event barns within an area, hours
of operation and capacity, and effect on the roads with the increased traffic.
Supervisor Bloomquist stated, according to the way the proposed ordinance is
written, there are approximately 135 properties that would be eligible to have
an event barn. McKenna brings in information from all over the state and that
is taken into consideration when writing the ordinances. Board members would
like feedback from municipalities with event barns. Multiple Board members
stated that balancing the rights of property owners to have the event barn and
the rights of neighbors is an important to maintain.
Prior to the June 9 meeting Board members will reach out to other
municipalities with a list of questions to ask them. The Planning Assistant
will develop a list of questions and disburse it to the Board members.
Questions would include number of events allowed, acreage requirements,
operation hours, location, setback requirements, and any issues they have had.
Motion Passed.
Cluster Zoning Ordinance Amendments
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board postpone action on the
proposed Zoning Ordinance amendments regarding Cluster Housing to the June 9th,
2021 meeting.
Seconded by Clerk Cleveland.
Discussion: The matter of the term “affordable” being a HUD term was discussed
and it was explained that this was unintentional. The term “affordable” could
be removed from the ordinance and the intent would still remain. Board members
requested to have the revisions out prior to the June 9 th meeting to give time
for resident questions or comments.
Motion Passed.
Newsletter
Clerk Cleveland moved the Williamstown Township Board approve expending up to
$2000 for the cost of design, printing, postage and mailing a Township
Newsletter with Foresight Group.
Seconded by Trustee Steinberg.
Discussion: Supervisor Bloomquist explained that the Township last sent out a
newsletter in 2019 with the summer tax bills. This year the idea is to have a
newsletter designed and mailed out prior to the summer tax bills because of the
change to the Spring Cleanup, which would provide important information about
the Township. It would include information on the common questions asked by
residents such as building permit requirements, fence regulations, burning
regulations, and reminder of services offered by the Township. This would be
something for the residents to keep and refer to as needed.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg,
Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
DISCUSSION ITEMS
Ethics Policy – Supervisor Bloomquist asked for any editing or changes to the
policy and requested that this be submitted to her by the end of May to be
brought back to the June meeting. 
Copier – Supervisor Bloomquist reminded the board members that the six-month
time frame for revisiting replacing the copier has now passed and following
discussion with office staff the recommendation is to replace it. Supervisor
Bloomquist will facilitate acquiring bids for the replacement and will bring it
to the June meeting.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA: Trustee Duffy reported that the meeting is May 13 th and the main topic
of discussion will be creating a policy for providing breaks, food, and drink
at long events when personnel is on scene for extended amounts of time. NIESA
has had eight fire fighter candidates pass the hands-on exam and are waiting on
their written exams. Two other candidates have completed both and are now full-
fledged fire fighters.
Parks: Trustee Steinberg was happy to report that there have been a lot of
people going down the river in kayaks and canoes since the cleanup project was
completed. There is a new obstruction in the river and cleanup is being worked
on before it gets larger. A plan is being developed for the house and park, and
sources of revenue for the house and the park are being investigated.
Roads:  Supervisor Bloomquist stated that two additional subdivisions have
asked for estimates on fixing roads utilizing the Special Assessment District/
Neighborhood Road Policy. Meetings are set with the two neighborhoods and if
they decide they want to move forward, the neighborhood would then do petitions
for a Special Assessment District. Supervisor Bloomquist advised that Red Cedar
Manor is waiting for completed RFPs to move forward with their road work.
Elections: Clerk Cleveland reported that Okemos Schools had two millage
proposals for the May election, and both passed overwhelmingly. Okemos Schools
will reimburse the Township for the cost of the election. The Township had 24%
voter turnout with 88% of ballots being absentee ballots. The election has been
certified and the Township has not been chosen to be audited.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:18 PM
William Norman, Township property owner: Commented about permission to record
the Zoom Board meetings, the hotspots provided to the schools by the library,
and the event barn ordinance.
Closed at 8:21 PM
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Clerk Cleveland
Meeting adjourned at 8:23 p.m.
Minutes approved by:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10693.png]
June 9, 2021
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened a virtual meeting at 7:02
p.m. on June 9, 2021 via Zoom (meeting ID 876 8202 5683) due to the COVID-19
virus. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order, reviewed the agenda,
and led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer
Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy and Trustee Steinberg
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:04 PM
David Kenney, 1553 Epley Rd.: He previously emailed Jim Howard with questions
and concerns about event barns. He wants anybody that stands to gain from event
barns to abstain from voting.
Jennifer Tubbs, 5915 Shoeman Rd.: She has concerns about noise, from her
experience and indicated that farmers aren’t doing event barns, that people are
buying properties with barns to start event barn businesses. She suggested
limiting event barns to 5 events per year. From personal experience she knows
how disruptive event barns are, including making roads are more dangerous from
drinking & driving. If the Board moves forward, proximity to density is more
important than distance.
Sam Zuke, 6116 Shoeman Rd.: Mr. Zuke has DJ’d more than 1000 events. He said
police were usually called because of noise and it is not reasonable to expect
a one-time customer to care about the noise or anything else. From May –
October expect events every Thursday through Sunday.
Julie Byelich, 850 Gulick Rd.: Her acreage backs up to huge property that could
be an event barn. She has small children whose rooms face the farm and is
concerned about noise, etc. After hearing others who live next to event barns
talk about their property being trashed, she can’t imagine dealing with that
herself.
Jeff Sweet, 5915 Shoeman Rd.: Mr. Sweet is a teacher. He enjoys time with his
kids and family and the peaceful use of his property including bonfires and
outdoor movies. He has concerns about event barns include DJ noise and 300
people leaving at night.
Jordan Byelich, 850 Gulick Rd.: He sent an email to Jim Howard. Concerns about
the event barn include: challenges with traffic, noise, liability when people
wander onto his property, how it will be regulated and that the Township office
would be closed during events.
Closed at 7:23 pm.
Consent Agenda
Trustee Steinberg moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approved the minutes of the May 12, 2021 Board meeting
General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 30573-30583, for a total
of $33,058.78, and Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 30590-30592, for a
total of $1,843.03.
May Payroll Paid check numbers 50647-50689, and EFTs 719-720, for a total of
$29,071.91 (phys. check amount).
General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 30584-30589, for a
total of $4,079.47, and GF Accounts Payable for Approval #2, check numbers
30593-30598, for a total of $5,276.17.
GL Activity Report for May 2021
Revenue and Expenditure report ending May 31, 2021.
Police Report
Building Inspectors Report
Acknowledge receipt of May 2021 Treasurer’s Report
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: None
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy,
Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist
Nays: None
Motion Passed
Planning Commission Annual Report
Presented by Rob Stanford, Vice Chairman of the Planning Commission
Vice Chair Stanford stated he appreciates comments about Event Barns and said
it would be helpful to have these comments at Planning Commission during the
planning stage. The Planning Commission spent 18 months working on the Event
Barn ordinance and they did not get any comments from residents about Event
Barns. They reached out to a number of event barn owners, people that had used
them and neighbors of event barns.
The May 26th Planning Commission meeting included a public hearing for site
plan review and special use permit for Barkham Creek Farms on E. Haslett Rd.
According to Planning Consultant, Chris Doozan, from Mckenna, the site plan met
the ordinance requirements. The Planning Commission recommended to wave the
paving of the parking lot, lighting requirements and dust control. The
applicant submitted a revised landscape plan for screening from the neighboring
property.
The Planning Commission continued discussion of farm animals on non-farm
parcels. Vice Chair Stanford invited residents to attend upcoming Planning
Commission meetings which are announced on the Township website.
ACTION ITEMS
Barkham Creek Farms
Trustee Creagh moved that the Township Board approve the site plan for Barkham
Creek Farm dated 5/1/2021 and Special Use Permit to allow the growing and
selling of pumpkins and mums, the pressing and sale of cider along with donuts,
and other farm products grown on site, subject to the following conditions:
That the parking lot paving and lighting requirements be waived;
That dust control measures be continued;
That the driveway approach within the Haslett Road Right-of-Way be completed by
August 31, 2021 and in compliance with Ingham County Road Department
requirements;
And that the North / South screening along the southeast corner of the parcel
intended to provide a screen for the adjacent parcel be completed in accordance
with a landscape plan submitted by Mr. Barkham and approved by the Township,
with administrative review.
Seconded by Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: Supervisor Bloomquist stated that Mr. Barkham had revised his
special use permit and site plan and they went back to Planning Commission for
review. A revised landscaping plan was submitted on June 8 at the request of
the east neighbor. Clarifications were needed on the submitted revisions. The
revisions could be reviewed administratively to insure conformance with the
ordinance.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy,
Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster
Nays: None
Motion Passed
Cluster Zoning Ordinance Amendments
Clerk Cleveland moved the Township Board approve adding Article 25.50 Planned
Development Cluster Option to the Williamstown Township Zoning Ordinance as
amended with the additional requirement to provide physical broadband
connectivity.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: There was discussion about whether the term “cable ready” is the
right language. Ultimately, the Board decided on the term “physical broadband
connectivity” instead of “cable ready.”
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg,
Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland
Nays: None
Motion Passed
Prime Housing Donation
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township accept the donation of
$6,000.00 from Prime Housing Group for the Township Park, with funds placed in
401-751-881.000 and increase the expenditure line by an additional $6000.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: Prime Housing has previously donated to the Township Park and the
Art Tour.
Motion Passed
MTA Education
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board approves the MTA premium
educational package.
Seconded by Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: The Township utilized the Plus package last year.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster,
Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh
Nays: None
Motion Passed
Copier
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board authorize the Supervisor,
Treasurer and Clerk to explore and approve the purchase or lease of a new
copier not to exceed $7,000 to replace the Township copier.
Seconded by Trustee Duffy
Discussion: The price comparisons are close, therefore quality and service
would be a deciding factor.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk
Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy
Nays: None
Motion Passed
Concrete Leveling - Pavilion
Clerk Cleveland moved the Township approve the proposal from Concrete Raising
and Leveling Company for leveling and calking the concrete in the Township Hall
Pavilion, not to exceed $3,400.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: Cheaper and more efficient than replacing the concrete.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster,
Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh
Nays: None
Motion Passed
Environmental Committee Appointments
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Township Board approve the appointments of Ed
Mahoney, Sharon LaPointe and Jim Miller to the Environmental Committee.
Seconded by Clerk Cleveland
Discussion: Other members of the committee are Jim Flore (Planning Commission
representative) and Janet Eyster (Board representative).
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk
Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy
Nays: None
Motion Passed
DISCUSSION ITEMS
Event Barns- Based on feedback from residents, each member of the Board was
charged with contacting Townships with event barns to give the board a sample
of any issues that Townships have experienced and what their ordinance language
includes. Items of concern and/or interest:
Location only allowed on state highway
Limited to existing barns
More limited hours
Limited number of events per year to 6-12
Lowered maximum attendance
No amplified music
Not permitting event barns
Setting a density standard for neighbors
Daytime only
Trash complaints
Limited special use permit would require renewal
Increase in traffic on local roads
No complaints in Rives Twp. (only one event barn has been permitted)
Language to insure it is a secondary use to farming
Limiting alcohol use
Monitoring activity became an issue due to complaints
Limit of zoning districts as well as acreage
It was suggested to bring back the issues to the Board at the July meeting to
discuss next steps by the Board.
Ethics Policy-Revised draft was submitted to the Board based on comments
received.
Discussion:
Insure it covers items covered in closed session.
Further comments to Supervisor Bloomquist by June 16th.
Will submit to the Township attorney for review.
Office Reopening-This is the last Board meeting via Zoom. The July meeting will
be in person. The office will open to the public on July 1st. All staff is back
in the office on a regular schedule.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA: Trustee Duffy reported that local resident, Dane Cook, has been hired to
design a new website. Bids have been requested for a new auditor. NIESA has
submitted a grant application to Ingham County to cover new equipment and
wages. NIESA is intending to request funding from the participating
municipalities as well. Concern was expressed over the continued cost of
additional pay in the future for staff. Question about the practice of billing
Township residents when insurance does not cover the full cost, as other
municipalities do not bill residents for fees not covered by their insurance.
Parks: Trustee Steinberg updated the Board regarding the priorities of the
parks committee. Designs for a new entrance sign are being formulated with the
hopes of including a new logo. Mapping of the river will take place thanks to
Tri-County Regional Planning. The committee, with the assistance of Trustee
Creagh, is identifying grant opportunities that the Township may be able to
utilize for funding park projects.
Emergency Plan: Supervisor Bloomquist mentioned that Trustee Eyster suggested
we prepare an emergency plan for hazardous waste, tornados, etc. Treasurer
Cutshaw and Trustee Eyster will work together on a draft plan. PC Vice Chair
Stanford suggested checking the County’s plan and volunteered to aid in
drafting a plan.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 9:47 PM
David Kennedy thanked Vice Chair Stanford for his comments about the Planning
Commission’s actions. He stated that people have to know what is going on.
Planning Commission Vice-Chair Stanford stated that everyone is always welcome
to attend the Planning Commission meetings. The next meeting is in person on
July 28 th at 7 pm.
Closed at 9:53 PM
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Creagh moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Clerk Cleveland
Meeting adjourned at 9:54 p.m.
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________________ ______________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor Date
 
 
_____________________________________________ _____________
Robin A. Cleveland, Township Clerk Date
July 14, 2021
Williamstown Township Township Board Meeting Minutes 
July 14, 2021
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 7:
00 p.m.
on July 14, 2021. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order, reviewed the agenda, and led the Pledge
of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor
Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, and Clerk Cleveland.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:03 PM
Jennifer Tubbs, 5915 Shoeman Rd: Shared her opposition to the proposed event
barn amendments for reasons previously stated in her letter to the Township.
Todd Granger, 542 Haslett Rd.: Expressed concerns about the proposed event barn
amendments with regard to noise, parking, traffic, and impaired drivers
due to alcohol. He questioned the benefit to the township.
Tom Potter, 5605 Lounsbury Rd.: Stated that he does not support event barns and
sees no advantage for the Township unless it is a source of revenue. Stated
that he lives in the Township because of the quiet and
would not like to see that disrupted.
Closed at 7:06
Consent Agenda
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approved the minutes of the June 9, 2021 Board meeting.
General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 30599-30611, for a total
of $17,354.15, and Accounts Payable #2, check numbers 30623-
30624, for a total of $1,085.09.
General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 30612-30622 for
a total of
$21,720.18, and GF Accounts Payable for Approval #2, check numbers 30625-
30632, for a total of $3,594.94.
June Payroll Paid check numbers 50690-50726, and EFTs 721-722, for a total of
$34,982.46 (phys. check amount).
GL Activity Report for June 2021
Revenue and Expenditure report ending June 30, 2021.
Police Report
Building Inspectors Report
Acknowledge receipt of June 2021 Treasurer's Report Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer
Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Steinberg.
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
Police Update - Chief Plaga
Chief Plaga reported that the department conducted traffic stops at the west
end of Sherwood Road near Meridian to try to curb speeding in that area. A
speed study and traffic survey will be conducted at the Zimmer Road/Sherwood
Road intersection to determine what steps might be taken to reduce accidents.
Extra hours are down for this year to date. Due to summer activity those hours
may go up. Once the department is fully staffed, they plan to participate in
Ingham County's Violent Crime Initiative. Chief Plaga reported that
diversity of officers is a priority and while the national average for female
officers is 12.5%, they are currently at 25%. They are once again holding the
Citizens Academy and encourage residents to participate and learn more about
how their department operates.
ACTION ITEMS
Ethics Policy
Trustee Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Ethics Policy
as presented to
the Township Board with the amendments proposed by the Township attorney.
Seconded by Clerk Cleveland
Discussion: After some questions about wording were raised it was decided to
take the issue up at the August meeting to allow time for further review.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: None
Nays: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh,
Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist.
Motion Failed.
Keith Creagh moved the Williamstown Township board bring action on the ethics
policy to the August Board meeting with amendments.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster. Discussion:  none
Motion Carried.
Construction Board of Appeals
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the appointments
of Thomas Burt and Jeffrey Bartrem to serve a 2-year term on the Construction
Board of Appeals beginning August 1, 2021. Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion:  There was brief discussion regarding posting the committee
positions. Supervisor Bloomquist advised that volunteer applications have been
sent with the weekly update and that they are available on
the website. Committee openings will be posted on the website.
Motion Passed.
County Road Agreement
Trustee Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the contract with
the Ingham County Road Department for the 2021 road maintenance improvements.
Seconded by Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: Regarding the road funding match from the County.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Steinberg,
Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster.
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
Covid Policy
Trustee Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board adopt the Covid Policy
dated July 14, 2021. Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion:  Suggestion was made to have an additional policy in place with
direction on procedures if restrictions are returned.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor
Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
Branch School Painting
Supervisor Bloomquist advised that one of the quotes obtained had been
rescinded so more quotes need to be obtained before a decision is made.
Will be brought to the August meeting.
Cemetery Improvements
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board move
forward with an RFP for drive maintenance/improvements and the RFP for the
Green Burial and scattering garden design at Summit Cemetery.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: Supervisor Bloomquist explained that there have been requests for
green burials at the
cemetery and the driveway repairs and landscaping are necessary to begin laying out the site.
Roll Call Vote:   .
Ayes: Trustee Creagh, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster,
Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw.
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
Logo/Branding
Clerk Cleveland gave an overview of the three bids that had been obtained for
the new logo design. The request was for designing a new logo that can be used
in multiple ways and for advice on successful branding of the Township. Mid-Ml
Consulting is a Williamston business and the other two companies are based in
Lansing and East Lansing.
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the proposal
with Mid-Ml Consulting for logo/branding design work
for the Township at a cost of up to $3900.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw Discussion:  none
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk
Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh.
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
Wage Increase for Henry Szymecko
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the requested
pay increase for Henry Szymecko for the balance of the season to $13.50/
hr. effective July 10, 2021.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster Discussion:  None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk
Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh.
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
DISCUSSION ITEMS
Event Barns - Supervisor Bloomquist expressed appreciation for the residents
who have come forward to state their views on this subject. Based on the
interest shown, she suggested a committee be formed with two Board members and
two Planning Commission members to look at everything that has been gathered
and discussed to this point and solicit more input from the community. The
Board members will be Trustees Cutshaw
and Creagh, and the Planning Commission members are yet to be determined. The committee will provide recommendations
to be provided to the Planning Commission to hold a public hearing and
gather further input from the community before final recommendations are made to the
Board.
Joint meeting with City- Supervisor Bloomquist explained that it was Township's
turn to host the meeting last year but since that meeting was cancelled due to
Covid-19 the Township will be host this year. August 18
th or 25th is the proposed date for the meeting.
Reports - Departments and Committees
NIESA: There have been two NIESA meetings since the last board meeting and in
his absence, Trustee Duffy provided a summary via email. Both meetings centered
around wage increases for EMTs and Paramedics to bring them more in line with
other local municipalities. Director Yanz and Deputy Chief Pfiester
expressed concerns that if this action wasn't taken soon, not only will they
lose more staff, but they won't be able to
recruit new trainees to replace the lost staff members. The wage
increases were unanimously approved.
Parks:  Trustee Steinberg advised that because the river is so high the use is
down due to safety concerns.
The committee will be meeting next week to discuss projects and organizing ongoing river cleanup. Trustee Steinberg
reported that two future projects are to add a launch site in the City and a
launch site at the MOOT park on Grand River. The
City project has already begun.
Branch School: Supervisor Bloomquist reported that there is an opportunity to
work with a student from Eastern Michigan University's historic preservation
program on writing the application for historical designation.
The designation may be just for
the school or possibly for an entire section to be designation as "Africa."
Township Audit:  Supervisor Bloomquist advised that the preaudit has been
completed and the Township's financial audit will take place on July 21, 2021.
Copier: An update was requested on the purchase of a new copier and Supervisor
Bloomquist advised that they are awaiting arrival
of the selected copier for testing prior to purchase.
Barkham Site Plan: An update was requested on the Barkham site plan and
Supervisor Bloomquist
advised that it has been approved and that Mr. Barkham has been notified of the approval and conditions.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:37 PM
Jennifer Tubbs, 5915 Shoeman Rd: Expressed concerns regarding the event barn
amendments including that there are issues with how it is written, that it is
much harder to stop once it is allowed, and that any issues that arise come at
the expense of the neighbors. It was suggested to have law enforcement review
the ordinance
and a request was made for adding residents to the newly formed committee.
Tom Potter, 5605 Lounsbury Rd.: Expressed that there are alternate places
already available for events so event barns are not necessary. Suggested
looking into the liability for the Township of allowing event barns
vs. not allowing them.
Todd Granger, 542 Haslett Rd.: Advised that he knows that agritourism is a big
draw currently, but questions how event barns
benefit the Township. Cautioned the Board not to react in a
way solely to avoid lawsuits.
Closed at 8:47 PM
Adjournment and Review
Clerk Cleveland moved to adjourn the meeting. Seconded by Trustee Creagh.
Meeting adjourned.
Minutes approved by:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10695_2092x897.jpg]         [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/IMAGES/0-0-0-10698_1017x460.jpg]
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor Date
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10701_3264x480.jpg]      [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/IMAGES/0-0-0-10704_1094x288.jpg]
Robin A. Cleveland, Township Clerk   Date
August 11, 2021
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
August 11, 2021
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 7:00
p.m. on August 11, 2021. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order,
reviewed the agenda, and led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer
Cutshaw, and Trustee Steinberg.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:04 PM
No public comment.
Closed at 7:04 PM
Consent Agenda
Trustee Steinberg moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approved the minutes of the July 14, 2021 Board meeting
General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 30633-30643, for a total
of $17,575.31, and Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 30649-30651, for a
total of $1,372.22
General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 30644-30648, for a
total of $2,465.98, GF Accounts Payable for Approval #2, check numbers 30652-
30658, for a total of $8,066.56, and Accounts Payable for Approval #3, check
number 1119, for a total of $1,500.00.
July Payroll Paid check numbers 50727-50761, and EFTs 723-725, for a total of
$30,149.72 (phys. check amount).
GL Activity Report for July 2021
Revenue and Expenditure report ending July 31, 2021.
Police Report
Building Inspectors Report
Acknowledge receipt of the draft PC minutes
Acknowledge receipt of July 2021 Treasurer’s Report
Discussion: Clarification was sought regarding the recording of the attendance
of Township Board Members for the July 14, 2021 minutes. Specifically, noting
what members were present and absent. It was confirmed that members who were
present were noted on the minutes.
Seconded by:  Treasurer Cutshaw
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Steinberg,
and Supervisor Bloomquist
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
Planning Commission – Jerry Eidt
The Planning Commission held an in-person meeting on July 28, 2021, along with
two public hearings. The Planning Commission recommended the Township Board
approve new language for a text amendment to section 29.02 of the Zoning
Ordinance to clarify and specify that NIESA shall review site plans, as
appropriate. Site Plan and Special Use permit approval was recommended for JBJ
Products and Machinery with conditions needing ZBA approval.  
A proposed ordinance amendment for animals in non-farm areas will be addressed
at the September meeting. Commissioner Stanford and Chair Eidt will be on the
Sub-committee for Event Barns, along with Trustee Creagh and Treasurer Cutshaw.
The Sub-committee will summarize input regarding Event Barns and bring revised
amendments to the Zoning Ordinance to the Planning Commission for re-review and
public hearing.
ACTION ITEMS
ARPA Funds
Clerk Cleveland moved the Williamstown Township Board accept the funds
available to the Township through the American Rescue Plan Act.
Seconded by Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: Application completed for ARPA (American Rescue Plan Act) Funds.
Approximately $543,000 funds would be designated to Williamstown Township.
Funds would need to be allocated by Dec. 31, 2024. Funds have not been received
at this time. Perspectives were sought on how the funds might be spent. The
township will be looking into options. Ingham County is doing a Broadband
survey audit to help townships determine needs for broadband expansion. Other
uses may be possible and the township will thoroughly assess resident needs
before determining allocations. It was expressed that sharing the options of
ARPA approved expenditures with Board members would be useful for understanding
and future planning.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor
Bloomquist, and Trustee Eyster.  
Nays: none
Motion Passed.
Branch School Painting
The board is still waiting for bids.
Fences and Maximum Lot Coverage
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Board request the Planning Commission to review the
regulations regarding fences in the R-1, R-1-S, MHP and RM-1 districts and the
maximum lot coverage in the OS-1, B-1, B-2, and I-1 districts. 
Seconded by Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: None
Motion Carried.
Ethics Policy
Trustee Steinberg moved that the Township Board approve the Ethics Policy as
presented to the Township Board as amended.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: The adoption of the Ethics Policy was praised. It is an effort and
policy that will be valuable to have established.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk
Cleveland, and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Nays: None
Motion Passed
Principles of Governance
Treasurer Cutshaw moved that the Township Board adopt the Principles of
Governance as presented from the Michigan Township Association.
Seconded by Clerk Cleveland
Discussion: It was shared that nothing should be done with personal gain in
mind, nor should efforts be in conflict with or negatively affect the township.
Members agreed that it’s likely that when these principles were drafted it was
the lens of township government and thus noted specifically. Supervisor
Bloomquist will share this observation with the MTA.
Motion Carried.
507 Lease Renewal
Trustee Steinberg moved the Township Board renew the current lease with Deana
Eberhard for 507 E. Grand River for an additional year.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer
Cutshaw, and Trustee Steinberg
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
Poverty Exemption Guidelines
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Board submit the 2020 Poverty
Guidelines to the Michigan Dept of Treasury to seek approval of the guidelines
for future Poverty Exemptions.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: An inquiry was made regarding how these guidelines affect the
number of people who qualify. It was shared that we have had 3 residents
qualify, at varying percentages, at this time. The sliding scale for which the
Township seeks approval allows for higher exemption percentages.
Motion Carried.
State of Emergency
Trustee Steinberg moved the Township Board declare a state of emergency due to
the current Covid-19 pandemic through December 2021 to allow the Township to
utilize Zoom for meetings should the need arise when determined by the officers
of the Township.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: The Trustees shared concerns regarding the current Covid variant
and the need to establish this declaration to ensure safety. The Township would
communicate, via email and the Township website, any changes to the meeting
formats that may be needed in weeks/months to come.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor
Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
Cemetery Landscaping Plan
Clerk Cleveland moved the Township Board contract with Mannik Smith Group at a
cost of $7,500 to prepare a landscaping plan for the Green Burial Section of
Summit Cemetery.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion:  Board members noted how the plan completes the vision set forth in
the original Master Plan. It was noted that a September timeline may be an
aggressive endeavor.    
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee
Eyster, Clerk Cleveland
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
DISCUSSION ITEMS
Fire Insurance Withholding - Supervisor Bloomquist explained that whenever
there is a fire, and the loss is more than 49%, the township can receive escrow
funds from the impacted homeowner’s insurance to ensure that the building loss
is rebuilt or removed. Supervisor Bloomquist reached out to the township
insurance representative, Jason Orton, regarding the escrow of funds through
this program. By adopting the resolution, the Township would be added to the
state list of participating communities. Insurance companies access these lists
after a fire to determine if a portion of the insurance funds needs to be sent
to the township. It was noted that homeowners would have access to these escrow
funds to assist with rebuilding, etc. Most municipalities in Michigan
participate in the Fire Insurance Withholding. This applies to any property –
commercial/residential. The next step for the Township Board would be to
complete the enrollment process. The Board is in consensus to move forward and
take action on the resolution.
Joint Meeting with City - This meeting will take place on Wednesday, August 18,
2021 @ 7:00PM at the Williamstown Township Hall. In the past it has been a
large round table discussion that included participation from important
community stakeholders including: the City Manager, Williamston Schools, CADL,
Senior Center, and City Council representatives. Possible topics to address
could include the joint river clean-up, Summit Cemetery, ARPA Funds, planning
commission, and subdivision projects. A reminder will be sent to all parties.
The public is invited. Information has been provided on the website and it will
be posted at the Township office.
DNR Forestry Program Grant – This was shared with the Township Parks and
Environmental Committee. The Environmental Committee was in favor of moving
forward. The goal would be to have a forestry area in the Grand River township
park. It would serve both an aesthetic and educational purpose. It could be a
forestry demonstration that our residents could both learn from and consider in
light of climate change. It would be beneficial to bring some membership of the
two committees together to plan.The Board is in consensus on moving forward
with the grant process and will bring it back to the September Board meeting.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA: No report from Trustee Duffy.
Parks: Trustee Steinberg shared the parks membership list is going to be
expanded. They are looking to align with Rotary to clean the minor log jams out
of the river. With flowers currently in full bloom, residents are encouraged to
visit.
Elections: Clerk Cleveland shared that Perry has an upcoming mileage in
November. Opting out is still under determination because there are only 245
residents in that school district within the Township. It’s important to note
that Williamston Township is a part of 7 different school districts. We may be
able to amend our agreement with Shiawassee County to opt out for this election
and consider what options would be available for the Perry voters.
Environmental Committee: Trustee Eyster shared that this committee established
a vision and mission statement. The committee wants to look at future
demonstration and lecture events to inform Township residents around
environmental issues, awareness, and considerations for informed decision-
making. Ideas are currently being generated and must tie into the two developed
statements that center around air, land, and water. Once the topics are
determined, event planning would begin. The timeline would encompass the next
couple of years.
Logo Design: Clerk Cleveland and Supervisor Bloomquist met with Lynn Brown of
Mid-Michigan Consulting to begin the Township’s Logo work. The meeting gave her
a sense of who we are as a township. Ms. Brown is working on a variety of
concepts/templates and will be bringing these ideas/draft designs back to
Supervisor Bloomquist, Clerk Cleveland, and the rest of the Board, for feedback
and consideration in a couple weeks. The logo could be utilized in a variety of
ways and on multiple items – ex. signage, letterhead, apparel, possibly even a
flag, as this was wish by past Board members.
Greenhouse Gas Committee Audit: Supervisor Bloomquist noted the EPA has a
toolkit to assist on determining the current carbon footprint of organizations.
This may be something to consider for the township, as it would provide a
summary of our current utilization of resources. In addition, it may be
beneficial to have this benchmark data and use it to help inform future
planning. It’s possible that an outside source (e.g., university intern) could
also be considered or utilized to complete the audit.
Roads: The Red Cedar Manor project is on hold until 2022 due to drainage work
that needs to be completed. Meadowdale petitions are currently being
circulated.
Permits: BS&A has a program that would allow residents to complete the building
permit process on-line. The Township is currently investigating funding and
exploring the benefits of this program/option.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:54 PM
No public comment.
Closed at 8:54 PM
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Eyster moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Trustee Steinberg
Meeting adjourned.
Minutes approved by:
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10714.jpg]
September 8, 2021
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
September 8, 2021
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 7:00
p.m. on September 8, 2021. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order,
reviewed the agenda, and led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer
Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy and Trustee Steinberg.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:03 PM
No public comment.
Closed at 7:03 PM
Consent Agenda
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approved the minutes of the August 11, 2021 Board meeting
Approved the special meeting minutes of the August 18, 2021 Board Meeting
General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 30659-30669, for a total
of $20,606.48, and Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 30670, for a total
of $508.92.
General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 30671-30677 for a
total of $3,595.81, and GF Accounts Payable for Approval #2, check number 1120,
for a total of $667.00, and Accounts Payable for Approval #3, check number
30678, for a total of $2,036.48.
August Payroll Paid check numbers 50762-50798, and EFTs 726-727, for a total of
$31,934.43 (phys. check amount).
GL Activity Report for August 2021
Revenue and Expenditure report ending August 31, 2021.
Building Inspection Report
Police Report
Acknowledge receipt of August 2021 Treasurer’s Report
Discussion: Suggested amendments to the special meeting minutes, specifically
acknowledging that the meeting was a “joint meeting” between the township and
city vs a “special meeting” and clarifying language to acknowledge the
collaborative efforts between the city and township on the river launch site.
Seconded by: Clerk Cleveland
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh,
Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, and Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
ACTION ITEMS
Planning Commission
Trustee Creagh moved that the Williamstown Township Board reappoint Rob
Stanford, Annette Davis, and Dali Giese, each to a three-year term ending
September 2024.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: None
Motion Passed.
NIESA Review
Trustee Creagh moved the Board adopt the recommended revisions to the zoning
ordinance Section 29.02(C)3 and 29.02(F) requiring NIESA review for Site Plan
Approval.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: None
Roll Call Vote:   
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy,
Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, and Trustee Eyster.
Nays: none
Motion Passed.
Branch School Painting
Trustee Eyster moved that the Township Board approve the bid from Prebble Home
Maintenance for painting Branch School at a cost of $4,200.00 to be paid from
101-751-882.000.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: Concern was expressed around the value of honeybees and the
consequences of trying to move them at this time of year – it is currently not
advisable. Supervisor Bloomquist shared that the contractor said that the bees
can be quieted, vs. moved, so that the painting can commence. Additionally, it
was shared that there are some boards that are in need of repair. Supervisor
Bloomquist will speak with the painter regarding repairs prior to the work
beginning.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg,
Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, and Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: none
Motion Passed.
Fire Insurance Withholding Resolution
Clerk Cleveland moved that the Township Board approve Resolution #128-2021 to
participate in Fire Insurance Withholding Program.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: It was noted that that there were some typographical errors to be
corrected.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist,
Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Nays: none
Motion Passed.
Signatory Resolution
Trustee Creagh moved the Township Board approve Resolution #73-2021 amending
the bank signatories.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: none
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster,
Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, and Trustee Creagh.
Nays: None
Motion Passed
DNR Forestry Grant Resolution
The Parks and Rec Committee and Environmental Committee worked together in the
proposal and writing of the grant. Civic organizations including the Boy
Scouts, Girl Scouts, and Rotary have agreed to provide volunteer hours to the
project.
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown Board approve Resolution #129-2021 for
the submittal of the application for a DNR Forestry Grant in the amount of
$15,000 that would be combined with resources and labor from the Township in
the amount $18,900, if awarded. The commitment of Williamstown Township to be
paid from Special projects 401-101-982.000.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: Clarification sought on the cash match by the Township and the
quantity of trees that would be purchased as part of the grant. Average cost
per tree would be $16-20, including mulch and fencing for protection.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk
Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, and Trustee Duffy.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Pheasant Run Burn Petition
Clerk Cleveland moved the Township Board approve the petition presented by the
residents of Pheasant Run Subdivision to be allowed to burn with an open permit
as permitted in the RR non- subdivision district of the Williamstown Township
Ordinance to Regulate Burning.
Seconded by Trustee Duffy
Discussion: It was confirmed that residents of this subdivision would need to
follow the Burn Ordinance including requesting a burn permit when they want to
burn. Homes outside this subdivision would continue to follow Township burn
regulations appropriate for the designated zoning for their property.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer
Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, and Trustee Steinberg.
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
DISCUSSION ITEMS
Social Media Policy Draft: Clerk Cleveland has been meeting with the Resident
Engagement Committee regarding the development and establishment of a township
social media page (ex. Facebook) for residents to learn about township issues,
provide event visibility, or special notices. The consensus of the committee
was to move forward with this initiative without allowing comments on Township
posts. If approved, this policy would not only provide an alternate way to
communicate with residents, but also provide an additional point of connection
beyond current communication methods (ex. newsletters, the website, or the
Williamston Enterprise). The initial implementation and planning of the
Township Facebook page would include protocols for permissions to post and
intentional planning on how events/information would be posted. During board
discussion, perspective was shared on the time commitment required of township
staff to maintain a Facebook page. Clarification was sought regarding a
Facebook membership group vs. a page. It was confirmed that it would be a
Facebook page. It was suggested that the Board might consider the option of
having residents’ comment on posts, with a disclaimer stating that pages/posts
are not actively monitored. Concern was expressed that not responding or
acknowledging comments may lead to negative perceptions by the community that
the Board is unresponsive. It was shared that the Township could have email and
phone contact information shared on each post as an avenue for residents to
provide feedback or have questions answered. Board members are encouraged to
further review the draft and have comments to Clerk Cleveland by September 30,
2021 so that revisions may be considered before the October Board Meeting.
Ethics Policy – Signatures were collected.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA: Trustee Duffy reported that action items included the approval for a new
auditor. A three-year contract was established with Drake Certified Public
Accountants. An Ingham County grant was approved for Rescue Funds totaling
nearly $750,000. These funds will assist with purchasing a new ambulance,
establishing 16 EMS scholarships, and purchasing life-saving equipment. This
Saturday, September 11th is the 9/11 Ceremony, as well as two retirement
celebrations at the Fire Station.
Parks: Trustee Steinberg has been working with Earl Wolfe regarding signage for
parks that are similar to DNR signage.
Environmental Committee: Trustee Eyster shared that the committee came to
consensus on a Mission and Vision statement. Next steps will include
establishing goals and action steps to meet these goals. Once complete, they
will be shared with the Township Board. Concern was shared around invasive
species in our parks and resources have been allocated to address this problem.
Most will be removed, but some left behind with signage to educate township
residents. Supervisor Bloomquist shared that any invasive species educational
opportunities are shared with Parks and Environmental Committee.
Joint Committee on Event Barns: Trustee Creagh shared Chief Plaga’s concerns
with Event Barns. The Chief anticipated that if these venues were established,
Meridian Township Police would require additional revenue from the township to
support residents. Additional experts will be addressing the committee in the
future to lend technical and legal expertise regarding these venues. This
information will be helpful in informing the committees next steps and assist
in purposeful planning.
Cemetery Committee: Mannik Smith Group met with Treasurer Cutshaw, Supervisor
Bloomquist, and the Cemetery Committee. It was noted that they have extensive
experience with cemetery developments including shepherds’ walls and natural
burial sites. It was noted that bids for the cemetery drives is due on
September 9 th at 2:00pm.
A general reminder was shared that recycling is Saturday, September 11th and
this month’s focus will be metal (appliances, scrap metal, freon requires a $20
charge). October will be trash. Overall, the new recycling plan has been met
with positivity from staff and residents.
Treasurer Cutshaw requested a status update on the traffic study plans at the
intersection of Zimmer and Sherwood Roads. It was shared that it would likely
begin now that school has commenced. The study will be a coordinated effort
between Meridian Township Police and Ingham County Road Commission.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:18 PM
Tom Potter, 5605 Lounsbury, shared concerns regarding Event Barns. He wondered
if the township was looking into this initiative and wondered if the township
had made any decisions to move forward with them.
Closed at 8:21 PM
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Trustee Steinberg
Meeting adjourned at 8:22 p.m.
Minutes approved by:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10722.jpg]
October 13, 2021
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
October 13, 2021
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 7:00
p.m. on October 13, 2021. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order,
reviewed the agenda, and led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer
Cutshaw, Trustee Duffy and Trustee Steinberg.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:01 PM
Vicki Potter, 5605 Lounsbury Road: Re: Encouraging remote access to meetings.
Closed at 7:03 PM
Consent Agenda
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approved the minutes of the September 8, 2021 Board meeting
General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 30679-30694, for a total
of $12,411.99, and Accounts Payable Paid #2 (Police), check numbers 1121, for a
total of $61,382.68.
General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 30695-30709, for a
total of $10,291.28, GF Accounts Payable for Approval #2, check number 1122,
for a total of $1,150.00, and Accounts Payable for Approval #3, check number
30710-30715, for a total of $7,547.80.
September Payroll Paid check numbers 50799-50838, and EFTs 728-729, for a total
of $30,464.47 (phys. check amount).
GL Activity Report for September 2021.
Revenue and Expenditure report ending September 30, 2021.
Building Inspection Report
Police Report
Acknowledge receipt of September 2021 Treasurer’s Report
Acknowledge receipt of September 2021 PC minutes
Seconded by: Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: It was suggested that Accounts Paid or Approved for Police Services
be their own bulleted line item in the Consent Agenda.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Duffy,
Trustee Steinberg, and Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Audit Review
Brenda Seelman, from Clark Schaefer Hackett CPAs and Advisors, presented a
review of the Williamstown Township Audit issued for year ending March 31,
2021. The Township received the highest rating the auditors can award. Ms.
Seelman provided highlights of the report with regards to the Township’s
current revenue and expenditures, as well as the capital assets and general
fund balance. Additionally, she provided a summary of the Township’s net
position, which has seen an overall increase. Auditor recommendations were
reviewed and implemented upon completion of the report in September.
Police Report
Lieutenant Bart Crane from Meridian Township Police presented police activity
in the Township. Lt. Crane’s report highlighted the billable hours for the
township are in line with past hour and call patterns. Most calls were related
to automobile accidents and welfare checks. There has been a slight increase in
calls regarding gun shots being fired, however this is typical with the onset
of firearm hunting season in November. Lt. Crane shared details about their
Citizens’ Academy being held at the Meridian Township Police Department in
Okemos. He reported one Williamstown Township resident is currently attending.
He reminded residents that on October 30, 2021 the police department will be
hosting a Halloween Open House from 10:00am -1:00pm. All township residents are
invited to attend; pre-registration is required.
Interest was shared from the Board regarding asking the resident who is
participating in the Citizens’ Academy to share their learning and experiences
at an upcoming meeting. Inquiry was made regarding the slight increase in
arrests for the month of September. Lt. Crane cited that the arrests were
related to traffic stops and outstanding warrants.
The Board praised the work of the department and their resident welfare checks.
Lt. Crane provided additional details on the role of a police officer during
mental health calls and noted that Crisis Intervention and Mental Health
Training have been at the forefront of law enforcement education. Police
officers are often the first line of support. Meridian Township Police works in
partnership with Community Mental Heath (CMH) on all calls. Officers travel
with an iPad that allows police and/or the resident with direct contact with a
CMH counselor should support or immediate services be needed.
Lt. Crane also shared information about a Senior Citizens Program where elderly
residents can sign up with the police and share contact information for check-
ins. This service can occur a variety of ways from the resident receiving a
call from police, or the resident calling the police or cooperating partners.
If a senior citizen doesn’t respond, the officer will then provide an in-person
check.
Planning Commission
PC Chair, Jerry Eidt, provided an overview of the Commission’s most recent
meeting on September 22, 2021. He shared a summary of the Public Hearing
regarding the draft language for proposed text amendments to Section 8.02 of
the Zoning Ordinance to allow certain farm animals on non-farm parcels. The
Commission discussed and questioned aspects of the draft, as well as considered
feedback from public comment. A Public Hearing date was set for Site Plan
Review and Special Use Permit for Williamston Storage Center. The Commission
also addressed fence heights and lot coverage in non-residential districts, as
well as a review of the current Township Ethics Policy and collection of
Commissioner signatures. The Planning Commission appointed a committee to
nominate officers for upcoming the year. Chairman Eidt announced the
resignation of Commissioner Rex LaMore, and voiced his appreciation of Mr.
LaMore’s time and expertise over the years.
The Board asked for an update on Event Barn progress. Treasurer Cutshaw shared
that there have been two meetings of the Planning Commission subcommittee and
this is proving to be a complex issue. They have had two speakers address their
group who are well-versed in these types of venues. Legal and law enforcement
perspectives and considerations have been provided thus far.
ACTION ITEMS
Trustee Eyster moved that the Board approve the following budget amendments for
the 2021-2022 budget.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10725_6923x8674.jpg]
 
Discussion:
Clarification for understanding was sought regarding the Policy to 401 and
Elections sections.
Seconded by: Clerk Cleveland
Roll Call Vote:   
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg,
Supervisor Bloomquist, and Trustee Eyster.
Nays: none
Motion Passed. 
DISCUSSION ITEMS
Logo Review – Graphic Designer Lynne Brown continued to work with Supervisor
Bloomquist and Clerk Cleveland on editing the four Township logos for the Board
to review. Board members and residents in attendance at the meeting made their
first and second choices. The top two logos will be put into action on sample
business cards and letterhead so that layout, utilization, and application of
both can be tested. Board members will be emailed the versions. The Board
expressed their appreciation for each unique logo that utilized the theme of
“Serving Our Neighbors.”
Social Media Policy Revised Draft – The Board expressed their approval for the
updated draft. Minor suggestions and edits will be made. A final draft will be
brought back to the Board in November for vote and adoption.
Roads – This committee met and drove the local roads and a determination was
made that Epley Road is in extremely poor shape and is in need of improvement.
Supervisor Bloomquist sought consensus from the Board for Mannik and Smith to
ascertain what needs to be done on Epley. She reminded the Board that bid
packets are forming now to initiate the process for 2022. In addition to Epley,
the township is working on determinations for Red Cedar Manor, Meadowdale, and
the cemetery drives. The committee hopes to have a final recommendation to the
board in November.
Medical Marihuana Regulations – Supervisor Bloomquist shared that with recent
court cases, townships are able to regulate Caregivers. Caregiver facilities
can turn into grow facilities which are not allowed in the Township. Lt. Crane
from Meridian Township Police shared that it is a multifaceted and lucrative
issue that communities are facing. The Board is in agreement to move this issue
to the Planning Commission for further review and processing.
Budget Workshop October 20th – Supervisor Bloomquist shared that the budgeting
process for the next fiscal year will be starting on October 20th. While no
binding decisions will be made at the meeting, the Board will discuss ARPA
funds, special projects, strategic planning, and developing a capital
improvement plan for the next 3-5 years.  
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA: Trustee Duffy shared a date was set for a Public Hearing for the NIESA
Budget (November 11, 2021). NIESA will be purchasing two new ambulances and
received grant funding of approximately $750,000 from Ingham County to assist
with this expense. The next NIESA Board meeting will be on October 14, 2021 at
the NIESA building in Webberville. Treasurer Cutshaw will represent the
Township at that meeting.
Parks: Trustee Steinberg shared Williamston Rotary has committed to keeping the
river clear for recreation. Volunteers were able to open a massive log jam. 
Environmental Committee: Trustee Eyster provided the Vision and Mission
Statements and goals from the Environmental Committee. This information will be
added to the Township Website. This committee will be working to provide
residents with educational opportunities in the near future. 
Joint Committee on Event Barns: Two meetings have been held and have included
guest speakers to help inform the work and process. Chief Plaga from the
Meridian Township Police shared views from a law enforcement perspective and
Kathleen Kaufman from Michigan Township Association Legal Counsel provided
legal perspective and considerations. The committee recognizes there are varied
perspectives in Williamstown Township. At the committee’s next meeting Fire
Chief Michael Yanz from NIESA will speak about Event Barns from a fire and
public safety perspective. The Committee would also like to hear from our
Township Building Inspector, Tim O’Neil, as well as seek insights from an
Ingham County Road Commission perspective.
Cemetery Committee: Supervisor Bloomquist shared that a draft plan was chosen
by the Cemetery Committee. Next steps are establishing plans for mowing,
landscaping bids, and construction plans. Board members acknowledged that these
improvements were part of the Master Plan in 2010 and that it was exciting to
see them coming to fruition. 
Training Opportunities: The Board discussed an upcoming training opportunity
for Trustees through the Michigan Township Association. In addition, Supervisor
Bloomquist informed the Board of the educational workshop provided by the
Township regarding Risk Reduction in Planning and Zoning decisions for the
Board, Zoning Board of Appeals and Planning Commission on November 9th via
Zoom.
Speed Study: Speed Study completed by Meridian Township Police Department of
the intersection of Sherwood and Zimmer Roads was shared by Lt. Crane. The
results will be used to help the County determine if the intersection warrants
further study. An update will be given at the November meeting.
Correspondence: Supervisor Bloomquist also acknowledged two pieces of
correspondence. One was from Commissioner Schafer regarding NIESA requesting
grant matching with ARPA funds. The second was to Ingham County Prosecuting
Attorney Carol A. Siemen from Supervisor Bloomquist regarding recent policy
changes.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:53 PM
Ron Poth, 4075 N. Williamston Road: Mr. Poth shared that he recently moved to
Williamstown Township and wanted to attend a meeting to see what is happening
in the Township.
Closed at 8:57 PM
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Trustee Steinberg.
Meeting adjourned at 9:00 p.m.
Minutes approved by:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10732.png]
 
October 20, 2021
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
October 20, 2021
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held a Board Workshop meeting at on
October 20, 2021. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order at 7:02
p.m., reviewed the agenda, and led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Clerk Cleveland, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy,
Trustee Eyster, and Trustee Steinberg.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:05 PM
No public comment.
Closed at 7:06 PM
Budget Review
Supervisor Bloomquist presented the initial proposed budget for Fiscal Year
(FY) 2021-2022, highlighting various areas of the budget where there could be
changes from the previous FY. Department heads will be asked to review their
proposed budget and submit suggested changes to Supervisor Bloomquist. Budget
discussions will continue and a Budget Public Hearing will be scheduled in
February.
7:26 pm – Trustee Duffy left the meeting.
ARPA Grant
The ARPA funds grant was discussed and Supervisor Bloomquist presented a list
of potential uses for the funds. Board members added items to the list for
consideration. The Township will need to determine by 2024 where they will
spend the ARPA funds, but the funds do not have to be spent until 2026.
Discussion and further suggestions will continue. Board members and residents
are invited to share their ideas for use of the funds.
Supervisor Bloomquist expressed that in light of the ARPA grant, this may be a
good time to do a 3 to 5-year Strategic Plan and possibly a Capital Improvement
Plan. Consensus of the Board was that a Strategic Plan with an outside
facilitator would be a good idea. Supervisor Bloomquist will inquire with
various entities to determine potential facilitators with local government
experience and bring the results to the November meeting.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:55 PM
Ron Poth, 4075 N. Williamston Rd.: As a new resident, Mr. Poth expressed
confidence in the way the Board is proceeding on behalf of its’ residents.
Closed at 8:58 PM
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Creagh moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Clerk Cleveland
Meeting adjourned at 9:00 p.m.
Minutes approved by:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10734.png]
 
November 10, 2021
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
November 10, 2021
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 7:00
p.m. on November 10, 2021. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order,
reviewed the agenda, and led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer
Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, and Trustee Steinberg.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:03 PM
None
Closed at 7:03 PM
Consent Agenda
Trustee Steinberg moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the minutes of the October 13, 2021 Board meeting
Approve the minutes of the October 20, 2021 Board workshop 
General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 30716-30731, for a total
of $6,122.87, and Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 30732-30735, for a
total of $4,352.44.
General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 30736-30742, for a
total of $5,050.30.
October Payroll Paid check numbers 50839-50868, and EFTs 730-732, for a total
of $29,674.66 (phys. check amount).
GL Activity Report for October 2021
Revenue and Expenditure report ending October 31, 2021.
Building Inspection Report
Police Report
Acknowledge receipt of October 2021 Treasurer’s Report
Seconded by: Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: Distinguish between the meetings addressed in the first two lines –
Monthly Board Meeting (10/13) and Board Workshop (10/20).
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh,
Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, and Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
ACTION ITEMS
Special Use Permit/Site Plan Approval JBJ Enterprises
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Special use
Permit for JBJ Products and Machinery, Parcel # 33-03-03-34-406-002, located at
1432 E. Grand River as recommend by the Planning Commission at their meeting on
July 28, 2021.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: JBJ Owner was available for questions from the Board. Clarification
was sought regarding special use permits. Confirmation was provided for the
length of the variance. Supervisor Bloomquist will review the Site Plan
Approval process and resend the variance approval with the approved conditions.
Motion Carried
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the site plan
for JBJ Products and Machinery as recommended by the Planning Commission at
their meeting on July 28, 2021, including the paving variance approved by the
ZBA at their meeting on October 14, 2021.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Motion Carried.
Forestry Grant Acceptance
Trustee Duffy moved the Williamstown Township Board accept the Community
Forestry Grant and enter into agreement with the Michigan Department of Natural
Resources.
Seconded by: Clerk Cleveland
Discussion: None
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist,
Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Brookstone Extension
Trustee Creagh moved to approve the extension of the Brookstone Final
Preliminary Plat to allow time to obtain approval from the Ingham County Road
Department and City of Williamston.
Seconded by: Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: Confirmation of protocol regarding length of the extension.
Motion Carried. 
Police Special Assessment Roll
Clerk Cleveland moved the Williamstown Township Board approve amending
Resolution 2021-98, confirming the 2021 Special Assessment Roll for Police
Protection within the Township with the Special Assessment Roll total from
$214,170.00 to $213,770.00.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: None
Roll Call Vote:  
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy,
Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, and Trustee Eyster.
Nays: None
Motion Passed. 
Social Media Policy
Clerk Cleveland moved to adopt the Social Media Policy as presented to the
Township Board.
Seconded by: Trustee Cutshaw 
Discussion: Clarification regarding messages posted from other organizations
and individuals. 
Roll Call Vote:  
Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster,
Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, and Trustee Creagh.
Nays: None
Motion Passed. 
Meadowdale Dr. – Resolution to call for Public Hearing
Treasurer Cutshaw moved to adopt the Resolution for the Meadowdale Road
Improvements and to call for a Public Hearing to be held at 6:00 pm December 8
th , 2021 to hear objections to the petition.
Seconded by: Trustee Creagh
Discussion:  Confirmation that the Public Hearing will be at Williamstown
Township Hall. Notice is mailed to all Meadowdale residents.
Roll Call Vote:  
Ayes: Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk
Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, and Trustee Duffy.
Nays: None
Motion Passed. 
Transfer of Funds from 101 to 401
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the movement of
funds in the amount of $79,714.00 from 101-000-999.000 Transfer Out General
Funds to 401-000-699.000 Transfer In.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster  
Discussion: None
Roll Call Vote:  
Ayes: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer
Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, and Trustee Steinberg.
Nays: None
Motion Passed. 
DISCUSSION ITEMS
Permanent Recycling – Reclaimed by Design has reached out to the Township
regarding the possibility of moving forward with the earlier (2015) plans to
provide permanent recycling service. If agreed upon, this plan would replace
the current contract with Granger. The Township would be responsible for the
site improvements in order to implement this plan. ARPA funds could be used/
considered, as this project is an expansion of a service. The Board expressed
interest in moving forward and suggested that a cost analysis would be
beneficial. Supervisor will bring some data and financials to the next Board
meeting.
Roads/Restricted Road Use – Residents have raised concern over the use of our
local roads as short cuts for non-local traffic. Commercial truck routes could
be designated and marked/posted accordingly utilizing county primary roads.
This would lessen the impact of commercial trucks on our local roads and
increase safety for pedestrian bikers/walkers. Enforcement questions were
shared. Supervisor Bloomquist will bring back language and a process for moving
forward.
Budget – Changes to the budget have been made based on the Oct. 20th Board
Workshop. Payroll and department recommendations will be made next month. It
was confirmed that ARPA funds have been deposited in the Township’s bank
account. Community input will be sought on plans for these funds within the
guidelines set forth by the Federal Government.
Police Services – Our contract with Meridian Township Police (MTP) expires at
the end of 2021. MTP wants to continue to provide service to the township,
however the current contract may need to be amended due to reduced staffing of
officers. The Board will need to determine considerations for reductions in
service. As/when officers are added, the patrol hours may be reinstated at an
hourly rate. The Board would like to consider the cost estimates for different
hourly patrol plans, as well as Chief Plaga’s perspective on the most impactful
safety services provided MTP.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA: Treasurer Cutshaw attended the October Meeting. The NIESA Budget was
reviewed, as well as their efforts to capture their DDA funds from Webberville.
Hourly wages and staffing shortages were discussed. A project under
consideration is facility remodeling to accommodate overnight volunteers/
officers.
Parks: The City of Williamston received a grant for a kayak launch in 2022.
Clearing out major log jams ahead of this installation would be helpful. There
was also discussion around the annual care and maintenance for the township
soccer fields located at the Grand River Park. The Board is in support of
Supervisor Bloomquist exploring guidance and proposals for this work.
Environmental Committee: The committee discussed next steps with regards to the
recent DNR grant approval. They have established a 2030 goal for being carbon
neutral and are creating goals to achieve this. Solar energy for township
buildings, as well as cemeteries and the park are being considered. The
committee is seeking input from the Board. The Board supports moving forward
with a proposal.
Joint Committee on Event Barns: Trustee Creagh shared that the work continues
and significant revisions to the recommendation are occurring.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 9:09 PM
Vicki Potter, 5605 Lounsbury Road: Re: Encouraging availability of Board
Meeting information packets ahead of meetings. 
Ron Poth, 4075 N. Williamston Road: Re: Special use permit and medical
marijuana dispensary inquiry.
Closed at 9:11 PM
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Trustee Creagh
Meeting adjourned at 9:13 p.m.
Minutes approved by:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10742.jpg]
December 8, 2021
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
December 8, 2021
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 7:00
p.m. on December 8, 2021. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order,
reviewed the agenda, and led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee
Creagh, Trustee Duffy, and Trustee Steinberg.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:10 PM
None.
Closed at 7:10 PM
Consent Agenda
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the consent agenda consisting of:
   ∙   Approve the minutes of the November 10, 2021 Board meeting
   ∙   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 30743-30752, for a
total of $4,324.26, and Accounts Payable Paid #2, check number 30760, for a
total of $406.84.
   ∙   General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 30753-
30759, for a total of $3,842.08, and Accounts Payable for Approval #2, check
numbers 30761-30766, for a total of $1,081.77.
   ∙   November Payroll Paid check numbers 50869-50902, and EFTs 733-734, for a
total of $26,853.39 (phys. check amount).
   ∙   GL Activity Report for November 2021
   ∙   Revenue and Expenditure report ending November 30, 2021.
   ∙   Building Inspection Report
   ∙   Police Report
   ∙   Draft Planning Commission minutes of 11-22-21
   ∙   Acknowledge receipt of November 2021 Treasurer’s Report
Seconded by: Trustee Steinberg 
Discussion: none
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy,
Trustee Steinberg, and Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: none
Motion Passed.
Planning Commission Report – Chair, Eidt gave the report.
The Planning Commission’s (PC) last meeting took place on November 22, 2021.
Public Hearings were held regarding an accessory apartment on 1784 Harvey St.
and Williamston Storage’s Special Use Permit and Site Plan for expanded storage
and site modifications. The PC recommended the board grant the accessory
apartment request as it had been in existence for an extended period time.
Additional materials from the storage facility applicant were provided to the
PC just prior to the meeting commencing. The commission tabled the deliberation
of this request until their next meeting to allow for further review of the
information. Discussions continued on the draft language for a proposed text
amendment to Section 8.02 of the Zoning Ordinance to allow certain farm animals
on non-farm parcels. It will be revisited again in January. Officers for 2022
have been chosen: Gerald Eidt, Chair; Rob Stanford, Vice-Chair; Dali Giese,
Secretary.
ACTION ITEMS
Special Use Permit/Site Plan Approval Accessory Apartment
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Site Plan and
Special use Permit for the accessory apartment at 1784 Harvey Drive, Parcel #
33-03-03-35-402-008, with the stipulation that it remains a family apartment in
compliance with Sections 8.03.A.6 and 29.03.B.10 of the Zoning Ordinance, as
recommended by the Planning Commission at their meeting on November 22, 2021.
Seconded by: Clerk Cleveland  
Discussion:  None  
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy,
Trustee Steinberg, and Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
 
Police Services
Trustee Duffy moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the proposed
contract for police services for 2022, 2023, and 2024.
Seconded by: Trustee Steinberg  
Discussion: Sgt. Andrew McCready spoke on behalf of Meridian Township Police
(MTP) to address questions/concerns with the upcoming reduction of patrol hours
from 80 to 40 due to reduced department staffing. He offered reassurance that
there will still be a presence of MTP officers throughout the township and that
this reduction does not diminish any of the other services to our residents.
The Board will continue to monitor the monthly police report data to inform any
unforeseen consequences or impacts of this adjustment.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg,
Supervisor Bloomquist, and Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
 
Senior Center
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the
contribution of $3,000 to the Williamston Senior Center for providing services
to Township Seniors.
Seconded by: Trustee Duffy
Discussion: The Board discussed personnel updates, the recent millage passage,
and programming at the Williamston Senior Center. Supervisor Bloomquist shared
that the Senior Center has invited representation from the Township on their
Board. Trustee Steinberg will serve in this role.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist,
Clerk Cleveland, and Treasurer Cutshaw. 
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
 
Website
Trustee Duffy moved the Williamstown Township Board approve moving forward with
bidding for the development of a new website.
Seconded by: Trustee Creagh  
Discussion: The current township website is approximately seven years old.
Current technology offers improved site maintenance and accessibility and more
intuitive navigation.
Motion Carried. 
 
Bang the Table
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Township Board move forward with the
proposal from Bang the Table with an initial cost of $7,000 and an annual fee
of $4500.
Seconded by: Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: The Board discussed how this service increases township outreach
and transparency and offers more opportunities for resident feedback and
engagement. Once established, a communication plan for this tool will be
needed.
Roll Call Vote:  
Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Clerk Cleveland,
Treasurer Cutshaw and Trustee Creagh. 
Nays: None
Motion Passed. 
 
Park – Drive and House
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board move forward with an
initial architectural consultation for the house at 507 E. Grand River Rd. to
aid in the determination of next steps for possible house use not to exceed
$2000.00.
Seconded by: Clerk Cleveland
Discussion: The Board would like the analysis of the property to provide
insight on the structure ranging from potential uses to demolition.
Roll Call Vote:  
Ayes: Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer
Cutshaw, and Trustee Creagh.  
Nays: Trustee Duffy
Motion Passed. 
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Township Board request Mannik & Smith
to review the Township Park Drive to estimate the cost of improving and paving
the drive.
Seconded by: Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: It was noted that funds from ARPA and/or Special Projects could be
utilized for this project. The Board would like to have “not to exceed”
financial language included in this action. Additionally, they would like a
cost estimate of this project, as well as consideration of future maintenance
over time. Supervisor Bloomquist will bring these updates, information, and
projections back to the January meeting.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Supervisor Bloomquist
Nays: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, and
Trustee Steinberg.
Motion Failed. 
 
Budget Amendment
Trustee Creagh moved the Board approve the following budget amendment for the
2021-2022 budget.
 
Budget Amendments
Add to                 Reduce           Amount
401-000-699.000
Forestry Grant Project                  $ 28,300.00 (grant funding)
(Transfer In)
                       401-101-982.000  $28,300.00
                       Special Projects
 
Seconded by: Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: none
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy,
Trustee Steinberg and Supervisor Bloomquist. 
Nays: None
Motion Passed. 
DISCUSSION ITEMS
Permanent Recycling – Supervisor Bloomquist will bring back a cost estimate of
a site plan for a permanent facility, as well as usage data and financials to
the January Board meeting.
Roads/Restricted Road Use –Bill Conklin (Ingham County Road Commission) and
Chief Plaga (Meridian Townhip Police) offered insights and perspective on road
determination for this potential ordinance. It was noted that Milton from
Shaftsburg to Williamston Rd. will be added to the established list of
designated truck routes. The Board is in support of moving forward with an
ordinance. Supervisor Bloomquist will begin the process of drafting ordinance
language.
Budget – Payroll, Streaming and Remote Participation
Payroll - The value of the work and expertise of the part- and full-time
township employees is appreciated by the Board. Members shared that the percent
increases were significant. Without a benchmark or comparison, it was hard to
gauge support for this increase. The Board would find comparisons to similar
townships and the consumer price index, timelines of previous compensations, as
well as reason and rationale for the proposed increases helpful in processing
this budget request further.
Streaming and Remote Participation – Williamston Community Schools came out to
look at the township facilities regarding each option:
   ∙    Streaming: Approximately $4,000 investment of technology and set-up
support. It would take approximately 3-4 meetings to establish full
operationalization.
   ∙    Remote Participation (Two-Way Communication from Residents to Board) –
Approximately $8,000 investment of technology, as well as an added employee to
run microphones, equipment, and live interface at monthly meetings.
The Board expressed interest in learning more about the streaming option, the
development of a policy, and requesting bids.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA: Trustee Duffy reported that the majority of the last meeting was closed
session. Main discussion point was on finances and investments.
Parks: Trustee Steinberg stated the Parks Committee is considering offering a
sledding event for families at the Township park. The committee is addressing
the issue of birds in the pavilion. Beginning collaborative work with the
Environmental Committee on their DNR Forestry Grant. 
Environmental Committee: Supervisor Bloomquist stated the committee is
continuing to focus on solar initiatives and plans for the DNR Forestry Grant.
Supervisor Bloomquist informed the Board of a website that appears to be
operated by the Township, however it is not.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 9:03 PM
None
Closed at 9:03 PM
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw
Meeting adjourned at 9:06 p.m.
Minutes approved by:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10755.png]
December 8, 2021 - Public Hearing
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Public Hearing for Meadowdale Drive Special Assessment District Roll
December 8, 2021
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened a virtual meeting at 6:00
p.m. on December 8, 2021 at the Williamstown Township Community Room.
Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order, reviewed the agenda, and
stated the reason for the meeting/public hearing. Supervisor Bloomquist led the
Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Supervisor
Bloomquist, Trustee Steinberg, and Clerk Cleveland.
Public Comment for non-agenda items
Opened at 6:02 p.m.
None.
Closed at 6:03 p.m.
Supervisor Bloomquist outlined the reason for the public hearing is to hear
objections or omissions to the proposed assessment roll for the Meadowdale
Drive road improvement project.
Public Hearing for the Red Cedar Manor Assessment Roll
Treasurer Cutshaw moved to open the public hearing.
Seconded by Trustee Creagh.
Opened at 6:05 p.m.
 
The following residents asked questions or made statements regarding the
Special Assessment District:
Dave Carlson, 4120 Meadowdale – Wanted to know about the toxicity of materials
to be used in the construction.
Lynn & Barbara Yauk, 4156 Meadowdale (written comments) – Supervisor Bloomquist
read the letter the Township received, stating objections to the method of
funding and the physical street surface to be used.
Rufus Bailey, 4171 Meadowdale – Asked why the Township didn’t let him know that
the Township is not responsible for maintaining their road. Also said he never
got the petitions, although someone came to talk to him in August.
Geri Hare, 4127 Meadowdale – She agrees with the sentiments in the Yauk’s
letter.
David Worth, 4029 Meadowdale – Said that a second coat of blacktop was never
put on the road when the subdivision was turned over to the Township.
Dean Buggia, 4108 Meadowdale – Stated some people couldn’t attend the Zoom
meeting that took place earlier in the year. He felt the process could have
been better.
Dave Hurlburt, 4028 Meadowdale – Wanted to know if ARPA funds could be used for
the project.
Suzann Bailey, 4171 Meadowdale – Stated the process was an issue.
Tom Kugler, 4163 Meadowdale – Had concerns that if a road millage went on the
ballot in the future causing double taxation.
Kendra Church, 4176 Meadowdale – Said she didn’t know about the Special
Assessment District and by the time she found out it was too late to stop it.
Nick Warda, 4077 Meadowdale – He indicated that this was an investment in their
community that is needed at this time.
Diane Carlson, 4120 Meadowdale – Said that by the time she found out about it,
there wasn’t time to do anything to stop it.
Tom Barrett, 4082 Meadowdale – Said he never received the petition.
John Bollman, 4185 Meadowdale – Said that he was one of the people circulating
petitions and that he looked for neighbors who might be in favor of the Special
Assessment District (SAD). He indicated that this is the legal process to
follow when instituting a SAD, however he thought it would be helpful in the
future if the Township would outline the process so people had a better
understanding of it.
 
Closed at 6:38 p.m.
Adjournment
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Clerk Cleveland.
Meeting adjourned at 6:57 p.m.
Minutes approved by:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10753.png]
2022 Meeting Minutes
January 12, 2022
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
January 12, 2022
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 7:00
p.m. on January 12, 2022. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order,
reviewed the agenda, and led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee
Duffy, and Trustee Steinberg.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:03 PM
Randy Schafer – District 13 Ingham County Commissioner – 4139 Meadowdale Drive
- Commissioner Schafer shared Ingham County’s plans on the utilization of the
American Rescue Plan Act (ARPA) and Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act
funds. He also shared his support of the Meadowdale Drive improvements and his
appreciation for those who led the petition process for the Special Assessment.
Closed at 7:11 PM
Consent Agenda
Trustee Steinberg moved the consent agenda consisting of:
   ∙    Approve the minutes of the December 8, 2021 Board meeting and December
8, 2021 Meadowdale SAD public hearing.
   ∙    General Fund Accounts Payable Supplemental Paid, check number 1123
(Police Fund), for a total of $250.00.
   ∙    General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 30767-30785, for a
total of $79,967.92, Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 30797-30798, for a
total of $1,090.11, and Accounts Payable #3, check numbers 30802, for a total
of 3,000.00.
   ∙    General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 30786-
30796, for a total of $8,463.65, Accounts Payable for Approval #2, check
numbers 30799-30801, for a total of $3,633.07, and Accounts Payable for
Approval #3, check numbers 30803-30804, for a total of $5,337.87.
   ∙    December Payroll Paid check numbers 50903-50914 and EFTs 735-736, for a
total of $10,759.96 (phys. check amount), and DD1-DD19, for a total of
$18,459.92.
   ∙    GL Activity Report for December 2021
   ∙    Revenue and Expenditure report ending December 31, 2021.
   ∙    Building Inspection Report
   ∙    Police Report
   ∙    Acknowledge receipt of December 2021 Treasurer’s Report
Seconded by: Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: Clerk Cleveland discussed the General Fund Accounts Payable
Supplemental Paid check for the Police Fund.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, and
Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: none
Motion Passed.
Police Quarterly Report – Chief Plaga provided updates on department staffing.
Meridian Township Police is seeking grants for training and recruitment for law
enforcement, paramedics, and firefighters. He updated the Board on the new
changes to the countywide radio system. Traffic crashes have increased with
more motorists on the road. With these increases, he will closely monitor
billable hours against the new township contract. Meridian Township is
completing a deer cull which should help decrease car/deer accidents.
ACTION ITEMS
2022 Poverty Guideline Resolution
Trustee Duffy moved the Williamstown Township Board adopt Resolution #97-2022
Poverty Exemption Guidelines for 2022.
Seconded by: Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: None  
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor
Bloomquist, and Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Meadowdale Road Improvements
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Township Board adopt the Meadowdale
Special Assessment Resolution #2 to move forward with the road maintenance
project and the creation of the Special Assessment District.
Seconded by: Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: Based on comments shared by residents who live in the Meadowdale
Subdivision, a Board member shared procedural concerns regarding their
opportunity to see the circulated petition. Supervisor Bloomquist shared that
the policy and procedures for Special Assessment District processes are
dictated by state law and are reviewed by township attorneys to ensure that
townships are following legal requirements. It was suggested and discussed that
providing recommendations for consideration on how residents work through the
petition process could be a useful tool. Supervisor Bloomquist will draft
recommendations for future petition processes for the Board to review.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Clerk Cleveland, and Treasurer
Cutshaw.
Nays: Trustee Duffy
Motion Passed.
Strategic Planning
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Township Board approve contracting
with Dr. Lewis Bender to provide a 2-day strategic planning workshop for the
Williamstown Township Board. at an estimated cost of $5,000 plus expenses, not
to exceed $500.
Seconded by: Clerk Cleveland
Discussion: The Board discussed participation from Township Committee Chairs to
inform the Strategic Planning process. There was discussion on seeking Dr.
Bender’s view on the implementation and value of plans established by other
townships/communities. Potential dates for this work will be considered and
verified.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer
Cutshaw, and Trustee Duffy.
Nays: None
Motion Passed. 
Hall Curtain
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board move forward with a bid
from SA Morman for replacement of the curtain in the Township Hall at bid
amount of $7500.
Seconded by: Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: None
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Supervisor Bloomquist, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Duffy
and Trustee Steinberg.
Nays: None
Motion Passed. 
Budget Amendments
Clerk Cleveland moved the Board approve the following budget amendments for the
2021-2022 budget.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10759.png]
 
Seconded by: Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: None
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, and
Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None
Motion Passed. 
Computer Purchase
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the purchase
and replacement of recommended four computers at an estimated cost of $800.00
each.
Seconded by: Clerk Cleveland
Discussion: Confirmation that the server replacement will occur in the 2022-23
budget.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, and
Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None
Motion Passed. 
DISCUSSION ITEMS
Roads/Restricted Road Use -
Chief Plaga shared his support of the township proposed Truck Route Ordinance.
He recommended adding jake braking language to the document. The Board was in
support of this suggestion. Supervisor Bloomquist will update the language to
include this and bring the Ordinance back to the Board for consideration in
February.
Permanent Recycling –
Supervisor Bloomquist shared usage data from past recycling years, financials,
and a cost estimate of a site plan with the Board. The Board is in support of
moving forward with this permanent service. Next steps will include determining
engineering costs, drafting a contract and project timeline for the Board to
consider, and communicating with Reclaimed by Design who will facilitate daily
operations, once established.
Budget – Payroll, IT Maintenance –
An updated budget and benchmark data were presented to the Board for review.
The Board is in agreement to move forward with the budget recommendations
including payroll for the February meeting in preparations for the March Public
Hearing.
Art Policy -
The Board was presented with a grant opportunity for commissioning public art.
The Parks and Rec Committee has discussed the idea of an interactive art
installation to engage youth with special needs. The Board was in agreement to
move forward with development of a policy and an application for the $10,000
award through LEAP.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA - 
Trustee Duffy shared that last month’s agenda had no action items. Discussion
continued on the remittance of funds from Webberville DDA to NIESA. Plans for
remodeling the facility in Webberville are moving forward.
Parks and Environmental Committees -
Forestry Grant planning continues. Members of both committees toured the
proposed forested area at the Grand River Township Park where the tree planting
will occur. Areas were staked out in preparation for purchasing and planting in
April. It was shared that resident inquiry and sentiment has been positive
regarding this effort. The Parks Committee will be working to establish their
annual plans and priorities for 2022. Additionally, they are partnering with
the Rotary Club for a potential 5K Harvest Run at the Grand River Township Park
in the fall.
Grand River Township Park Drive -
Mannik Smith will be moving forward with a feasibility study of the drive due
to drainage problems. More information will be shared when the study is
completed.
Streaming of Township Meetings -
Supervisor Bloomquist continues to explore options to implement this service.
There was clarification that the Board cannot offer remote participation as
spelled out in the Open Meetings Act.
Sherwood and Zimmer Road Intersection -
The township continues to monitor this intersection. Ingham County Road
Department (ICRD) will move forward on the intersection study based on the
information provided by Meridian Township Police’s initial traffic study.
Supervisor Bloomquist has requested a timeline of ICRD’s process and next
steps.
MTA Annual Conference -
Supervisor Bloomquist provided a reminder about this opportunity for Board
members and to confirm participation with the office for registration.
Event Barns –
The proposed draft of this Ordinance is currently with township attorneys for
review. Next steps will include a Public Hearing with the Planning Commission,
then a recommendation to the Board. It will likely be June or July before this
will come to the Board.
Monthly Meeting Materials -
Clerk Cleveland sought input on the merged meeting documents format and next
steps for sharing meeting materials with residents on the township website.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 9:03 PM
Randy Schafer – District 13 Ingham County Commissioner – 4139 Meadowdale Drive
– Commissioner Schafer shared his experiences in the Meadowdale Special
Assessment petition process. His recommendation would be to consider shortening
the process. He also addressed the Countywide Broadband Initiative.
Williamstown Township is seeking resident participation on the Taskforce.
Closed at 9:14 PM
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Trustee Steinberg
Meeting adjourned at 9:15 p.m.
Minutes approved by:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10761.png]
February 9, 2022
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 7:00
p.m. on February 9, 2022. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order,
reviewed the agenda, and led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, and Trustee
Steinberg.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:04 PM
None.
Closed at 7:05 PM
Consent Agenda
   ∙   Treasurer Cutshaw moved the consent agenda consisting of:
   ∙   Approve the minutes of the January 12, 2022 Board meeting.
   ∙   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 30805-30820, for a
total of $18,475.90, and Accounts Payable Paid #2, check number 30835, for a
total of $560.84.
   ∙   Accounts Payable Paid - Police #1, check number 1124, for a total of
$63,412.42.
   ∙   General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 30821-
30834, for a total of $9,121.15, and Accounts Payable for Approval #2, check
numbers 30836-30839, for a total of $6,996.50.
   ∙   January Payroll Paid check numbers 50915-50921 and EFTs 737-740, for a
total of $11,288.59 (phys. check amount), and Direct Deposit DD20-41, for a
total of $18,220.28.
   ∙   GL Activity Report for January 2022
   ∙   Revenue and Expenditure report ending January 31, 2022.
   ∙   Building Inspection Report
   ∙   Police Report
   ∙   Draft Planning Commission Minutes
   ∙   Acknowledge receipt of January 2022 Treasurer’s Report
 
Seconded by: Clerk Cleveland
Discussion:
Edit consideration on AP Paid #1; usage of the “replacement wall” vs.
“replacement curtain” in an effort to remain consistent with verbiage used in
January’s Meeting.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Steinberg, and Supervisor
Bloomquist.
Nays: none
Motion Passed.
Planning Commission Report –
Chair Eidt shared a summary of the January 26, 2022 in-person meeting that
included a recommendation of approval of the draft of the Williamston/1099
Storage Center Site Plan and Special Use Permit to the Township Board with
specified conditions. In addition, the Commission recommended approval of the
Farm Animals on Non-Farm Parcels draft Zoning Ordinance amendments and
scheduled a public hearing meeting on March 23, 2022 for the following proposed
amendments: fence height, open space, and stormwater management.
ACTION ITEMS
PC Appointment – Ronald Poth
Clerk Cleveland moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the appointment
of Ronald Poth to fill the vacancy of Rex LaMore expiring September 2022.
 
Seconded by: Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: None  
Motion Carried.
Branch School
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board support and approve the
application for Historic Designation of Branch School with the Ingham County
Historical Commission.
 
Seconded by: Clerk Cleveland
Discussion: The Board expressed gratitude for Tom Johnson’s, Fred Campbell’s
and George Eyster’s decades of dedication and efforts with regards to
preserving Branch School. A review of what to expect for the county and state
application process for Historic Designation ensued.
Motion Carried.
Roads: Restricted Road Use (Truck Route Ordinance) and 2022 Ingham Request
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the proposed
Truck Route Ordinance subject to approval of the Ingham County Road Department.
 
Seconded by: Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: The Board reviewed the type of trucks impacted with this ordinance.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, and Clerk
Cleveland.
Nays: None
Motion Passed. 
 
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Township Board recommend the Township
contract with the Ingham County Road Dept for maintenance/improvement of Epley
Rd. from Zimmer to Williamston Rd to include 1.5 inch topcoat, ditching, tree
trimming and drainage repair for the 2022 year at a cost not to exceed
$230,000.
Seconded by: Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: - The Board reviewed other roads that will be maintained by ICRD as
planned for 2022. The Road Department is currently in the process of analyzing
the needs of the other roads and will share this information with Supervisor
Bloomquist upon completion.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Supervisor Bloomquist, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, and Trustee
Steinberg.
Nays: None
Motion Passed. 
Meadowdale Road Improvements – Special Assessment District – Set Public Hearing
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board adopt the Meadowdale
Special Assessment Resolution #3 calling for a Public Hearing on March 9th at
6:30 pm at the Township Hall on the establishment of the Special Assessment
District.
 
Seconded by: Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: None
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Steinberg, and Supervisor
Bloomquist,
Nays: None
Motion Passed. 
Art Policy
Clerk Cleveland moved the Williamstown Township Board adopt the draft Art
Policy as presented.
 
Seconded by: Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: The Board reviewed the supervision of the Public Art Committee
budget, as well as language considerations for committee membership.
Roll Call:
Ayes: Supervisor Bloomquist, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, and Trustee
Steinberg.
Nays: None
Motion Carried. 
Art Grant
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the submittal
of the LEAP Grant application to facilitate the commissioning of an interactive
art piece for the Township Park.
 
Seconded by: Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: The Board was pleased with the thoroughness of the grant
application.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, and Clerk
Cleveland.
Nays: None
Motion Passed. 
Park Drive
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board, having requested three
bids on this project and only receiving one, approve moving forward with a
feasibility study for the Township Park Drive with Mannik Smith with cost not
to exceed $5,800.00.
 
Seconded by: Trustee Cutshaw
Discussion: The Board reviewed the bid process to ensure three bids were sought
for this project and ensured the motion reflected this attempt.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Clerk Cleveland, and Treasurer
Cutshaw.
Nays: None
Motion Passed. 
Police Special Assessment and Budget - Set Public Hearing
Clerk Cleveland moved the Township Board schedule the Public Hearing for the
2022 Police Assessment Roll and the 2022-23 draft budget on Wednesday March 2nd
at 6:00 pm.
 
Seconded by: Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: Supervisor Bloomquist explained that the Police Assessment roll
reflects new construction and any changes in business through December 31,
2021. The draft budget reflects wage adjustments for township staff (not
elected officials).
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Supervisor Bloomquist, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, and Trustee
Steinberg.
Nays: None
Motion Passed. 
Budget Amendments
Clerk Cleveland moved the Board approve the following budget amendments for the
2021-2022 budget.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10767.png]
 
Seconded by: Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: None
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Steinberg, and Supervisor
Bloomquist.
Nays: None
Motion Passed. 
DISCUSSION ITEMS
Permanent Recycling Update – Supervisor Bloomquist shared information regarding
a grant opportunity that she was made aware of for infrastructure offered by
EGLE. This would assist in the cost of the recycling station. The Board is in
consensus to move forward with the application process. Reclaimed by Design
will collaborate on this and assist in providing data. The grant is due by
April 20, 2022. It was noted that there are additional recycling partnership
educational opportunities in tandem with the grant to consider for the future. 
Farm Animals in Non-Farm Parcels – The Board commended the Planning Commission
on their thorough work and considerations on this draft ordinance. They
discussed exemption processes, as outlined by the Michigan Department of
Agriculture, as well as oversight, if granted. In addition, discussion ensued
regarding the animal weight regulations that residents will be required to
adhere to for larger farm animals.
Reports – Departments and Committees
Parks and Environmental Committees – The Parks Committee will meet next week.
There is new membership joining. They are looking forward to working on an Art
project, as well as Forestry Grant project. The Environmental Committee has
ordered the trees for the Forestry Project with an anticipated arrival in
April.
Streaming of Township Meetings – Supervisor Bloomquist will be seeking bids for
streaming services to be provided to the Township for future meetings. There is
consideration being given on joining MiDEAL. As noted on Michigan.gov –
Department of Technology, Management, and Budget – “MiDEAL is the State of
Michigan's extended purchasing program that allows Michigan cities, townships,
villages, counties, school districts, universities, colleges and nonprofit
hospitals to buy goods and services from state contracts. Membership for the
Township would be $180.00 annually. Local governments benefit directly from the
reduced cost of goods and services and indirectly by eliminating the time
needed to process bids.”
Spring Clean Up – The Board received positive feedback on last summer’s
recycling schedule for specific items. Currently, the plan is to continue month
by month collection that coincides with normal recycling until permanent
recycling established. It was noted that the Township may still want to
consider a special paint and tire collection event.
Board of Review – Supervisor Bloomquist shared that they are preparing for the
March Board of Review. The Organizational Meeting will be on March 8th. The
Board of Review for 2022 will be hearing assessment appeals at the Township
Hall on the following dates by appointment: Monday, March 14th and Tuesday,
March 15th. 
Treasury Department - Treasurer Cutshaw reminded the Board that taxes are due
on Monday, February 14th. Our office will be open from 9am-5pm for collecting
taxes only. After the 14th, there will be a penalty period for two weeks. The
final date that taxes can be paid at the Township Hall is Monday, February 28th
from 9am-5pm for collecting taxes only. After the 28th, Ingham County will take
over the tax roll.
Clerk’s Office – Clerk Cleveland shared that there will not be a May election
in our jurisdiction. Our first election this year will be in August with the
Gubernatorial primary election and general election in November. Additionally,
Board documents that accompany monthly Board Meetings are now available on the
website the Thursday before the meeting.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:28 PM
David Worth – 4029 Meadowdale – Mr. Worth shared his observations of the
subdivision road patches in Hideaway Woods and sought clarification on who paid
for those road improvements.
Closed at 8:30 PM
Appraisal Request
Clerk Cleveland moved the Township Board approve the expenditure of $6,000.00
for an appraisal as may be needed for the Michigan Tax Tribunal.
 
Seconded by: Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: The language of the motion reflects the township attorney’s request
for a bid for potential MTT evidence.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, and Clerk
Cleveland
Nays: None
Motion Passed. 
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Steinberg moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw
Meeting adjourned at 8:34 p.m.
Minutes approved by:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10769.png]
March 2, 2022
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Public Hearing for Proposed Budget and Police Assessment Roll
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened the Public Hearings for
the 2022-2023 Budget and Police Assessment Roll. Supervisor Bloomquist called
the meeting to order at 6:00 p.m. reviewed the agenda, and stated the reason
for the meeting/public hearing, and led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Treasurer Cutshaw, Clerk Cleveland, and Trustee
Creagh. Quorum established.
Public Comment for non-agenda items
Opened at 6:02 pm
Melody Wallace: Stated she is no longer receiving an email newsletter and she
called the Township, was put into voice mail, and has not received a return
call.
Closed at 6:04 pm
Public Hearing for the Police Assessment Roll
Trustee Creagh moved to open the public hearing for the Police Assessment Roll.
Seconded by Clerk Cleveland.
The Public Hearing for the Police Assessment Roll was opened at 6:04 p.m.
Melody Wallace: She stated she is opposed to $900 in the budget for a
newsletter. Also, she couldn’t find the contract with the Meridian Township
Police Department online and stated the contract should have gone out to bid if
Meridian Township couldn’t meet their obligations. She had several questions
about how the reduced police hours will impact the residents and stated the
police assessment should be less.
Tammy Gilroy, Mayor – City of Williamston: She wanted to know why the City of
Williamston’s police department wasn’t considered for this contract and if the
contract we have with Meridian Township allows the Township to vacate the
contract.
Maureen Maloney: She had a question about how the police reduction will work
and if there would be a subsequent reduction in assessment for residents.
Frans Wilbrink: He stated the Township should bid out police services each time
a contract is near the end. Commented on the absence of Board members at the
meeting. Stated the Township should reduce the assessment.
Supervisor Bloomquist explained how the police contract works and why the
Township chose to stay with Meridian Township. She also explained the police
assessment and how the Township will need to determine if a reduction in the
assessment is appropriate.
Clerk Cleveland moved to close the public hearing.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Public Hearing closed at 6:18 p.m.
Public Hearing for the Proposed Budget opened at 6:19 p.m.
Public Hearing for Proposed Township Budget for 2022-2023
Treasurer Cutshaw moved to open the public hearing on the 2022-2023 Proposed
Budget.
Seconded by Trustee Creagh.
Frans Wilbrink: He wanted to know if the Compensation Commission will change
the salaries of the elected officials after the budget is adopted. He wants to
review the police contract. He pointed out an error in the budget.
Melody Wallace: She had more questions about the police contract.
Supervisor Bloomquist acknowledged the error and verbally made the correction
to attendees and will correct the budget for the Board meeting on March 9th.
Supervisor Bloomquist, Treasurer Cutshaw, and Trustee Creagh addressed the
various questions residents and guests had about the budget and police roll.
She addressed the question about Compensation Commission, explaining that the
Compensation Commission meets every two years and their recommendation is
automatically adopted (by law) unless the Board rejects their entire
recommendation. Those who wish to see the police contract are asked to email or
send a letter to the Township to request a copy.
Trustee Creagh moved to close the public hearing.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Public Hearing closed at 6:33 p.m.
Adjournment
Trustee Creagh moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw
Meeting adjourned at 6:35 p.m.
Minutes approved by:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10771.png]
March 9, 2022
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 7:00
p.m. on March 9, 2022. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order,
reviewed the agenda, and led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer
Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, and Trustee Duffy.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:03 PM
Matt Phelan: Addressed the Board on behalf of the Williamston Sting Girls’
Softball Club. Mr. Phelan asked the Board to consider allowing the club to
establish the park fields as the team’s home field and waive the fees for
practices and games for their 2022 season. Mr. Phelan’s proposal included
assisting the township in the maintenance of the field (ex. raking and
chalking) to offset waiving the fees.
Closed at 7:10 PM
Consent Agenda
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the consent agenda consisting of:
   ∙   Approve the minutes of the February 9, 2022 Board meeting and the March
2, 2022 Public Hearings.
   ∙   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 30840-30851, for a
total of $7,177.40, and Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 30859-30860,
for a total of $1,080.27.
   ∙   General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 30852-
30858, for a total of $3,709.83, and Accounts Payable for Approval #2, check
numbers 30861-30866, for a total of $5,010.77.
   ∙   February Payroll Paid check numbers 50922-50927 and EFTs 741-742, for a
total of $6,511.93 (phys. check amount), and Direct Deposit DD42-62, for a
total of $18,840.64.
   ∙   GL Activity Report for February 2022.
   ∙   Revenue and Expenditure report ending February 28, 2022.
   ∙   Building Inspection Report
   ∙   Police Report
   ∙   Acknowledge receipt of February 2022 Treasurer’s Report
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion:
Trustees Eyster and Creagh were absent for the February 9, 2022 Township Board
Meeting. Trustees Eyster and Creagh chose not to include the minutes of the
February 9th meeting in their approval of the Consent Agenda.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh,
Trustee Duffy, and Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
ACTION ITEMS
1099 SUP/Site Plan
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the final site
plan for the Williamston Storage Center, 1099 E. Grand River with the following
conditions:
-   Final approval by the Ingham County Drain Commission;
-   Approval by MDOT (construction plans required for formal approval);
-   Approval of the Special Land Use Permit.
Seconded by: Clerk Cleveland
Discussion: Working with the Planning Commission was helpful for the
redevelopment and design process for this business. Many of the materials in
the teardown process will be able to be recycled. Completion date will be
dependent upon supplies and the economy. 
Motion Carried.
Clerk Cleveland moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Special Land
Use Permit for the Williamston Storage Center, 1099 E. Grand River with the
following conditions:
-   Approval of the final stormwater management plan by the Ingham County Drain
Commission’s office;
-   Approval of the final site plan.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: None  
Motion Carried.
Farm Animals on Non-Farm Parcels – Zoning Ordinance Amendments
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Township Board adopt the recommended
revisions to Section 8.02 of the Williamstown Township Zoning Ordinance to
allow farm animals on non-farm parcels as presented to the Board.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: The Board recognized that some resident’s small animals could be
grandfathered in when this Ordinance goes into effect. It was noted that the
Ordinance provides a mechanism for initiating a permit process should
complaints be voiced by neighbors regarding established small animal farms. It
was also shared that there is value in knowing where small poultry farms are
with regards to Avian Influenza outbreaks. 
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy,
Supervisor Bloomquist, and Trustee Eyster.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Meadowdale SAD – Resolution #4
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board adopt Resolution #4
pertaining to the Meadowdale Road Improvements.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: The Board addressed the need to continue to review the policies and
procedures regarding resident petition processes. Supervisor Bloomquist shared
that this is being addressed and recommendations are currently being developed
that residents could choose to follow. In addition, the establishment of an
additional neighborhood meeting, when proposing a Special Assessment District,
will be recommended.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Supervisor Bloomquist,
Trustee Eyster, and Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None
Motion Passed. 
Census - Charter
Trustee Duffy moved the Williamstown Township Board remain a General Law
Township.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster 
Discussion: The Board sought confirmation regarding census guidelines should
there be future interest in exploring Charter Township status.
Motion Carried.
Police Assessment Resolution
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve Resolution 2022-
98, confirming the 2022 Special Assessment Roll for Police Protection Within
the Township with the Special Assessment Roll total of $214,445.00.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: None
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster,
Clerk Cleveland, and Treasurer Cutshaw. 
Nays: None
Motion Passed. 
Budget Adoption
Clerk Cleveland moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve the 2022-23
Township Budget with a beginning Township Total Fund Equity of $3,327,568.00 as
of 3-3-22, with department appropriations as outlined:
Dept 101- Township Board          $106,459
Dept 171- Supervisor              $51,369
Dept 191- Elections               $29,243
Dept 209- Assessor             $66,539
Dept 215- Clerk                   $54,296
Dept 247- Board of Review         $3,541
Dept 253- Treasurer               $64,791
Dept 265- Building and Grounds    $108,797
Dept 276- Cemetery                $26,000
Dept 294- Township Office         $67,880
Dept 371- Building Inspector      $32,746
Dept 400- Planning Commission     $68,344
Dept 411- Zoning Administrator    $9,718
Dept 420- Zoning Bd of Appeals    $3,519
Dept 441- Public Works         $53,275
Dept 751- Recreation              $71,304
Dept 851- Other Expenses          $500
Dept 890- Contingency          $40,000
Total general fund appropriations $1,168,321
207 - Police fund              $342,532
209 - Cemetery Fund               $205,505
401- Capital Project Fund
Dept. 101-Township Board          $380,718
Dept. 441 public works            $1,043,885
Dept. 751 recreation              $13,743
Dept 752 forestry grant        $11,465
Dept 754 park house               $42,851
Total 401 fund appropriations  �$1,492,662
Total Fund Appropriations         $3,209,020
 
In addition to the above, Clerk Cleveland noted the following changes to the
2022-2023 Recommended Budget:
101-215-703 Deputy Clerk to $6,010.00
101-191-702 Deputy Elections to $10,300.00
101-215-704 Minutes to $1,720
 
In addition to the above, Trustee Cutshaw noted the following change to the
2022-2023 Recommended Budget:
Police Assessment from $214,370.00 to $214,445.00
Seconded by: Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: None
Roll Call:
Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland,
Treasurer Cutshaw, and Trustee Creagh.
Nays: None
Motion Passed. 
Budget Amendments
Trustee Creagh moved the Board approve the following budget amendments for the
2021-2022 budget.
Budget amendments                                        
                                                      
Add to                Reduce                 Amount      
101-101-713.000       101-101-711.000        $300.00    Township Board
Pension Plan Expense  Social Security                   
                                                      
101-215-704.000       101-215-703.000        $200.00    Clerk- wages
wages-rec. secretary  wages- dep. Clerk                 
                                                      
101-400-980.000       101-400-728.000        $800.00    PC. New computer
Capital Outlay        Supplies                          
                                                      
101-400-704.000       101-265-975.000        $200.00    PC. Wages
wages- rec. secretary wages: assist reimbur.            
                                                      
209-276-711.000                             $300.00    Cemetery
social security                                        
                                                      
209-276-711.030                             $100.00    Cemetery
Medicare                                               
                                                      
                     209-276-714.002        $400.00    Cemetery
                     health benefits                   
                                                      
401-752-583.002       401-101-982.000        $13,300.00 Forestry Grant
from special projects special projects                  
                                                      
401-752.980.000                             $9,300.00  Forestry Grant- Trees
Capital Outlay                                         
                                                      
401-752-583.000                             $17,700.00 Township office
Supplies                                               
                                                      
101-265-920.000                             $3,400.00  Correct mistake from 2-
                                                        09-22 budget amend.
Utilities                                              
 
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: The Board sought clarification on the Special Projects and the
Forestry Grant funds.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer
Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, and Trustee Duffy.
Nays: None
Motion Passed. 
Website Proposal
Clerk Cleveland moved the Williamstown Township Board contract with STG for
website design and hosting for an amount not to exceed $3,000.00.
Seconded by: Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: The Board reaffirmed its desire for significant improvements to the
Township’s current website regarding its robustness and interactivity for
residents and wanted to confirm that utilizing our past website design company
ensures this would occur.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh,
Trustee Duffy, and Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None
Motion Passed. 
Meeting Dates
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the 2022-23
Meeting dates as presented.
Seconded by: Trustee Creagh
Discussion: None
Motion Carried.
Road Improvements
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Township Board recommend the Township
contract with the Ingham County Road Dept for maintenance/improvement of Epley
Rd. from Zimmer to Epley Rd. to include 2.5” top coat, ditching, tree trimming
and drainage repair for the 2022 year at a cost not to exceed $230,000; 2.5”
top coat of Germany Rd. .5 miles east of Meridian to Hart at a cost not to
exceed $80,000 and the balance of the 2021 contract that includes Lounsbury Rd.
and Germany Rd. from Zimmer to Williamston Rd. asphalt wedging and chip seal.
The Board also request that tree trimming, and drainage issues be addressed on
Germany and Lounsbury as needed.
Seconded by: Clerk Cleveland
Discussion: The Board discussed contract completion by Ingham County Road Dept.
Trustees Eyster and Creagh expressed a desire to recuse themselves from the
vote because they live on Epley Rd.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Duffy, and Supervisor
Bloomquist. 
Nays: None
Abstain: Trustee Eyster and Trustee Creagh.
Motion Passed. 
Covid Policy
Trustee Duffy moved the Williamstown Township Board adopt the recommendations
from MDHSS dated 2-16-22 pertaining to making masking guidance optional at all
township facilities beginning on 3.9.22.
Seconded by: Trustee Creagh
Discussion: The Board confirmed that the usage of dates are consistent with
past policies and wanted it noted that masking/unmasking should continue to be
dependent upon possible future recommendations.
Motion Carried.
Permanent Recycling
Trustee Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Township Board accept the agreement with
Mannik Smith Group for professional services to review the site for the
recycling center and grant proposal not to exceed $2000.00.
Seconded by: Trustee Creagh
Discussion: None
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Eyster,
Supervisor Bloomquist, and Clerk Cleveland
Nays: None
Motion Passed. 
DISCUSSION ITEMS
Permanent Recycling Update
– Supervisor Bloomquist recommended moving forward with the agreement for
professional services from Mannik and Smith Group (MSG) in preparation for a
proposed Permanent Recycling site at the Township Hall. The results of this
work will provide the Township with engineering advisement and site
improvements necessary to ensure its feasibility and success. In addition, MSG
will also help prepare the EGLE grant application to aid in offsetting the
costs to the Township. The Board noted that in an effort to not miss the
deadline for the grant application and because the requested project fee was
over $1,000 it should become an Action Item.
Trustee Creagh moved the estimated fee from The Mannik & Smith Group to provide
assistance with a grant application for a proposed recycling center be moved up
into Action Items.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Motion Carries.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA –
Covid runs have decreased over the last several weeks. There was little action
on the Webberville DDA efforts. Station 62 still waiting on cost estimates. New
Board Members were elected: Dorothy Hart is Chairperson, Tommy Pratt is Vice
Chairperson, and Kevin Duffy is Secretary.
Board of Review –
Supervisor Bloomquist shared that there are currently five petitioners
scheduled. The process begins next Monday, March 14th. There are also five VA
petitions and two Poverty Exemptions. Each Board member has gone through
training this year, as in the past. Supervisor Bloomquist anticipates that it
will run smoothly.
Treasury Department –
Winter Tax season was completed on February 28th. Approximately 60-70 tax
payments were delinquent and have been sent on to the County for collection.
Treasurer Cutshaw also shared information on a new state program called
Michigan Homeowners Assistance Fund (MIHAF) which helps homeowners by providing
funds to prevent homeowner mortgage delinquencies, defaults, foreclosure, loss
of utilities or home energy services and displacements of homeowners
experiencing financial hardship. The hope is to assist up to 8,000 residents
within the state. She has shared this information with residents, when
applicable.
Parks and Recreation Committee –
Supervisor Bloomquist shared that the committee discussed the request of Matt
Phelan, coordinator for the Williamston Sting Girls’ Softball Club. It is the
committee’s desire to treat each team who requests field usage equally. Current
Board policy that states reservation fees for practices and games. It was
suggested that the Board review the policy and procedures of our park fields at
next month’s meeting. To help inform the conversation, it was suggested that
both the Parks and Recreation Committee and Mr. Phelan bring important
information and data to the next Board Meeting, including, but not limited to:
-   the number of players/teams who participate in the club
-   how many members are township residents
-   club membership costs
-   plans for how the club could improve this asset of the township and
community
-   field rental data from the past several years
-   costs for field maintenance
-   current teams who use the township park fields and their fees (ex.
Williamston Soccer Club)
The Parks and Recreation Committee continues to explore hosting a Harvest
Festival at the Grand River Park in the fall. Preliminary planning includes
having food trucks, small races, music, games, and activities. The goal is to
introduce the park to more residents.
Environmental Committee –
The committee continues to work on the Forestry Grant. They have identified all
the plants that will be used for the project. Planting will begin on April 23rd
and 24th. On the 23rd, 440 bare root plants will be planted, mulched, caged,
and watered. On the 24th, 2,000 acorns will be planted. In May there are 85
containered plants scheduled to be planted. They hope to include as many
children and families as possible in the endeavors and are also seeking
participation from organizations like the Boy Scouts.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 9:03 PM
Closed at 9:03 PM
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Trustee Creagh
Meeting adjourned at 9:04 p.m.
Minutes approved by:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10773.png]
March 9, 2022 - Public Hearing
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Public Hearing for Meadowdale Subdivision Special Assessment District
March 9, 2022
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened the Public Hearings for
the Meadowdale Subdivision Special Assessment District. Supervisor Bloomquist
called the meeting to order at 6:30 p.m., reviewed the agenda, stated the
reason for the meeting/public hearing, and led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Treasurer Cutshaw, Clerk Cleveland, Trustee
Eyster, and Trustee Creagh. Quorum established.
Public Comment for non-agenda items
Opened at 6:30 pm
None.
Closed at 6:30 pm
Public Hearing for the Meadowdale SAD
Trustee Creagh moved to open the public hearing for the Meadowdale Special
Assessment District.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Motion carried.
The Public Hearing for the Meadowdale SAD was opened at 6:33 p.m.
David Worth: Mr. Worth had questions about maintaining the road once the work
is completed and future cost.
Lynn and Barbara Yauk: Supervisor Bloomquist read the letter received from the
Yauks dated March 7, 2022 objecting to the Special Assessment District.
 
Trustee Eyster moved to close the public hearing.
Seconded by Clerk Cleveland.
Motion carried.
Public Hearing closed at 6:42 p.m.
Public Comment for non-agenda items
Opened at 6:43 pm
David Worth: Mr. Worth asked about what happens if the Township passes a road
millage after the SAD is approved.
Supervisor Bloomquist explained that the Township Board has discretion to amend
the SAD roll to reduce the total assessed amount and the amounts of future
installment payments should the Township residents pass a road millage.
Closed at 6:44 pm
Adjournment
Treasurer Cutshaw moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Trustee Creagh.
Meeting adjourned at 6:44 p.m.
Minutes approved by:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10775.png]
 
April 13, 2022
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 7:00
p.m. on April 13, 2022. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order,
reviewed the agenda, and led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer
Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, and Trustee Steinberg.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:02 PM
None
Closed at 7:03 PM
Consent Agenda Trustee Steinberg moved the consent agenda consisting of:
   ∙   Approve the minutes of the March 9, 2022 Board Meeting and March 9, 2022
Public Hearing.
   ∙   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 30867-30905, for a
total of $24,431.14, and Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 30913-30915,
for a total of $1,470.78.
   ∙   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid – Police, check number 1125, for a
total of $38,596.23.
   ∙   General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 30906-
30912, for a total of $2,622.56, and Accounts Payable for Approval #2, check
numbers 30916-30923, for a total of $11,851.54.
   ∙   March Payroll Paid check numbers 50928-50937 and EFTs 743-746, for a
total of $8,552.10 (phys. check amount), and Direct Deposit DD63-88, for a
total of $19,466.29.
   ∙   GL Activity Report for March 2022.
   ∙   Revenue and Expenditure report ending March 31, 2022.
   ∙   Building Inspection Report
   ∙   Police Report
   ∙   Draft Planning Commission minutes
   ∙   Acknowledge receipt of March 2022 Treasurer’s Report
Seconded by: Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion:
Trustee Steinberg was absent for the March 9th Board Meeting and Public
Hearing. He recused himself from approving the minutes of both meetings in the
approval of the consent agenda.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh,
Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg and Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Meridian Township Police Quarterly Report –
Chief Plaga updated the board on current staffing at the department which
includes the hiring of two officers and planning for new recruits who will be
heading to the Police Academy in August. He also provided information on
department protocols regarding resident reported traffic concerns and
enforcement.
Planning Commission –
Chair Eidt shared a summary of the March 23, 2022 meeting that included public
hearings for the proposed fence height and open space and stormwater management
amendments. The committee approved a motion to approve the 6” increase in front
fence height in the R-1, R-1-S, RM-1, and MHP Districts to the township board,
however tabled action on lot coverage in the OS-1, B-1, B-2, and I-1 Districts.
A public hearing has been set for the event barns amendment at the May meeting.
In addition, the planning commission approved their meeting schedule for 2022-
2023.
ACTION ITEMS
Fence Height Amendments
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the revised
language for Fence Height in the R-1, R-1-S districts as recommended by the
Planning Commission.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster 
Discussion: The Board expressed their agreement that the amendment resulted in
a reasonable change in fence heights for residents. 
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy,
Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, and Trustee Eyster.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Home Occupations
Clerk Cleveland moved that the Board request the Planning Commission review the
regulations for Home Occupations to include remote work and Medical Marijuana
Caregivers.
Seconded by: Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: The Board discussed the need for Telecommuting regulations for
residents who are working from home due to the pandemic and beyond. It was
acknowledged that this has been in practice for many years, pre-pandemic. The
Board reiterated that issues given to the Planning Commission to investigate
should not insinuate approval.
Motion Carried 
BS&A Community Development Software
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Township purchase the Community Development
Software at a cost of $3,380 and $675 per year for support.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: The Board acknowledged the improvements and value this software
would add to the building permit process.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist,
Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Board Room Set Up for Streaming and Remote Participation
Trustee Creagh moved the Township contract with Smart Office Smart Homes to
upgrade the Township Board Room for streaming and remote participation at a
cost not to exceed $20,000.00.
Seconded by: Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: The Board acknowledged the value this technology upgrade would
offer regarding improving transparency and public participation. They would
like to learn from other municipalities currently utilizing this streaming
technology (ex. Meridian Township). They also acknowledged there could be
delays in the installation process and pricing variances due to supply chain
issues. The Board wanted the budgeted cost to include a 10% cushion to address
these potential setbacks. The township’s first goal with installation would be
to stream meetings, with a future goal of working towards participation.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk
Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, and Trustee Duffy. 
Nays: None
Motion Passed. 
Recycling Grant
Trustee Steinberg moved the Township submit the EGLE Grant application to
create a site for permanent recycling at the Township Hall with the Township
match not to exceed $31,200.00 or 30% of $104,000.00.
Seconded by: Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion:
   ∙   The Board reiterated that this permanent recycling initiative has been
part of a long term plan for the Township since 2015.
   ∙   Requested by residents
   ∙   Central location within the Township
   ∙   Opportunity to partner with the EGLE to expand collection days from 1
day a month to 2-3 times a week.
   ∙   Future expansion of compost and food waste
Roll Call:
Ayes:. Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer
Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, and Trustee Steinberg.
Nays: None
Motion Passed Unanimously 
Computers and Server Upgrades
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Township Board approve $8,600.00 for the purchase
of 4 new computers, new server, new server UPS and wireless.
Seconded by: Treasurer Creagh
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster,
Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, and Trustee Creagh.
Nays: None
Motion Passed. 
Road Improvements
Clerk Cleveland moved the Township Board approve the road work for 2022 as
recommended by the Ingham County Road department to include Epley from Zimmer
to Shaftsburg Rd., Germany from Zimmer to Williamston Rd, Lounsbury from
Haslett to Milton Rd., Germany from .5 mile east of Meridian to Hart, Beeman
Rd. from City Limits to work completed at a total cost not to exceed $820,000
Seconded by: Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: In light of the recent accident on Germany Road, Supervisor
Bloomquist reiterated her commitment to working closely with the drain and road
commission to ensure our roads and drain plans ensure safety. Due to their
residences, Trustees Eyster and Creagh asked to be recused from the vote.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, and
Supervisor Bloomquist.
Abstained: Trustee Eyster and Trustee Creagh
Nays: None
Motion Passed. 
Soccer Fields
Trustee Creagh moved the Township Board approve the Soccer Field Improvements
as proposed by Contractors Landscape & Development Services, L.L.C. not to
exceed $12,000, pending input from a turf grass expert regarding the best time
to reseed the fields.
Seconded by: Trustee Duffy
Discussion: It was noted by the Board that timing of seeding for grass is best
from Mid-August to Mid- September. It was suggested that the Board seek
guidance from a turf grass expert and postpone seeding until fall. A resident
communication plan was also discussed regarding fertilizer application, should
it occur.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg,
Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, and Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Application for Farm Animals on Non-Farm Parcels
Postponed until the May 11, 2022 Township Board Meeting.
DISCUSSION ITEMS
Park Field Rental Policy –
Treasurer Cutshaw reviewed the park comparison price list and field management
plans from surrounding and similar municipalities. It was noted that across the
area, policies and prices varied greatly. The Board shared agreement that the
township’s current park rental policies and fees are fair and not unreasonable.
They also recognized the efforts that the local softball club are putting forth
to become established and organized. They noted the importance that athletics
provides for encouraging positive interactions and improved mental health for
our youth. The Board is supportive of encouraging the utilization of our fields
and are willing to collaborate with the club in the future. This support would
require a thorough long- term plan that encouraged the development of the park
assets. This will be communicated to Mr. Phelen.
Strategic Planning –
Supervisor Bloomquist reminded the Board that this important work will be May
13th and 14th.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA –
Trustee Duffy shared that Station 62 is fully paid off. The NIESA attorney
drafted an agreement with the Webberville DDA to be discussed on April 14,
2022. Committee appointments were made.
Parks and Recreation Committee –
Trustee Steinberg shared information on the proposed fall festival plans. It
will take place on October 16th. There will be the 5K race in the morning
coordinated through the Williamston Rotary. There will be Township sponsored
events later in the day that may include food trucks. Other discussion items
included Grand River Park signage which continues to be in development. There
will be a Volunteer Day to stain the pavilion. The date will be determined
soon. The Grand River Park driveway review is still in process. 
Senior Center –
Determinations for their Board of Directors will be in May. Trustee Steinberg
shared his excitement in all that is occurring at the center and the positive
direction of the upcoming plans.
Redistricting –
Clerk Cleveland shared and reviewed Williamstown Township’s redistricting and
polling place changes to be implemented for the August 2nd State Primary and
November 8th General Election. These changes were recently determined by the
Williamstown Township Local Election Commission. Furthermore, Clerk Cleveland
noted that these changes are a result of our most recent census. It provides an
opportunity to review our precincts for efficiency and effectiveness. Our
township services four school districts which can lead to ballot splits, which
can be costly. With our new precinct boundaries, school splits will only occur
in Precinct 2. Changes have been approved by Bureau of Elections and have been
applied in the State of Michigan’s Qualified Voter File. Clerk Cleveland
reminded the Board that all district number have changed and that every
township voter will be getting new Voter Information/Identification Card with
these updates. Residents can expect additional communications regarding these
changes and what to expect in the Williamston Enterprise, the township website,
and our Facebook page. Voters can find additional information at Michigan.gov.
Environmental Committee/Forestry Grant –
Trustee Eyster shared that our local Scouts will be out on April 24th to plant
acorns at 9:00am. April 30th is bare root planting. May 7th will be larger
trees. She shared her pleasure at the opportunity this planting experience will
provide and emphasized the idea that this event is an investment in our young
people who will be able to come back someday and say, “I helped plant this
forest.” Sign-ups for this event continue to be distributed.
County Broadband Survey –
Treasurer Cutshaw reminded the Board that this important survey is out and that
the county needs resident input and perspective. The data collected will help
to inform the grant that the county is applying for, regarding the expansion of
broadband infrastructure. There’s a survey link on our website.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 9:28 PM
None
Closed at 9:28 PM
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Trustee Steinberg
Meeting adjourned at 9:29 p.m.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10787.png]
 
May 11, 2022
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 7:00
p.m. on May 11, 2022. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order,
reviewed the agenda, and led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer
Cutshaw, Trustee Duffy, and Trustee Steinberg.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:01 PM
Beth Schrader (Director) and Julie Rudd (Assistant Director) of the Williamston
Area Senior Center (WASC) updated the board on the increased participation,
current engagement activities, partnerships, and travel opportunities for our
area seniors. They shared information about new plans, processes, and
procedures for the organization, as well as their work on the center’s
financial systems.
Closed at 7:12 PM
Consent Agenda
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the consent agenda consisting of:
   ∙   Approve the minutes of the April 13, 2022 Board Meeting.
   ∙   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 30924-30938, for a
total of $7,980.42, and Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 30944-30949,
for a total of $2,236.21.
   ∙   General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 30939-
30943, for a total of $2,691.81, and Accounts Payable for Approval #2, check
numbers 30950-30952, for a total of $1,591.83.
   ∙   April Payroll Paid check numbers 50938-50943 and EFTs 747-751, for a
total of $10,949.32 (phys. check amount), and Direct Deposit DD89-109, for a
total of $19,675.22.
   ∙   GL Activity Report for April 2022.
   ∙   Revenue and Expenditure report ending April 30, 2022.
   ∙   Building Inspection Report
   ∙   Police Report
   ∙   Acknowledge receipt of April 2022 Treasurer’s Report
Seconded by: Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: None  
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Duffy,
Trustee Steinberg and Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
ACTION ITEMS
Farm Animals on Non-Farm Parcels
Trustee Duffy moved the Township Board approve the zoning permit for farm
animals as presented with a fee of $20.00.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: The fee has been revised in light of last month’s Board
recommendations. The Board shared concern regarding the Avian Flu and felt the
permit process would help to establish a database of residents who are farming
poultry. This would be useful, should the need for communication regarding the
disease arise.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg,
Supervisor Bloomquist, and Trustee Eyster.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Comcast Franchise
Trustee Steinberg moved the Township Board approve the Comcast Franchise
Agreement w/o any video service fee paid to the Township.
Seconded by: Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: The Board discussed this agreement in comparison with other utility
franchise agreements. The Board sought to maintain the contract in its current
form in an effort to keep resident’s Comcast bills unchanged.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor
Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, and Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None
Motion Passed. 
Cemetery RFP
Trustee Steinberg moved the Township Board approve the letting of the RFP for
the Cemetery Green Burial site with an amended due date July 8, 2022.
Seconded by: Clerk Cleveland
Discussion: The Board is pleased with the Green Burial site design created by
Mannick Smith Group and the fulfillment of most of the plans for our cemetery
in the Township’s Master Plan. In an effort to give bidders optimal time to
complete their RFPs, the Board amended the due date to Thursday, July 8, 2022
at 4:00 pm. with a completion date of October 31, 2022.
Motion Carried.
DISCUSSION ITEMS
Park Drive
– No new information; postponed until June.
Strategic Planning
– Supervisor Bloomquist provided an update for this upcoming work session.
Sign Regulations
– Supervisor Bloomquist noted that this regulation is lacking guidance for
signs on residential property. As more residents work from home, the need for
regulation consistency between secondary and primary sign use is important. The
Board is in agreement that this regulation work be moved to the Planning
Commission for review and development.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA
– Trustee Duffy noted that a member at large position is coming back up for
appointment. Letters of interest needs to be submitted by May 26th. The
position would be appointed at June Meeting.
Parks and Recreation Committee
– Trustee Steinberg shared that on the morning of June 7th there will be a
pavilion work session at Grand River Park with a focus on staining the
structure. Volunteers are welcome. Planning for the October 16th community
event, in partnership with Williamston Rotary, continues. The overall goal of
this event is to establish the park as a sense of place for and known by
residents of Williamston and the greater community.
Environmental Committee/Forestry Grant
– Trustee Eyster shared that 440 trees and 1,500 acorns (resulting in an
additional 150-200 oak trees) have been planted in the designated forest area
of Grand River Park thus far. 80 more trees are expected for delivery and will
be planted on the weekend of May 21st. More volunteers are needed for this
final stage of the planting event. Additionally, watering crews will be needed
throughout the summer to ensure growth and development. The committee is also
hosting a contest for naming the new forest.
MTA Conference
– Board Members provided information on various classes and sessions they
participated in at the annual Michigan Township Conference in April.
Elections
– Clerk Cleveland noted that she published an article recently in the
Williamston Enterprise to provide residents with information regarding our
changing districts, new precinct designations and polling locations, and the
upcoming mailing of new Voter ID/Information cards. She also shared that these
changes will decrease the amount ballot styles needed for an election and have
impacts for the delegates of the Democrat and Republican Parties and the
precincts they serve.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:00PM
Nancy Horton, 5632 Shoeman Rd.– Mrs. Horton shared an experience she had with
one of her horses on her farm and a neighbor’s in-ground pool in 2021. She
expressed concerns regarding the resident’s current pool barrier, as well as
the township’s/township building inspector’s application of and adherence to
the State of Michigan’s Building Code for Pools and the permit granting
process.
Closed at 8:10PM
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw
Meeting adjourned at 8:15 p.m.
Minutes approved by:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10789.png]
May 13, 2022
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
May 13, 2022 & May 14, 2022
Call to Order
Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order at 5:45 p.m. on May 13, 2022.
Present on May 13, 2022:
Township Board: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland,
Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Duffy, and Trustee Steinberg.
Facilitator: Dr. Lewis Bender
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
No public attended.
Supervisor Bloomquist made opening comments and Dr. Bender gave an overview of
the process as well as outlined current trends happening at the township level.
Participants discussed projects underway in the township and what they feel is
needed in the next five years. The Board outlined a Strategic Vision for the
township.
May 14, 2022
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
May 13, 2022 & May 14, 2022
Present on May 14, 2022:
Township Board: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland,
Treasurer Cutshaw, and Trustee Steinberg.
Township Staff: Julie Bellinger, Kim VanErp, Mac Donnelly, Dan Rhines
Committee/Commission Members: Gerald Eidt, Tom Johnson, Jim Brinker, Rob
Stanford,
Facilitator: Dr. Lewis Bender
On Saturday, breakout groups discussed various aspects of the Strategic Vision
and identified key objectives and guidelines for each goal area. They also
identified one-year tasks to be completed in each goal area.
Dr. Bender discussed next steps to bring the Strategic Vision to fruition.
Adjournment
The strategic planning session was adjourned at 11:30 a.m. on May 14, 2022.
Minutes approved by:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10791.png]
 
June 8, 2022
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
June 8, 2022
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 7:00
p.m. on June 8, 2022. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order,
reviewed the agenda, and led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer
Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, and Trustee Steinberg.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:03 PM
None.
Closed at 7:03 PM
Consent Agenda
Trustee Creagh moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the minutes of the May 11, 2022 Board Meeting and May 13 & 14 Strategic
Planning Meeting.
General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 30953-30964, for a total
of $15,543.50, and Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 30970-30974, for a
total of $1,362.99.
General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 30965-30969, for a
total of $10,683.80, and Accounts Payable for Approval #2, check numbers 30975-
30980, for a total of $13,169.69.
May Payroll Paid check numbers 50944-50954 and EFTs 752-753, for a total of
$6,730.56 (phys. check amount), and Direct Deposit DD110-139, for a total of
$23,857.96.
GL Activity Report for May 2022.
Revenue and Expenditure report ending May 31, 2022.
Building Inspection Report
Police Report
Draft Planning Commission Minutes
Planning Commission Annual Report
Acknowledge receipt of May 2022 Treasurer’s Report
Seconded by: Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: None
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh,
Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg and Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Williamston Community Schools Report – Dr. Adam Spina, Superintendent of
Williamston Community Schools, shared a review of the school year and district
accomplishments. A copy of the year-end newsletter that was sent to all school
families was also provided to each Board Member. Dr. Spina addressed
considerations for affordable housing with the Board for Schools of Choice
families. The district would be willing to collaborate with the township and
city to create a long-term systematic and controlled growth plan that would
provide opportunities for families interested in moving to Williamston.
Planning Commission (PC) Report – Chair Eidt shared a summary of the May 25 th
Public Hearing for Event Barns. Residents expressed opinions and shared input
on the proposed draft of Section 8.02.RR. The Planning Commission will
reconvene on July 27 th to continue to review and deliberate the draft in light
of resident perspective shared. Chairman Eidt predicted that this draft would
come before the Board in September. The Commission also approved the ARK/
Oddfellows revised site plan and PC annual report, as well as adopted the
County’s stormwater management standards.
ACTION ITEMS
Staffing
Clerk Cleveland moved the Township Board move forward with the addition of an
Office Assistant and Code Enforcement Officer as budgeted.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: The Board sought clarification on the role and responsibilities of
a Code Enforcement Officer.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy,
Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, and Trustee Eyster.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Park Drive
Trustee Creagh moved the Township Board request an RFP for engineering and
design for the Grand River Community Park parking area improvements, for the
existing driveway and parking area, based on Option 3 as identified in the
Mannik & Smith Group’s June 1, 2022 letter to Supervisor Bloomquist.
Seconded by: Trustee Duffy
Discussion: Mannik & Smith Group Senior Project Manager, Corey Vincent,
reviewed four options for Board consideration as a result of their Community
Park Parking Area Improvement Study. After discussion of each option, the Board
determined that Option 3 – HMA Millings and Surface Repair and Single Course
Chip Seal -would be the best choice for improving the surface conditions and
drainage of the site. The Board would like to secure three Request for
Proposals (RFP) for consideration of the engineering and design of this option.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg,
Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, and Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None
Motion Passed. 
Prime Housing Donation
Trustee Steinberg moved the Township Board accept the designated funds of $6000
from Prime Housing Group for the park with the park committee recommending use
with board approval.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: none
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist,
Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Nays: None
Motion Passed. 
DISCUSSION ITEMS
Strategic Planning – Supervisor Bloomquist shared her gratitude for the
strategic planning participation of the Township Board, committee members, and
office staff. Overall, feedback of the sessions was positive as shared by the
survey results provided by Clerk Cleveland. It was noted that many of the items
expressed in the work sessions are initiatives that are currently in progress.
Maintaining momentum for this work will be key. Next steps include
intentionally planning for a strategic planning goal/focus update at each
monthly Board Meeting. Furthermore, Supervisor Bloomquist will invite Dr.
Bender to come back to the Township in June 2023 to meet with the Board and
check in on the status and progress of the established goals.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA – No new report. 
Parks and Recreation Committee – Trustee Steinberg updated the Board on the
progress of the continued maintenance of the Grand River Park pavilion in an
effort to ensure the barnwood used to construct the building is protected.
Environmental Committee/Forestry Grant – Trustee Eyster shared that there will
be a meeting on June 10 to celebrate the accomplishments and the continued
planning of the Forestry Grant efforts. She shared her gratitude for the many
participants who helped to make this a successful endeavor, but especially Jim
Miller who worked tirelessly on park preparation for the tree planting.
Elections – Clerk Cleveland provided an update on the various preparations
underway for the August and November State Elections. Some of the preparations
include printing and mailing new Voter Identification cards to all Township
Residents, as well as preparing Absentee Ballot Applications. Clerk Cleveland
shared that over 60% of Williamstown Township residents voted absentee in 2020.
It is important to note that this year’s absentee application is for both the
primary and the general elections. 
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:42 PM
None.
Closed at 8:42 PM
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Trustee Creagh
Meeting adjourned at 8:43 p.m.
Minutes approved by:
____________________________________________ ______________
Wanda Bloomquist, Township Supervisor Date
_____________________________________________ _____________
Robin A. Cleveland, Township Clerk Date
 
July 13, 2022
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
July 13, 2022
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 7:00
p.m. on July 13, 2022. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order,
reviewed the agenda, and led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer
Cutshaw, and Trustee Steinberg.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:03 PM
Donna Tocarchik, 9605 Deer Trail, stated her frustration regarding ordinance
interpretation and potential financial obstacles she is experiencing with the
township wetland buffer ordinance with regards to the storage shed that she
would like to erect on her property.
Closed at 7:10 PM
Consent Agenda
Trustee Steinberg moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the minutes of the June 8, 2022 Board Meeting
General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 30981-30999, for a total
of $38,151.41, Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 31006-31012, for a total
of $3,594.87.
General Fund Accounts Payable Paid – Police, check number 1126, for a total of
$39,644.80.
General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 31000-31005, for a
total of $3,653.13, and Accounts Payable for Approval #2, check numbers 31013-
31023, for a total of $3,482.88.
June Payroll Paid check numbers 50955-50963 and EFTs 754-758, for a total of
$18,572.19 (phys. check amount), and Direct Deposit DD140-164, for a total of
$21,619.61.
GL Activity Report for June 2022.
Revenue and Expenditure report ending June 30, 2022.
Building Inspection Report
Police Report
Acknowledge receipt of June 2022 Treasurer’s Report
Seconded by: Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Steinberg and
Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Capitol Area District Library (CADL) Report – Julie Chrisinski, Head Librarian
for Williamston – Ms. Chrisinki shared CADL highlights for 2021. Including
their multiple service options and their work to re-establish in-person
activities at the library located within the Williamston Middle School. In
addition, the CADL Student Success Initiative was implemented in 2021 which
allows students and educators to grow their awareness of the resources and
services the library offers. Board members were provided a copy of the CADL
Annual Report. Ms. Chrisinski also discussed the operational millage that will
be on the August 2, 2022 primary ballot.
Police Report – Chief Plaga – Chief Plaga shared an overview of the details
found in the Second Quarterly Police Report. It was noted that two new officers
were added in May with completion of their field training planned for August.
Additionally, Meridian Township Police will be sending four officers to the
Police Academy which is helping to bring the department back up to full
operating capacity. Chief Plaga wanted to ensure residents were aware that
Ingham Regional Emergency Alerts will now be communicated by Everbridge. Two
important upcoming dates residents may want to be aware of:
Tuesday, August 2 nd - National Night Out
Thursday, September 1 st – the next session of the Citizens’ Academy offered by
Meridian Township Police is slated to begin and will continue for the next nine
weeks after the start date
ACTION ITEMS
Odd Fellows Site Plan
Trustee Steinberg moved the Township Board approve the revised site plan for
ARK/Oddfellows at 1000 E. Grand River for a 60 ft x 80 ft building and drainage
improvements subject to Drain Commission approval.
Seconded by: Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor
Bloomquist, and Trustee Eyster.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Purchase of Burial Plots
Trustee Eyster moved the Township Board approve the purchase of the 3 burial
plots, West Section, Block 2, Spaces 4-6, in Foote Cemetery from Margie Walsh
at a cost of $675.00.
Seconded by: Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: None
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee
Eyster, and Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Zoning Ordinance Amendment – Storm Water Management
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Township Board adopt the Planning Commission’s
recommended language for Stormwater Management Regulations.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: None
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes:. Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk
Cleveland, and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Nays: None
Motion Passed. 
507 E. Grand River House – Roof Estimates
Trustee Steinberg moved the Township Board contract with Home Pro Roofing, to
re-shingle the 507 E. Grand River house, at a cost of up to $14,000, plus an
allowable increase due to a need for additional deck boards, from 401-754-
980.003.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: A suggestion to delay re-shingling until the of the purpose/use
and/or possible remodeling of the building was determined by the Board was
shared. Clarification will be needed from contractor regarding removal and
reinstallation of satellite and antennas.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes:. Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk
Cleveland, and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Nays: None
Motion passed. 
MTA Educational Options
Clerk Cleveland moved the Township Board purchase the Premium Pass Plan at a
cost of $1900.
Seconded by: Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: Board Members shared their positive experiences utilizing the
learning opportunities provided by MTA (Michigan Townships Association). Moving
forward, it was suggested that class participation could not only include Board
Members, but members of committees and commissions, as well as office staff.
The Board emphasized the value of these educational resources and classes in
building knowledge and capacity.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes:. Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer
Cutshaw, and Trustee Steinberg.
Nays: None
Motion passed. 
Security System
Trustee Steinberg moved the Township Board approve the security upgrades to the
Cemetery Barn and Branch School at a cost up to $1,000. 
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: None
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes:. Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland,Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Steinberg,
and Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None
Motion Passed. 
Budget Amendments
Clerk Cleveland moved the Board approve the following budget amendments for the
2022-2023 budget.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10804_9943x5770.jpg]
 
Seconded by: Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes:. Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor
Bloomquist, and Trustee Eyster.
Nays: None
Motion Passed. 
DISCUSSION ITEMS
RFP’s – Supervisor Bloomquist updated the Board on the status of the following
Request for Proposals (RFP):
Cemetery Landscaping - No RFP submittals have been received. Supervisor
Bloomquist will continue to seek out feedback from those vendors that were
contacted.
Cemetery Drive – The Township is making second attempt for RFP submissions.
Corey Vincent from Mannik and Smith has offered to reach out to the company who
was awarded bids from the county for asphalt work in on Beeman Rd. in
Williamstown Township to see if they will submit a proposal.
Park Driveway - RFPs have been sent out to engineering firms and submittals are
due before the next Board Meeting.
Strategic Planning Update – Work in the following areas of the Strategic Plan
continues:
Plans have begun for township resident classes with a tentative date to begin
in September. Possible topics include: Solarize Program, Sustainable
Landscaping, Photography Class, Natural Burial, and/or the Forestry Project.
More planning and information to come.
Williamstown Township Park - Planning for Park Drive improvement continues, as
well as the dedication for the Forestry Project and a Fall Harvest Festival. 
Resident Communication – New website will be launched very soon. 
November 9, 2022 – Strategic Planning Workshop from 6pm-7pm.
Reports – Departments and Committees
Parks and Recreation Committee – Trying to establish the next meeting to
continue to plan for the Harvest Festival on October 16 th .
Forestry Grant – Five regions have been established for a tree watering plan.
Volunteers will be updating tree cages and mulching as necessary. July 24 th
committee membership will participate in the local Farmer’s Market to share
information about the grant, forestry work, and opportunities for volunteering.
Senior Center – Trustee Steinberg shared that next week Senior Center members
will be able to participate in CPR training in Stockbridge.
Elections – Clerk Cleveland shared that the Election Commission recently met
and established Election Inspectors for the August Primary. Recent data
released from the State indicates that Williamstown Township has 4,521 voters;
Absentee Voters have increased 250% from 2018; the Township saw an increase in
ballot return of 747%; 29% of Absentee Ballots have been returned as of 7/13/22
for the August Primary. Security continues to be a priority. The State is
offering a HAVA Grant opportunity of $1500 per precinct for increased security
needs or tabulators ahead of the General Election in November.
Assessing Updates – New changes were established on July 13, 2022 regarding
Board of Review (BOR), Principal Residence Exemptions (PRE), and document
retention. PRE corrections can now be made administratively versus at the BOR.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 9:15 PM
Donna Tocarchik, 9605 Deer Trail, stated suggestions about the way the Township
should communicate ordinances and changes to residents. 
Closed at 9:17 PM
Adjournment and Review
Clerk Cleveland moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Mark Eyster
Meeting adjourned at 9:19 p.m.
Minutes approved by:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10810.jpg]
 
August 10, 2022
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
August 10, 2022
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 7:00
p.m. on August 10, 2022. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order,
reviewed the agenda, and led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer
Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, and Trustee Steinberg.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:02 PM
None.
Closed at 7:02 PM
Consent Agenda
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the minutes of the July 13, 2022 Board Meeting
General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 31024-31037, for a total
of $27,485.21 and Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 31056-31057, for a
total of $574.09.
General Fund Accounts Payable Paid – Police, check number 1127, for a total of
$1,500.00.
General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 31038-31055, for a
total of $14,743.81, and Accounts Payable for Approval #2, check numbers 31058-
31062, for a total of $18,510.66.
July Payroll Paid check numbers 50964-50977 and EFTs 759-761, for a total of
$7,901.31 (phys. check amount), and Direct Deposit DD165-196, for a total of
$24,732.16.
GL Activity Report for July 2022.
Revenue and Expenditure report ending July 31, 2022.
Building Inspection Report
PC draft minutes
Police Report
Acknowledge receipt of July 2022 Treasurer’s Report
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: Board sought clarification on the General Fund Accounts Payable
Paid - Police, check number 1127.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh,
Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg and Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
ACTION ITEMS
Cemetery Fee Schedule Change
Trustee Creagh moved the Township Board approved the revisions recommended by
the Cemetery Committee addressing the cost increase for the urns and faceplates
of the Columbarium.
Seconded by: Clerk Cleveland
Discussion: The Board confirmed that 2016 was last time there has been a fee
increase. 
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy,
Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, and Trustee Eyster.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Park Drive Engineering Bid Review
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Township Board approve entering into a contract
with Mannik Smith Group for engineering services for the Community Park Drive
Project at a cost not to exceed $33,000 to be paid out of Special Projects 401-
101-982.000.
Seconded by: Trustee Steinberg.
Discussion: The Board expressed interest and value in the soil boring services
suggested by DC Engineering and would like to explore that process with Mannick
Smith Group.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor
Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, and Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None
Motion Passed. 
House Rental
Trustee Creagh moved the Township Board continue to lease the home at 507 E.
Grand River Rd. at the current monthly rate of $1,200.00 for a period of six
months.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster.
Discussion: Board was in agreement that there is value in having the home
rented during the winter months.
Motion passed.
Harvest Festival
Trustee Creagh moved the Township Board approve the expenditure of up to
$3000.00 for the Harvest Festival scheduled for October 16 th by the Parks and
Rec Committee out of 101-751-881.000.
Seconded by: Trustee Duffy
Discussion: Discussion regarding the requested funds for the event.
Satisfaction was expressed that this event supported the vision of the Township
Strategic Plan with regards to building a sense of community. The Board
requested continued oversight by the Supervisor over the expenditures and would
like to have a report on event progress and planned costs for the next Board
Meeting.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster,
Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, and Trustee Creagh.
Nays: None
Motion Passed. 
Red Cedar Manor – Special Assessment District (SAD)
Clerk Cleveland moved the Township Board adopt the Red Cedar Manor Resolution
#5 calling for a public hearing to be held on August 24 th at 7:00 pm at the
Township Hall to hear from residents regarding the revised cost of road
improvements.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: Supervisor Bloomquist reported that Red Cedar Manor’s SAD costs
came in $100,000 over budget due to drainage and driveway approach needs. The
project is scheduled to begin in September hence the need to schedule a Public
Hearing for August 24th to hear from Red Cedar Manor residents regarding the
revised costs and the next steps the residents would like to take.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes:. Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk
Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, and Trustee Duffy.
Nays: None
Motion Passed. 
Railroad Quiet Zones
No action taken.
November Board Meeting Date Changed
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Township Board reschedule the November
9 th meeting to November 16 th at 7:00 pm due to the November 8 th election.
Seconded by: Clerk Cleveland
Discussion: None
Motion Passed. 
DISCUSSION ITEMS
Capital Improvement Plan – Supervisor Bloomquist recommended that a Capital
Improvement Plan, which is an action item in the Township Strategic Plan, be
developed by the Planning Commission. The Board supported this plan and would
like Supervisor Bloomquist to provide background and context to the Capital
Improvement directive that will be given to the Commission. The intent is to
ensure the planning is aligned to Township goals. It was also suggested that
the Planning Commission review the recent township audit, once published, to
inform planning, as well as consider participating in Fiscally Ready
Communities developed by MSU Extension and Michigan Department of Treasury.
These joint trainings focus on best practices for fiscal and operational
planning for Michigan communities.
Forestry Naming Competition – Supervisor Bloomquist updated the Board on the
forest naming contest. She encouraged everyone to vote. The Forest Grant
Committee will determine the name once the top entries are chosen.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA – Trustee Duffy reported that the NIESA Proposal was returned from
Webberville DDA. The Williamston Board provided feedback and have returned it
back to the Webberville DDA for further consideration. Member Don Henley was
appointed Treasurer.
Forestry Grant – The grant closes at the end of August. Trustee Eyster will
work with the committee to write the final report as stipulated and due in
September in order to receive reimbursement. Committed project volunteers have
been watering the trees all summer long. In a recent assessment of the newly
planted forest, by Jim Miller, it was estimated that of the 520 trees planted
24 were dead and approximately 25 are distressed, but have signs of life.
Overall, he and the forest grant consultant were pleased at the progress and
impressed at the overall plant health maintained over this hot summer.
Elections – Clerk Cleveland shared that the August Primary went well. She
celebrated the Election Inspectors and Chairs outstanding service to our
township residents. Collectively, they processed 1810 voters. 67% of that total
were absentee and the other third were in-person voters divided between the two
precincts. The election has been certified by Ingham County as of August 10,
2022. Next, it goes to the State for certification. An unforeseen issue
experienced was at St Katherine’s/Precinct 1. The AC was not working well and
the precinct was very warm. With the significant increase in Absentee Voters,
the Board discussed the purchase of a second tabulator for the Absentee Voter
Counting Board (AVCB). Clerk Cleveland shared that she has been advised by the
vendor to wait until the new version coming out in 2023 is available for
purchase. Also, the Township would be unable to obtain a tabulator in time for
the November election. In the meantime, it has been suggested that the Township
borrow a tabulator from the City of Lansing, if available, for November General
Election. The Board agreed that the AVCB needs the access and processing speed
to tabulate the number of ballots that the township is expected to receive for
the upcoming election.
Recycling Update – Supervisor Bloomquist reminded the Board that this month’s
recycling focus is metal from 9am until 3pm. Anything that contains freon will
require a $20 fee. September’s recycling focus will be trash and latex paint
(for a fee). She provided an update on the status of the Permanent Recycling
Grant and indicated that we are still awaiting a determination of award.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:23 PM
Chairman Eidt, Township Planning Commission (PC), provided a summary of their
July 27, 2022 meeting. He shared that the committee continued deliberation on
Event Barns. The issues have been referred back to the Event Barn Subcommittee
based on the potential impact of the Old Mission wineries court case that was
discussed. A Public Hearing has been scheduled for the next Planning Commission
meeting. In the meantime, the subcommittee will be touring existing Event Barns
to gain further knowledge on key aspects. Chris Doozen from McKenna and
Associates is providing guidance on Home Occupation, Medical Marijuana, and
Farm Signs on Residential Properties draft ordinance language. Chair Eidt also
commended the long-term service of Annette Davis who has resigned from the
Planning Commission.
Closed at 8:27 PM
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Trustee Creagh
Meeting adjourned at 8:30 p.m.
Minutes approved by:
 
August 24, 2022
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Special Meeting and Public Hearing for Red Cedar Manor Special Assessment
District
August 24, 2022
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened the Public Hearings for
the Red Cedar Manor Special Assessment District. Supervisor Bloomquist called
the meeting to order at 7:00 p.m., reviewed the agenda, stated the reason for
the meeting/public hearing, and led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Treasurer Cutshaw, Clerk Cleveland, Trustee
Eyster, Trustee Duffy, and Trustee Creagh. Quorum established.
Public Comment for non-agenda items
Opened at 7:01 pm
None.
Closed at 7:02 pm
Supervisor Bloomquist outlined the reason for the public hearing is due to the
bid cost exceeding 10% of the estimated cost and to hear objections to the
proposed assessment roll Red Cedar Manor Road improvement project.
Public Hearing for the Red Cedar Manor SAD
Trustee Creagh moved to open the public hearing for the Red Cedar Manor Special
Assessment District.
Seconded by Trustee Duffy.
Motion carried.
Opened at 7:03 p.m.
The following residents asked questions or made statements regarding the
Special Assessment District:
Nancy Parmenter, 4358 Congdon Dr.: Questioned the longevity of the road surface
project and the cost, as well as sought clarification on the driveways and
shoulder components of the plan.
Jim Brinker, 21 Oliver Dr.: Sought clarification on the portions of the
project, specifically driveways, that were removed from the original proposal.
Dave Sachau, 4424 Wilfors Dr.: Questioned if additional costs would be added to
residents’ property taxes as an additional assessment or as a cost from the
Drain Commission.
Supervisor Bloomquist read correspondence from Mr. Sachau dated August 23, 2022
that included several questions raised by both him and various residents of Red
Cedar Manor regarding the road project.
Melissa Wood, 4432 Wilfors Dr.: Expressed her observation that the adapted
proposal is different than what was originally planned for. She concluded the
cost is more and outcomes of the project are less than what residents approved.
Additionally, she asked for a new petition to be circulated among residents
with a new plan and revised costs.
John Sarafin, 4394 Wilfors Dr.: Sought clarification on cost differences for
concrete and asphalt driveways. He asked for information on how contractors are
chosen for projects and the bid process.
Raymond Borgman, 28 Oliver Dr.: Sought information on costs related to traffic
control, sewers, mailboxes, and slope restoration.
Pat Smith, 4363 Wilfors Dr.: Wanted information regarding parking for residents
during construction.
Sharon Carter, 4431 Congdon Dr.: Expressed her concern on the longevity of the
materials being used for the road construction project, the implications for
weather and delays in supply chain management, her appreciation of the Special
Assessment process, her understanding that projects can change, and her desire
for a revote in light of new project information. She also expressed concerns
regarding how the Board could make a decision with so many unanswered questions
and concerns, as well as her hopes for a Plan B for residents to consider.
Supervisor Bloomquist also read a letter from Sharon Carter dated August 18,
2022 that listed project questions and requested a new vote in consideration of
the changes to the plan and costs.
Steve Selinger, 4434 Congdon Dr.: Agreed with Ms. Carter desire for a revote.
He also sought confirmation on if the road would be widened during the project.
Jeremy Berger, 4411 Wilfors Dr.: Shared that, as a new resident to the
neighborhood, he was unable to vote. He did not resist the decision of his
neighbors, however now he questions the bidding and timeline process, how
projects are funded, and the reason for the culvert replacement.
Supervisor Bloomquist read a letter received from Jeremy Berger dated August
22, 2022 objecting to proceeding with the Special Assessment Resolution No. 5.
Judy Walgren, 4397 Wilfors Dr.: Questioned why the culvert replacement delayed
the project for a year.
Terry Smith, 4446 Wilfors Dr.: Sought clarification on mailbox removal and the
width of the shoulder upon project completion.
Ann Cody, 4365 Congdon Dr.: Questioned if there were any remaining options to
consider, if there were other funding sources that could be utilized, and what
the road condition would be in years to come if the project was not completed.
She expressed her desire to see the project completed and valued the
perspective of the Project Engineer and Township Supervisor regarding next
steps.
Patty Wright (no address provided): Questioned if the Board could consider
another township road millage vote as an alternate funding source for road
improvements.
John McLaughlin – 4442 Congdon Dr.: Shared the road history of Red Cedar Manor.
Stated that there was a considerable base established when the road was
constructed and that it remains in good condition. He noted that the unstable
parts are at the entrance when you enter from Meridian Rd. To forego future
unknown cost increases and more road deterioration, he recommended that the
residents of the neighborhood move forward with the project.
Mannik & Smith Group Senior Project Manager, Corey Vincent, and Supervisor
Bloomquist responded to the Red Cedar Manor residents’ questions and
statements. Ms. Vincent explained:
how the road will feather into residents’ driveways and the projected longevity
of the work
timelines for optimal road construction
how wide the road would be upon completion of the project
possible construction impacts on resident parking
the competitive bidding process and the factors that are considered when a
business is awarded the contract
the implications of inflation for present and future road construction
projects, as well as the increase in demand for these services statewide
She provided context for what traffic controls, underdrains, slope restoration,
and mailbox removal means within the context of the project description.
Supervisor Bloomquist confirmed:
that the Drain Commission has not yet shared the cost of the culvert
replacement
the delay in the project due to the erosion and undersized culvert were
necessary and would have destroyed the road had construction moved forward
that Plan B is no longer a viable option due to timing.
She explained the project estimation process used by Ingham County Road
Department (ICRD), reminded residents that the original price was an estimate
from the prior director of the ICRD, shared how surrounding townships were
utilizing Federal Covid Funds (also known as ARPA), and recommended that any
future considerations for a Township Road Millage to fund road work would
require initiative from residents.
Both Ms. Vincent and Supervisor Bloomquist expressed their concern for
continued road deterioration and cost increases if construction did not
commence as planned. Future unknown variables such as interest rates, possible
financial bonding, material and constructions costs, and limited availability
of construction companies due to increased demand for their services would need
to be strongly considered should the project be rebid.
Trustee Creagh moved to close the public hearing.
Seconded by Trustee Eyster.
Motion carried.
Public Hearing closed at 8:20 p.m.
Special Meeting for Deliberation
Trustee Creagh moved the Township Board move forward with Alternative 2 of the
Red Cedar Manor Road Resurfacing Options 9-24-20 with the following three
conditions: the Township would determine the cost that would be subsidized for
the culvert replacement should the Drain Commission not cover it; the Township
strongly encourages Red Cedar Manor residents to personally remove their
mailboxes in an effort to reduce overall costs; the Township and Project
Engineers will work with contractors to find ways to save money on traffic
safety conditions and costs.
Seconded by: Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: 
Trustee Creagh expressed his appreciation of the comments shared and the
demeanor presented by resident participants. He shared his desire to pursue the
project with the understanding that it is an additional cost and burden
especially during a time of high inflation and financial struggles. He stressed
his desire to find ways to work with the residents, based on ideas presented,
to reduce the costs where viable and to consider the option of the township
subsidizing costs not covered by the Drain Commission’s culvert replacement
(once determined).
Trustee Duffy expressed his support of Trustee Creagh’s motion and that the
intent is to try to bring the cost back down to the costs before the drain
issue.
Trustee Creagh moved to amend the initial motion to include language that caps
the amount the Township would subsidize to “not to exceed $20,000.00.”
Seconded by: Treasurer Cutshaw
Clerk Cleveland shared similar concerns as Trustee Eyster regarding the impact
of future Special Assessment Districts if subsidization of the drain/culvert
work were to occur for Red Cedar Manor.
Supervisor Bloomquist shared that there are no drain issues in the Meadowdale.
Future drain issues would need to be addressed as they are determined.
Trustee Eyster expressed her concern for setting a precedent on estimates for
bidding. She reiterated that the possibilities of other problems arising in
other subdivision road projects cannot be predicted. She is concerned that we
are putting the township in a difficult position and that the Board cannot
guarantee that it will financially cover work that is unknown to project as it
occurs. She reminded the Board that it is often after engineering begins that
unknowns arise.
Trustee Creagh shared his appreciation for the caution and wisdom of Trustee
Eyster and viewed this Red Cedar situation as very unique. He reminded the
Board that part of the township road policy is roads, not necessarily drains.
He viewed this opportunity as policy setting instead of precedent setting. He
recommended that the board consider incorporating the exploration of drainage
issues into the petition process of future Special Assessment Districts.
Voice Vote
4 Ayes
2 Nays
Amended Motion:
Trustee Creagh moved the Township Board move forward with Alternative 2 of the
Red Cedar Manor Road Resurfacing Options 9-24-20 with the following three
conditions: the Township would determine the costs that would be subsidized for
the culvert replacement should the Drain Commission not cover it, at a cost not
to exceed $20,000.00; the Township strongly encourages Red Cedar Manor
residents to personally remove their mailboxes in an effort to reduce overall
costs; the Township and Project Engineers will work with contractors to find
ways to save money on traffic safety conditions and costs.
Discussion:
Treasurer Cutshaw shared concerns about property value will diminish if the
road was returned to gravel. She supports Trustee Creagh’s motion.
Clerk Cleveland shared concerns about moving forward, but was willing to
consider the amended motion.
Trustee Eyster suggested that consideration be given to stating that we set it
at no more than the excess of 10% or $20,000.00
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Clerk Cleveland, Trustee Eyster, Trustee Duffy,
Trustee Creagh, and Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None
Motion Carried. 
Public Comment
Opened at 9:03 pm
John Sarafin, 4394 Wilfors Dr.: Suggested the board review the language in the
current Neighborhood Road Policy regarding the cost exceeding 10% of the
original estimated amount for improvements.
Closed at 9:05 pm
Adjournment
Trustee Creagh moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Trustee Duffy.
Meeting adjourned at 9:04 p.m.
Minutes approved by:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10821.jpg]
September 6, 2022
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
September 6, 2022
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held a special meeting at 10:30
a.m. on September 6, 2022. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order,
reviewed the agenda, and led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, and Trustee
Steinberg. Quorum Established.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 10:33 AM
None.
Closed at 10:35 AM
AVCB and Polling Locations
Trustee Steinberg moved the Township Board approve the Absent Voter Counting
Board (AVCB) for the November 8, 2022 General Election to be held at the
Forster Woods building, 4656 Meridian Rd., Williamston, Michigan; and polling
locations for Precinct 1 be held at St. Katherine’s Church, 4650 Meridian Rd.,
and Precinct 2 to be held at the Williamstown Township Hall, 4990 Zimmer Rd.,
Williamston, Michigan.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Motion Passed.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 10:39 AM
None.
Closed at 10:40 AM
Adjournment and Review
Treasurer Cutshaw moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Trustee Steinberg.
Meeting adjourned at 10:41 a.m.
Minutes approved by:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10829.jpg]
 
September 14, 2022
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
September 14, 2022
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 7:00
p.m. on September 14, 2022. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order,
reviewed the agenda, and led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer
Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, and Trustee Steinberg.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:01 PM
Donna Tocarchick - 9605 Deer Tr.: Ms. Tocarchick shared questions specific to
the September 14 th Board Meeting Agenda regarding: property ownership of Red
Cedar Antiques, zoning regulations concerning wind energy, the utilization of
food trucks at the Fall Harvest in relation to current township ordinance
language, Neighborhood Roads Policy, and the updated building fee
recommendations, specifically the inspection rates. In addition, from the
August 2022 Board Minutes Draft, she requested additional information on
Railroad Quiet Zones.
Closed at 7:06 PM
Consent Agenda
moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the minutes of the August 10 Board Meeting & August 24, 2022 Special
Board Meeting & Public Hearing, and September 6, 2022 Special Board Meeting
General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 31063-31083, for a total
of $22,779.64, Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 31084-31088, for a total
of $3,376.73, and Accounts Payable Paid #3, check number 31102, for a total of
$2,333.32.
General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1 – Police, check number 1128, for a total
of $1,166.68.
General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 31089-31101, for a
total of $3,615.93, and Accounts Payable for Approval #2, check number 31103,
for a total of $1,600.00.
August Payroll Paid check numbers 50978-51004 and EFTs 762-763, for a total of
$12,835.71 (phys. check amount), and Direct Deposit DD197-225, for a total of
$24,918.23.
GL Activity Report for August 2022.
Revenue and Expenditure report ending August 31, 2022.
Building Inspection Report
Police Report
Acknowledge receipt of August 2022 Treasurer’s Report
Seconded by:
Discussion: Clerk Cleveland noted that the Consent Agenda should read August
payroll paid, instead of July. In addition the August Payroll Paid amount
should read $12,835.17 instead of $112,835.71. Corrections were made.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh,
Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, and Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Red Cedar River Water Trail/Williamston Rotary Satellite Club Update
John Bollman, 4185 Meadowdale: Mr. Bollman provided the Board with an update on
the Red Cedar Water Trail efforts. He noted that the work is a combined
endeavor of the East Lansing, Okemos, Williamston Sunrise and Williamston
Satellite Rotary Clubs. They have a shared vision to create a local and viable
“up north water opportunity” for area residents. The updates included:
Launch site developments
Signage and logo efforts in conjunction with the Ingham County Parks Department
Grant sources that are being sought for information kiosks and floating docks
for access
Ideas on the utilization of the rapids for training and experience with river
boating
Developing maintenance programs that would include ascertaining blockages,
clearing log jams, and river traffic monitoring
Collaboration with the Boy Scouts on Eagle Scout Projects that included the
creation of a Boat Rack
How the development of this water trail could encourage patronage to local
businesses and restaurants along the route, as well as lead to possible
enhancements of the roadside park located on Grand River at Meridian Road
Mr. Bollman noted that the work has cultivated partnerships across many
municipalities, local organizations, and government agencies committed to
continue the progress towards making this river trail come to fruition for the
benefit of area residents.
ACTION ITEMS
Building Fee Schedule Recommendations
Trustee Creagh moved the Township Board approve the building permit fee
revisions recommended by the Building Department that includes a one-year
annual review.
Seconded by: Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: Board members sought clarification on the “TBD Status” on
reroofing, valuation calculations, right of way permits, and how new fees were
determined. Supervisor Bloomquist summarized the process that was used in
establishing the new recommendations and noted that the last time fees were
adjusted was in 2012. Trustee Creagh suggested adding a review of fees after
implementing the new schedule for a year.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy,
Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, and Trustee Eyster.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Planning Commission Appointment
Clerk Cleveland moved the Township Board approve the recommended appointment of
Jim Brinker to replace Annette Davis’s term on the Planning Commission,
expiring September 2024.
Seconded by: Trustee Duffy
Discussion: Clerk Cleveland shared that working with Jim on other township
committees has been a positive experience. It was noted that his
telecommunications background and expertise will be important as the township
discusses potential improvements.
Motion Passed. 
Capital Improvement Plan
Trustee Creagh moved the Township Board refer the development of a Capital
Improvement Plan to the Planning Commission, then to present to the Board for
consideration.
Seconded by: Clerk Cleveland
Discussion: Trustee Creagh shared that the example Capital Improvement Plan
(CIP) reports provided to Board Members were extensive and wondered if the use
of a consultant to assist the Planning Commission with the work and document
creation would be an asset to the process. Supervisor Bloomquist shared that a
consultant could advise the work and reminded the Board that part of the
process would include each Township department and/or committee providing
considerations, priorities, and proposals to the Planning Commission. Trustee
Creagh also suggested that there is a value in seeking township resident
perspectives to also inform where the priorities should be, in addition to the
Township input. Supervisor Bloomquist supported this suggestion and noted that
the Engage Williamstown program, once up and running, could collect this input
for the Commission. Clerk Cleveland supports the CIP initiative as it could
help the township better plan for the future and would reflect what our
residents value. Treasurer Cutshaw emphasized that this was good timing with
the ARPA funds as the Board determines what to plan for. She also noted that
there is a useful webinar put on by the State and/or MSU Extension that would
guide the planning for this process and where to begin. She will find the
information and pass it along. In addition, Supervisor Bloomquist will share
the Capital Improvement Plan Memo with the Planning Commission.
Motion Passed. 
Red Cedar Antiques Demolition – Request for Proposal
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Township Board approve the request for proposal for
the demolition of the remains of the structure at 1435 E. Grand River Rd.
(parcel # 33-03-03-34-403-009). According to the Blight Ordinance under Section
20.01 and 20.02, the conditions on the property at 1435 E. Grand River Rd. is
considered a public nuisance and must be abated. (20.03) (20.08).
Seconded by: Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: Supervisor Blomquist noted that the current state of the burned
building is unsafe and is in violation of the Township Blight Ordinance.
Furthermore, she shared that there is no insurance on the property. There have
been several attempts of communication in multiple formats regarding the
property, including certified mail, but the owner has not replied or
communicated upon receiving these communications. The Board inquired about
repayment of the demolition fees to the Township. The Supervisor explained that
upon completion of the demolition, a lien would be placed on the property and
appear on the owner’s tax bill. Payment to the township would occur immediately
upon payment of the taxes. Supervisor Bloomquist also reassured the Board that
the upcoming actions by the Township, including the approval to seek an RFP by
the Township for demolition services as well as timelines for the work, would
be communicated to the owner. The RFP is due by September 28th so that it can
be finalized at the October Board Meeting.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes:. Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster,
Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, and Trustee Creagh.
Nays: None
Motion Passed. 
Wind Energy Regulations
Trustee Creagh moved the Township Board request the Planning Commission review
the regulations for solar and wind energy and consider amendments to present to
the Board for consideration, if appropriate.
Seconded by: Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: The Board inquired about locations in the Township that Wind Energy
would be viable. Supervisor Bloomquist noted that our township is considered
more suburban, and therefore less suitable, and currently viable locations are
unknown due to grid and transfer locations. She further clarified that that the
objective of this regulation development is so that if the township were
approached about any wind turbines the township would have language and
guidelines in place. Trustee Creagh suggested adding the word “solar” to the
motion, as well as “if appropriate,” as changes to the regulations may not be
necessary.
Motion Passed. 
EV Smart Communities Program
Trustee Cutshaw moved the Township Board approve participation in the EV Smart
Communities Program.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: Trustee Steinberg questioned if the Township had determined if it
wanted to install Charging Stations. The Board determined it would be better to
edit the second bullet in the letter to the EV Smart Communities Administrators
to read that, “It supports the development of charging infrastructure..,” in
addition, the Township would add that it would “Seek input from the public for
wants/needs.” Trustee Eyster noted that this is an interest of the
Environmental Committee and supports moving forward in this program and
participating. Supervisor Bloomquist shared that only one member from the
Township can participate.
Motion Passed. 
DISCUSSION ITEMS
Harvest Festival- Forest Dedication – Supervisor Bloomquist reviewed the
Harvest Festival information in the Board packet, including the schedule,
planned activities, and budget updates. She shared that the festival is
considered a Special Event, therefore Food Trucks can be included.
Strategic Planning - Supervisor Bloomquist provided the Board information on an
upcoming Township Resident Educational Opportunity called Solarize Greater
Lansing. It will take place via Zoom on September 26 th . Residents can find
out more on the website, as well as enroll. It was suggested that we collect
feedback from the residents upon completion of the learning session.
City of Williamston Joint Meeting – September 21, 2022 – Supervisor Bloomquist
reminded the Board about this annual meeting and that it is part of the
Township’s 425 Agreement. This year the City of Williamston is hosting. Board
Members were encouraged to attend, as well as share topics that they would like
discussed. Topics mentioned included: the water trail, safe corridors to
schools, and green burials.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA – Trustee Duffy shared that there had been two NIESA Meetings since the
last Township Board Meeting. The August meeting highlights included:
the discussion on plans for the 702 E. Grand River vacant lot across from the
old fire station and whether or not NIESA should list the property to sell
the decision to end the 911 Ceremony – it was shared that it has become
increasingly difficult to schedule speakers and volunteers have decreased over
the years. Instead, they will do a stand-alone recognition ceremony
The September meeting highlights included the:
completion of seal coating of the parking lot to Station 62
cashing out of a CD and moving the funds to a savings account until new CD
options could be explored
listing of 702 E. Grand River with the asking price of $80,000 (purchased for
$72,500)
creation of a Training Pay Policy – to compensate new trainees while they are
taking classes
approval of the proposal with the Webberville DDA
Trustee Duffy also shared an update that Mason Lansing Ambulance will no longer
be serving nine rural communities due to financial reasons. Mutual aid will be
given to those areas by surrounding emergency services while these communities
determine next steps in securing EMS Services.
Parks and Recreation Committee – Supervisor Bloomquist provided an update on
Township rental property and renter. Currently, there is no confirmation on a
future renter.
Forestry Grant – Trustee Eyster shared that on Friday, September 16th (9am-
12pm) and Sunday, September 18th (9am-12pm and 1pm -4pm) residents will be
working with the Forestry Grant Team to attend to the newly planted trees that
have outgrown their protective sleeves. Chicken wire fencing will be placed
around them. There are approximately 75 trees to do this with. She noted that
several scouts will be earning Environmental and Community Badges for their
work on this. Other developments include a permanent watering station developed
by the Sunrise Rotary, as well as finalizing the Grant Report which is due at
the end of the month.
Elections – Clerk Cleveland shared that the Election Department is gearing up
for the General Election in November. The August Primary has been certified by
the State. Both of Williamstown’s Precincts balanced without a problem, as well
as the Absent Voter Counting Board (AVCB). She was able to secure a Tabulator
from the City of Lansing for use as a second Tabulator for the AVCB in
November. It will be returned to them upon completion of the Election. In
addition, the AVCB location has been moved to the Forster Woods building at St.
Katherines this year. Clerk Cleveland expressed her appreciation of their
willingness to host our residents/precincts and share this additional building
with us for Election Day.
Summer Taxes - Treasurer Cutshaw shared that that the deadline for Summer Taxes
was today (9/14/22) at 5pm. The Township experienced a high rate of payment,
only 129 residents haven’t paid. That is the lowest number in years. Letters go
out residents who have not yet paid on Thursday, September 15th that will
include a 1% late charge. She noted that tax payments made directly to the
local banks have increased and gives residents options. Treasurer Cutshaw
commended the efforts of Deputy Treasurer VanErp in ensuring a smooth tax
season for both residents and the township office.
Red Cedar Manor – Supervisor Bloomquist shared that Ingham County Road
Commission notified her of the need to reschedule the road work for next May
2023. They confirmed that the price will not change. A letter has been sent to
the residents. She also noted that the Drain Commissioner is looking to get
Federal Funds for the culvert replacement. Once this becomes known, the
townships portion will be able to be determined.
Safe Routes to School – Supervisor Bloomquist updated the Board on progress of
this initiative. The goal is to create a shared pathway for bicycles and
pedestrians along Williamston Rd. to include the Maple Shade subdivision. The
stakeholder group of participants who are working on this will be submitting a
grant for Federal Funds to help pay for this project. Public input will be
sought before the grant application and routes are determined. The Board noted
that this supports our Strategic Plan for walkable communities.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:55 PM
Donna Tocarchick - 9605 Deer Tr.: Ms. Tocarchick shared her appreciation for
the answers she received regarding her questions. She noted that she is still
seeking information on the Railroad Quiet Zone and Neighborhood Road Policy and
confirmed that Supervisor Bloomquist will contact her regarding this.
Nancy Horton – 5632 Shoeman Rd.: Ms. Horton shared her concern regarding the
Township Code Enforcement position and its necessity, as well as funding. She
asked the board to consider a public review of the names of applicants and
their qualifications before hiring.
Closed at 8:59 PM
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Clerk Cleveland
Meeting adjourned at 9:00 p.m.
Minutes approved by:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10849.bmp]
 
October 12, 2022
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
October 12, 2022
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 7:00
p.m. on October 12, 2022. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order,
reviewed the agenda, and led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Trustee Duffy,
and Trustee Steinberg.
Supervisor Bloomquist outlined the process and expectations for public
comments. 
Trustee Eyster moved that the Board move the Damon Road Seasonal Display
discussion to follow the Meridian Township Quarterly Police Report.
Seconded by: Trustee Steinberg
Motion Passed.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:10 PM
Nancy Horton, 5632 Shoeman Rd.: Ms. Horton spoke in support of the seasonal
holiday display and is unsupportive of the term blight. She did not observe
destruction of neighbor property when the light display was operational.
Cheryl Underwood, 177 Damon Rd.: Ms. Underwood requested to read a letter she
wrote aloud to the Board and submit it for the public record. She also asked
the Board to allow her to exceed the three (3) minute time allotment during
Public Comment in order to read her letter in its entirety. Supervisor
Bloomquist granted her request.
Kelly Roe, 55 Damon Rd.: Ms. Roe spoke in support of the seasonal holiday
display. She expressed a desire to understand the research, investigation, and
procedures for making the determinations in relation to the Township
Ordinances. Ms. Roe shared her observations around safety, parking,
accessibility, and neighbor complaints. She stated that she understands the
position of the Township, however moving forward she reiterated a desire to
know what procedures are implemented when making decisions.
Jennifer Warda, 4077 Meadowdale Dr.: Ms. Warda expressed concern that this is
dangerous precedent setting for our Township and that a minority is determining
what neighbors can display. She stated further concern for religious bias and
its potential for infringement of others’ rights.
Ashley Baker, 5632 Shoeman Rd.: Ms. Baker shared concerns regarding the
Township’s Blight Ordinance. She questioned the level of research the Township
undertakes, as well as the experience necessary, when making determinations.
Ms. Baker said she felt as though the background information being obtained is
not reasonable. She shared her observations of safety, precautions, and respect
for neighbors. She expressed that Townships should keep residents safe, not
police residents or tell them how to live on their personal property.
Gerre Lou Imhoff, 1210 Gulick Rd.: Ms. Imhoff shared her concern for citizens’
rights and the disappointment of children. She said this decision felt like one
more bite out of Americana.
John Foley, 936 Fairway Lane, Lansing: Mr. Foley shared that Williamston makes
him think of communities, family, and things that bring people together. He has
viewed the display yearly and noted that it brings families together. Mr. Foley
views it as a wholesome celebration; a positive when so many other things are a
negative. He expressed that he was impressed with Ms. Underwood’s solution and
that if the seasonal display is discontinued it could be a loss for the whole
Lansing area.
Melody Wallace, Williamstown Township: Ms. Wallace expressed concern that she
is no longer receiving any email communications from the Township and that
peoples’ addresses should not be required to be shared in Public Comment. She
advised that the township not disclose them. Ms. Wallace feels the overall
determination was speculative at best, not grounded in fact and referenced a
legal case in Florida.
Lauren Marinez, 1459 Wilshire, Haslett: Ms. Marinez stated that this community
is fortunate to have Cheryl Underwood as a resident and that she is well-
intentioned. She asked the Board to please consider her request.
Bob Barkham, 180 Haslett Rd.: Mr. Barkham commented on the joy of the holiday
season. He stated that one resident should not impact the display. He expressed
his willingness to fix any neighbor’s yard, if a need arose.
Closed at 7:46 PM
Consent Agenda
Trustee Steinberg moved the consent agenda consisting of:
General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 31104-31111, for a total
of $6,882.87. Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 31112-31115, for a total
of $1,596.35, and Accounts Payable Paid #3, check number 31132-31134, for a
total of $3,011.73.
General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1 – Police, check numbers 1129-1130, for a
total of $40,634.96.
General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 31116-31131, for a
total of $13,552.69 and Accounts Payable for Approval #2, check number 31135,
for a total of $691.00.
September Payroll Paid check numbers 51005-51011 and EFT 764, for a total of
$8,087.15 (phys. check amount), and Direct Deposit DD226-247, for a total of
$21,891.10.
Revenue and Expenditure report ending September 30, 2022.
Building Inspection Report
Draft Planning Commission Minutes
Police Report
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: Supervisor Bloomquist noted the Treasurer Report missing due to
illness. Trustee Steinberg asked for the September 14, 2022 Board Meeting
Minutes to be pulled from the Consent Agenda for review later in the meeting.
The Board supported the request.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg and
Supervisor Bloomquist
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Damon Rd. Seasonal Display Board Discussion – Supervisor Bloomquist summarized
concerns from Damon Rd. residents, the process used in determining where the
display fits in relation to the Blight Ordinance, the role of the Township in a
situation such as this, and suggested solutions to the situation. Board
discussion ensued.
Letters/emails of concern were shared with the Board noting that traffic in the
neighborhood varied but peaked at 350 cars per night. It was noted that if a
health emergency arose, emergency vehicles would be unable to access the
neighborhood. There are times when there are no issues with the traffic and
there are times when issues are present.
Procedurally, when ordinance complaints are reported to the Township, they are
investigated with a letter sent if a violation is found. Supervisor Bloomquist
is not necessarily the person who would complete investigations, it could be
the Township Planning Assistant or Building Inspector. In this case, Supervisor
Bloomquist was the investigator. She had visited the display four to five times
after receiving complaints. Supervisor Bloomquist expressed a desire to be fair
and considerate. The purpose of the letter was to ensure Ms. Underwood
understood her rights with regards to the ordinance. She stated that no one
wants to regulate holiday lights, however the Township does regulate issues
within the blight ordinance.
It is advised that Ms. Underwood work with her neighbors regarding the display
so that the Township is not receiving complaints. Many of the displays are
interactive. Thus, it is not always a drive-by situation. Access could be
better if the seasonal display was placed in a non-residential area, such as a
fairgrounds or other public space where the ability to park and move around
safely is present, instead of a dead end street.
Trustee Steinberg stressed that this situation illustrates the difficulty of
meeting the needs of all people. He recommended reviewing Ms. Underwood’s
changes and determine if it would remedy the situation from the point of view
of the neighbors. He stated that the changes should be considered if they
remedy the violations of the ordinance. He questioned if there is middle ground
or a way to have the seasonal display safely? He supported that neighbors need
to be involved and make their voices heard to Ms. Underwood. It needs a
discussion instead of anonymous complaints. 
The complaints began in 2020 and it is Supervisor Bloomquist’s understanding
that the neighbors have expressed their concerns with Ms. Underwood.. 
He wondered if there could be a solution where the traffic flow kept moving or
if the Township could host it? He wondered if that could lessen the liability.
Supervisor Bloomquist noted that it would have to be a discussion by the
Board. 
Trustee Eyster noted that these seasonal displays, for both Halloween and
Christmas, are each 30 days – for a total of 60 days. That is almost 1/6 of a
year. She also noted that people visit for much longer periods of times over
the weekends (Friday-Sunday). She recalled how much the Planning Commission
struggled with determining how long things like fireworks could occur. The time
for Ms. Underwood’s display exceeds what would have been permitted in the
past. Trustee Eyster would like to seek confirmation on all the holidays that
have a seasonal display on Ms. Underwood’s Damon Rd. residence and a
calculation of the amount of days that each is available for public display/
drive-by. She noted that this situation should follow the standard Township
process. This gives residents who have direct exposure an opportunity to
express their feelings. Trustee Eyster reasoned that if you permit something to
occur – then you will have to allow it for everyone. This has more implications
than just one holiday display.
Trustee Duffy noted that there are other sizable displays in the area. He
questioned if those neighbors minded? He feels as though there needs to be less
oversight. Residents should be able to do what they want on their property.
Supervisor Bloomquist noted agreement, except when it affects one’s neighbors.
She stated that it is the reason why the Township has ordinances in general. It
is a balance between protecting those who want to do what they want and
protecting the rights of neighbors to enjoy their property as well. Supervisor
Bloomquist reiterated that Ms. Underwood needs to reach out to her neighbors,
propose a solution, and see if it is sufficient. Unfortunately, the proposed
changes were not discussed after the December 21,2021 letter was received. The
Township could have worked with the compromise had a decision been reached with
neighbors prior to now.
Supervisor Bloomquist noted that her next steps would include a follow-up
communication to Ms. Underwood that included another invitation to work with
the Township. The communication would also include the suggestion of reaching
out to her neighbors. She would also be seeking clarification from Ingham
County Road Department about the turn-around at the end of Damon Road to
determine if it is considered a cul-de-sac or part of a private drive.
Brenda Seelman – Clark Schaefer Hackett CPAs and Advisors – Presented a review
of the Williamstown Township Audit for the fiscal year ending March 31, 2022.
She noted that their report format changed this year and audit opinions are now
listed first. Ms. Seelman provided highlights of the report with regards to the
Township’s current revenue and expenditures, as well as the capital assets and
general fund balance. Additionally, she provided a summary of the Township’s
net position, which has seen an overall increase. She reported that due to the
implementations of last year’s recommendations, there are no recommendations
for this year.
Sgt. McCready for Chief Plaga – Meridian Township Police – Sgt. McCready
reviewed the quarterly report in comparison to this time last year. He
highlighted current and upcoming projects for the Meridian Township Police
Department including the Beard Fundraiser for charitable organizations,
Halloween Open House on 10/29, and the Citizens’ Academy. Williamstown Township
currently does not have any residents enrolled. The Youth Academy will take
place in February 2023. This event is for high school students who are
interested in law enforcement. He encouraged anyone in high school, with an
interest, to enroll. Sgt. McCready also updated the Board on department
staffing. Recently two officers completed the field training program and two
more have just begun. There are five officers currently in the Police Academy
who will then have to go into the field training program. The department has
recently reevaluated its pay structure to attract more people and hires, as
well retain them. They are authorized for 41 officers, and they are making
strides to get there.
Planning Commission (PC) Report – Chair Eidt shared a summary of the October
5th Planning Commission Meeting. The second public hearing on Event Barns was
held. Due to the federal case on the Peninsula Wineries, it was referred back
to the subcommittee where modifications were considered around alcohol, music,
event frequency and capacity. Deliberation on the modifications of the proposed
Event Barn draft ordinance language will occur at the November 2nd PC Meeting.
The Commission considered proposed updates to the Home Occupation Ordinance
regarding Telecommunications. After the discussion, the topic was tabled.
Further clarification and direction from the Board will be sought for future
inclusion or not. Proposed Medical Marijuana, under the Home Occupation
Ordinance, was also reviewed. McKenna will provide updated recommendations
based on the discussion held.. A Public Hearing on Farm Signs on Residential
Property was called. A Subcommittee for Capital Improvement Planning was
established and will work to make recommendations to the PC and Board. A
November 2nd PC Meeting was scheduled due to the Thanksgiving holiday. A second
subcommittee was created to determine the slate of officers for the upcoming
year. Board discussion ensued with Chair Eidt around implications of the
Peninsula Wineries case and telecommunications.
Review of September 14, 2022 Board Meeting Minutes – No action taken. Action
will be taken at the November 16 th Board Meeting.
ACTION ITEMS
Police Assessment Roll
Clerk Cleveland moved the Williamstown Township Board approve amending
Resolution 2022-98, confirming the 2022 Special Assessment Roll for Police
Protection within the Township with the Special Assessment Roll total from
$214,450 to $214,350 with the removal of parcel # 33-03-03-34-452-008.   
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion:
There was confirmation of the rate charge for residential and commercial
property.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist,
and Trustee Eyster. 
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Planning Commission Reappointments
Trustee Steinberg moved the Township Board approve the reappointment of Ron
Poth and Donna Tocarchick to serve on the planning commission with terms
expiring September 2025.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: Supervisor Bloomquist indicated that both commissioners expressed a
desire to be reappointed. It was noted that these are three-year appointments
for renewal. Their professional qualities, willingness to serve, learn, and
participate, as well as their commitment and dedication to the township were
shared by Chairman Eidt. Clerk Cleveland noted the Township’s continued
adherence to its Ethics Policy and the continued willingness of commissioners,
committee members, and elected officials to abide by it.
Motion Passed. 
Budget Amendments
Trustee Steinberg moved the Board approve the following budget amendments for
the 2022-2023 budget.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10840_10774x5450.jpg]
 
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: Supervisor Bloomquist reviewed transfers coming out of fund equity.
She noted that it will increase the budget for this year and will show up in
next year’s audit as expenses. Trustee Eyster requested that the Board review
and update the language in Policy 12 now that Township has the investment in
Meadowdale Rd. She noted it will be easier to execute the changes next year.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster,
and Clerk Cleveland. 
Nays: None
Motion Passed. 
Software Leasing
Trustee Duffy moved the Township Board approve the leasing of Mircrosoft Office
for the office to replace the purchasing option now in place at an initial cost
of $100.00 per computer.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: none
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster,
and Clerk Cleveland. 
Nays: None
Motion Passed. 
DISCUSSION ITEMS
Recycling Grant – Supervisor Bloomquist shared that the Township received the
grant. The contract should be received in the next few weeks and more
information should be available. It will be on the November Board Agenda. At
that time, discussion can occur regarding determinations for moving forward. It
was noted that this initiative has been on the Board’s radar for a very long
time and many residents will be pleased.
Strategic Planning Workshop – Supervisor Bloomquist reminded the Board of its
Strategic Planning decision to work with Dr. Bender for a 6-month review. Dates
were considered and discussion ensued. It was stressed that the Township
Strategic Plan should inform the budget, as well as the work of the Capital
Improvement Plan (when completed). Therefore, the October 19th Budget Workshop
will be cancelled and rescheduled after the work with Dr. Bender. In addition,
the hour work session before the November Board Meeting will also be cancelled.
The Board will tentatively plan for a daytime session on December 7 at a cost
of $2500 plus travel (split between 3 communities) for Dr. Bender’s services.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA – No new report due to meeting schedule.
Parks and Recreation Committee – Harvest Festival is ready to be hosted. It
will include a race, christening the forest, family activities, music, and
food. It was noted that there was great advertising ahead of this event.
Environmental Committee/Forestry Grant – Trustee Eyster extended her
appreciation on the amount of help received on this grant. Over 100 people/
residents came out to the park and gave of their time over the course of the
project. The youngest volunteer was 2 years old and the oldest was 82. The DNR
was very impressed by the final report for the Forest Project and noted that it
was very well done. The Board complimented Trustee Eyster on her efforts on the
grant and at the park.
Elections – Clerk Cleveland shared that the Deputy Treasurer and Deputy Clerk
have been working to disseminate ballots. She continues to work to determine if
new legislation regarding Public Act 195 2022 has implications for Williamstown
Township’s upcoming November Election. If so, it would begin October 20th. It
may have implications for the Township for future elections. Clerk Cleveland
also addressed Proposal 2 and noted that there are good things and there are
aspects of concern to be considered with regards to elections. She also shared
that she had the opportunity to speak to the Williamston Senior Center and was
able to provide a great deal of good election information to its membership.
Ingham County Chapter of the Michigan Township Association – This group will be
meeting on Wednesday, October 26, at the Gene Wrigglesworth Training Center at
630 Cedar St. for a tour of the new jail. Tours will begin at 5pm and last
approximately 45 minutes. Supervisor Bloomquist will send more information out
to the Board Members.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 9:42 PM
Rosemary Harmon, Haslett: Ms. Harmon’s family has visited the Seasonal Light
Display with her family. They will often go on a busy weekend night but wait
until later after the congestion has lessened. She stressed that the display is
for both young kids and adults and that the week that you will see up to 350
cars is the week leading up to Christmas. Ms. Harmon noted that some neighbors
are difficult to engage in conversation with or complain in any neighborhood
because some people are just that way. Currently, at this time in our country,
this was a gesture that meant a great deal to people. She emphasized that
social media comments are a part of society, and it has removed personal
interaction. She is hopeful that it can be worked out with the neighbors
because the display brings them joy.
Jerry Eidt, Planning Commission Chair/Resident 4115 Vanneter Rd: Chair Eidt
suggested referring Ms. Underwood to the Williamstown Zoning Board of Appeals
(ZBA) to assist with an amicable resolution. The ZBA would act as the
intermediary between the neighbors and Ms. Underwood. Mr. Eidt acknowledged the
passion and outpouring shared by local and neighboring residents and felt
hopeful that there was something the ZBA could do. He suggested including this
invitation in Supervisor Bloomquist’s letter and explaining the process to make
this happen. He reminded the Board that there are steps in place to ensure
fairness. Additionally, Chair Eidt shared he was upset at the mean comments
directed at Supervisor Bloomquist recently. He noted that she is a giving,
public servant and felt badly at the direction of the letter shared this
evening.
Ron Poth, Planning Commissioner/4075 N. Williamston Rd.: Mr. Poth supports Mr.
Eidt’s sentiments. He noted that the Board needs to make the first step
forward. This evening’s Public Comments were not the way to resolve this. Ms.
Underwood had waited for 10 ½ months before approaching the Township
Supervisor. He encouraged Supervisor Bloomquist to write another letter to Ms.
Underwood encouraging her to work with the Damon Rd. neighbors and consider of
next steps.
Closed at 9:58 PM
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Clerk Cleveland
Meeting adjourned at 10:00 p.m.
Minutes approved by:
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10859.bmp]
November 16, 2022
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
November 16, 2022
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 7:00
p.m. on November 16, 2022. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order,
reviewed the agenda, and led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee
Creagh, Trustee Duffy, and Trustee Steinberg.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:01 PM
None.
Closed at 7:02 PM
Consent Agenda
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the minutes of the September 14 & October 12, 2022 Board Meetings
General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 31136-31158, for a total
of $329,662.45. Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 31170-31173, for a
total of $1,698.16.
General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 31159-31169, for a
total of $3,695.92 and Accounts Payable for Approval #2, check number 31174-
31182, for a total of $11,241.29.
October Payroll Paid check numbers 51012-51022 and EFTs 765-771, for a total of
$15,915.63 (phys. check amount), and Direct Deposit DD248-274, for a total of
$22,588.97.
Revenue and Expenditure report ending October 31, 2022.
GL Activity Report
Building Inspection Report
September and October Treasurer’s Report
Police Report
Draft PC minutes
Seconded by Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: It was stated that the Township received high marks for their
recent audit. It was suggested that this information be included in the minutes
moving forward. A correction to the upcoming Board meeting date from "November
15th" to "November 16th" was made on page 4 under "Review of September 14, 2022
Board Meeting Minutes" of the October 12, 2022 Board meeting minutes.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy,
Trustee Steinberg, and Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Planning Commission (PC) Report – Chair Eidt shared a summary of the November
2nd Planning Commission Meeting. He noted that it was rescheduled from earlier
in the month, in light of the Thanksgiving holiday. He shared that there was no
opposition from residents to final drafts of Farm Signs on Residential Property
and Event Barns. Telecommuting, under the Home-Based Occupations, will not be
considered any further. Revisions for the text amendments regarding Medical
Marijuana was postponed to the January meeting. Retaining the current slate of
officers was approved, as was the Public Hearing for Home-based child care
providers. Revisions to current language to solar and wind energy regulations
in the Zoning Ordinance is under review.
ACTION ITEMS
Red Cedar Antiques – Demolition Award
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board accept the Bid submitted
by Michigan Demolition in the amount of $60,000 leaving the concrete parking
area in place.
Seconded by: Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: Clarification and/or confirmation was sought on the discrepancy
between the bids, the thoroughness of the demolition services, updates on
service-provider’s liability insurance, as well as contractual dates. It was
noted that the cost of the project will be reflected on the owner’s tax bill.
Communication with the owner has occurred, via Supervisor Bloomquist,
throughout each step of the process. The property owner will be notified of
action taken at this (November) Board Meeting.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg,
Supervisor Bloomquist, and Clerk Cleveland.  
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Recycling Grant Contract
The Grant Contract was not received in time for the Board Meeting. Supervisor
Bloomquist was informed that it should be ready to be shared in the next few
weeks.
Blight Ordinance
Trustee Steinberg moved the Township Board move forward with McKenna Associates
review of the Township Blight Ordinance for clarification and update
recommendations in an amount not to exceed $3,500.00.
Seconded by: Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: It was noted that discrepancies have developed since the
establishing of this Ordinance in 2014. The Board discussed changing the title
from Blight to Nuisance Ordinance. It was agreed that this term makes an
important distinction.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist,
Clerk Cleveland, and Treasurer Cutshaw. 
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
DISCUSSION ITEMS  
Event Barn Regulations – The Board reviewed the draft ordinance and commended
the work of the Planning Commission regarding Event Barn regulations. They
noted that the draft is very thorough and well done. Chair Eidt commented that
the hearings and resident input provided excellent feedback for consideration.
Additionally, the committee field trips to established event barns in
neighboring townships also informed the process, solutions, and decisions. The
Board considered questions around the review process that owners will
experience as they work towards a permanent special use permit, enforcement of
ordinance and penalties if the permit is violated, as well as considerations
should the property owners sell. It was noted that impact to neighbors was
strongly considered in informing the final draft. Action will be taken at
December Board meeting.
Farm Sign Regulations – Trustee Creagh noted that conversations ensued at the
Planning Commission level regarding sign size and increasing it so that it can
be seen from the road. Action will be taken at the December Board Meeting.
Strategic Planning Workshop – This work will take place from 9:00am to 1:00pm
on December 7 th at the Township Hall. Supervisor Bloomquist will resend the
Strategic Plan to Board Members ahead of the meeting.
Budget Review – Supervisor Bloomquist shared recommendations for the 2022-23
Budget to be discussed at the December Board Meeting. She would like to add GL
numbers for better tracking to fully understand time and weekly/monthly
commitments to current and continuous projects. Treasurer Cutshaw noted that it
was an ideal time to add GL numbers with the implementation of the new Chart of
Accounts.
DNR Spark Grant – Supervisor Bloomquist shared information about this grant
opportunity and that it could be a resource to continue the work on the Red
Cedar Water Trail. The Board is in support of seeking grant funds to support
this initiative. Supervisor Bloomquist will have a draft application for
approval at the December Board Meeting.
Safe Routes to School – Supervisor Bloomquist provided a formal update of this
initiative. Walking audits have been completed and proposed routes have been
reviewed. Approximately 30 participants participated in the process. The plan
currently rests with MSU Engineering and Michigan Fitness who will finalize
draft proposals that will be presented to the community for review and
feedback. The cost to the Township would approximately $8,000 and would be
utilized for engineering.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA – Trustee Duffy reported highlights from the October Meeting. The Public
Hearing for the 2023 budget was set. He noted that NIESA approved the training
policy that provides pay for trainees, including overtime (if accrued).
Treasurer Cutshaw reported highlights from the November Meeting. NEISA received
and discussed an RFP from Ingham Township for emergency assistance and tours
were given of the new ambulances.
Parks and Recreation Committee – Trustee Steinberg noted that the Harvest
Festival was a success. He commended the efforts of Township employees Gwen
Brandon and Kerri Danstrom for this event. There is support for this to be held
annually. Supervisor Bloomquist shared that a survey on the park driveway/road
was recently completed and will provide the Board an opportunity to review
options for future planning.
Elections – Clerk Cleveland reported that overall things went well. Resident
feedback has been positive. There was 72.89% voter turn-out between the two
precincts. The Absentee Ballot Counting Board moved to Forster Woods, at St.
Katherine’s, for the General Election. The feedback on this change was very
positive. Additionally, the use of a second tabulator was immensely helpful to
the AV Board, as well as the increase in workers from 4 to 6 election
inspectors. Clerk Cleveland noted a tabulator issue occurred at Precinct 2 that
lasted approximately 2.5 hours on Election Day. It was determined that the
mechanical issue was caused by a voter using a gel pen on their ballot instead
of the markers provided in the voting booth. Clerk Cleveland continues to stay
updated on the legislative changes.
Roads – Supervisor Bloomquist noted that, aside from the projects that had to
be delayed, all other road projects have been completed for 2022. This included
the new four-way stop at Sherwood and Zimmer. She reminded the Board that the
2022 costs are significant and will draw down Township funds for road
improvements. She reported that the Pebblebrook neighborhood has shared a
letter of interest and is currently seeking neighborhood signatures for future
road improvements.
ICC-MTA – Supervisor Bloomquist reminded the Board of a Holiday gathering in
early December for the Ingham County Chapter of the Michigan Township
Association (ICC-MTA). She encouraged attendance, as it provides an opportunity
to meet and interact with fellow Boards and Townships. RSVP by December 1.
Resident Correspondence for Damon Road – Supervisor Bloomquist provided the
board updated copies of the letters exchanged around the Holiday light display
on Damon Road. It was confirmed that there are 12 homes on Damon Rd.. 
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:52 PM
Jerry Eidt, Planning Commission Chair/Resident 4115 Vanneter Rd.: Mr. Eidt
commented on working as an Election Inspector in the 2022 General Election. He
commended the competence of the election staff and noted the level of
professionalism, intentionality, and desire to run a safe and successful
election.
Closed at 8:55 PM
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Clerk Cleveland
Meeting adjourned at 8:56 p.m.
Minutes approved by:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10876.jpg]
 
December 7, 2022
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
December 7, 2022 Strategic Planning Session
Call to Order
Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order at 9:05 am.
Present:
Township Board: Supervisor Bloomquist, Clerk Cleveland, Trustee Creagh,
Treasurer Cutshaw, and Trustee Steinberg.
Township Staff: Julie Bellinger, Gwen Chirico-Brandon, and Jim Howard.
Facilitator: Dr. Lewis Bender
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
No public attended.
Supervisor Bloomquist made opening comments and Dr. Bender gave an overview of
the process as well as outlined current trends happening at the township level.
He reviewed the accomplishments of the Board and staff over the past several
months and sought clarification as needed.
Participants were divided into breakout pairs who discussed the current state
of each goal and what is needed going forward. Each group shared these with the
group.
Dr. Bender commended the amount of work that has been accomplished thus far. He
also cautioned the Board about keeping up with ongoing work and projects as a
small, part-time staff and asked the Board to consider what it will take to
keep up this pace.
No decisions were made during this process.
Adjournment
The strategic planning session was adjourned at 1:10 p.m.
Minutes approved by:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10888.jpg]
 
December 14, 2022
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
December 14, 2022
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 7:00
p.m. on December 14, 2022. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order,
reviewed the agenda, and led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee
Creagh, Trustee Duffy, *Trustee Eyster, and Trustee Steinberg.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:05 PM
None.
Closed at 7:05 PM
Consent Agenda
Trustee Steinberg moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the minutes of the November 16 th Board meeting and December 7 th
Strategic Planning Workshop.
General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 31183-31194, for a total
of $5,671.34. Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 31210-31213, for a total
of $1,574.63.
General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 31195-31209, for a
total of $18,794.43 and Accounts Payable for Approval #2, check number 31214-
31221, for a total of $9,211.52.
November Payroll Paid check numbers 51023-51053 and EFTs 772-773, for a total
of $12,642.06 (phys. check amount), and Direct Deposit DD275-310, for a total
of $26,796.45.
Revenue and Expenditure report ending November 30, 2022.
GL Activity Report
Building Inspection Report
Police Report
November Treasurer’s Report
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: It was noted that the November Payroll included the November 8 th
Election.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy,
Trustee Steinberg, and Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
ACTION ITEMS
Branch School Use Policy
Trustee Creagh moved to table the Branch School Use Policy until the January
Board Meeting.
Seconded by: Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: The Board confirmed that outside organizations that might use
Branch School would not receive a key and would need to provide Liability
Insurance. The number of people that may be in the building, in accordance with
the Fire Code, will be confirmed upon the upcoming revisions to Branch School
Use Policy. 
Motion Passed 6-0.
*Trustee Eyster arrived at 7:24pm.
Zoning Ordinance Amendments – Farm Sign Regulations
Trustee Creagh moved the Board adopt the Planning Commission’s recommended text
amendments to Section 7 of the Zoning Ordinance to allow for permanent farm
signs in the Township.
Seconded by: Clerk Cleveland
Discussion: None
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg,
Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, and Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Zoning Ordinance Amendments - Event Barn Regulations
Trustee Creagh moved the Board adopt the Planning Commission’s recommended
amendments to the Zoning Ordinance to permit Event Barns (Section 8.02(SS))
within the AG-SF and AG-C districts with amended language to include item “e.”
added to #25 to add delineation of open space on the site plan.
Seconded by: Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: Supervisor Bloomquist discussed Minimum Open Space and the
Additional Site Plan standards in Section 3. She noted that she would like to
add item “e.” to #25 to ensure that open space is noted and included in the
application. Clerk Cleveland sought clarification on Section 7 - #10 regarding
“stop work” orders. Confirmation on alcoholic beverage licensing acquisition
was also sought in Section 3 - #11.
Clerk Cleveland moved to have item “e.” added to #25 to add delineation of open
space on the site plan.
Seconded by: Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: None.
Motion Passed 7-0.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist,
Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
DNR Spark Grant
Supervisor Bloomquist noted that the Township would not be moving forward with
a grant proposal at this time due to Ingham County Road Commission and Michigan
Department of Transportation future projects that will be occurring at the Red
Cedar Bridge location. Tentative completion date is in 2024. There may future
opportunities for collaboration and grant seeking once the construction and
planning is underway.
Election Security Grant
Trustee Steinberg moved the Township Board move forward with Central Security
for cameras at the Township Hall and submittal of the Michigan Department of
State 2022 Election Security Grant for reimbursement.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: The Board sought clarification on any additional or ongoing charges
that might occur moving forward with Central Security; there would not be any.
Because the Township has two precincts, the Election Security Grant ($1,500 per
precinct) would cover the expenditure. Training is included in the cost. In
addition, it is a company Williamstown Township has positive experiences with.
It was noted that the addition of cameras could assist in increasing residents’
confidence in secure elections and exemplify the Township’s due diligence to
this end.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster,
Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, and Trustee Creagh. 
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Budget Amendments
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Board approve the following budget amendments for
the 2022-2023 budgets.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10895_9308x8187.jpg]
 
Seconded by: Clerk Cleveland
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk
Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, and Trustee Duffy.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Board of Appeals Appointments
Clerk Cleveland moved the Township Board approve the re-appointment of Dan
Kraft, Kurt Guter, Jill Fewer Kosen, and Jerry Eidt to the Zoning Board of
Appeals with terms expiring September 2025.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: None.
Motion Passed 7-0.
Compensation Committee Appointments
Trustee Creagh moved the Township Board approve the appointments of David
Foran, Everett Zack, and Bruce Wiggington to the Compensation Commission with
terms expiring 12/5/24, 12/5/26, and 12/5/27 respectively.
Seconded by: Trustee Duffy
Discussion: None.
Motion Passed 7-0.
Board of Review Appointments
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Township Board approve the re-appointment of
Michael Rice, Jerry Eidt, and Brian Johnston to the Board of Review and Lisa
Fletcher as an alternate with terms expiring 1/1/25.
Seconded by: Trustee Duffy
Discussion: None.
Motion Passed 7-0.
Cemetery Plot Repurchase
Trustee Duffy moved the Township Board approve the plot repurchase from Brian
Johnston in the amount of $500.00.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster.
Discussion: In the future, Cemetery Plot Repurchases will be included as part
of the Consent Agenda.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg,
Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, and Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
DISCUSSION ITEMS  
Strategic Planning Workshop – The Board valued Dr. Bender’s facilitation. A
follow-up is recommended in six months.
Budget Review – The Board discussed the State recommended Admin Fee as part of
tax collection. It is the State’s way of ensuring the Township is covering
their funding to cover the expenses of assessing and tax collecting. The
Township does not currently collect the admin fee which is typically 1%.
Special Assessments would not be included. Discussion and questions ensued. The
upcoming Assessing Department Audit could inform this consideration.
Recommendations on staff wages for 2023-2024 were shared. The Board encouraged
Supervisor Bloomquist to move forward with the budget as outlined. She will be
meeting with the various Township Commissions, Committees, and Departments in
the coming weeks. Supervisor Bloomquist will finalize the 2023-2024 Budget and
bring it back to the Board in January.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA – Trustee Duffy shared that the NIESA Board met on Dec 8 th . They
finalized their Training Policy, continued to make progress on the service
agreement language with the Webberville DDA, and worked through the budget
amendments.  
Parks and Recreation Committee – Trustee Steinberg and Supervisor Bloomquist
shared that surveyor’s equipment is in the park as engineering plans for the
park driveway and parking lot continue to be drafted. Wildtype Native Plants
and Ecological Services did some clearing of invasive plants and treated those
roots to prevent future growth.
Elections – Clerk Cleveland noted that Ingham County completed a recount of
votes for Proposals 2 and 3. The organization that signed the petition for the
recount will pay for most of it. The taxpayers will be responsible for
approximately $8200 in Ingham County. State Certification of the General
Election should be occurring soon.
Roads – Supervisor Bloomquist shared points from her recent meeting with Ingham
County Road Commission and Michigan Department of Transportation (MDOT). She
discussed the recent removal of township road signage after MDOT’s road work
and asked that they be reinstated. She inquired about the original agreement
with MDOT to maintain the bike lanes on Grand River to ensure these were being
properly cared for. The Williamstown Township Road Committee will need to
assemble and determine recommendations for 2023 ahead of the January Ingham
County Road Commission’s Meeting.
Taxes – Treasurer Cutshaw noted that the Township Office will have extended
hours on Wednesday, December 28 th from 9:00am to 7:00pm for residents who
would like to come in to make their Winter tax payment.
Supervisor Updates – Supervisor Bloomquist encouraged Board participation in
the upcoming Michigan Township Association and Capital Conferences. She has
still not received a contract from the State for the Recycling Grant. The Chart
of Accounts remains in development with the goal to have it in place at the
beginning of the next fiscal year. Event planning for the upcoming New Year is
underway including more events at Branch School, a possible Barn Tour for
cyclists, a Photography Class, and the Art Tour to name a few.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 9:16 PM
None.
Closed at 9:16 PM
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Clerk Cleveland
Meeting adjourned at 9:17 PM
Minutes approved by:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10908.jpg]
 
2023 Meeting Minutes
January 11, 2023
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
January 11, 2023
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 7:00
p.m. on January 11, 2023. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order,
reviewed the agenda, and led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee
Duffy, and Trustee Steinberg.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:02 PM
None.
Closed at 7:02 PM
Consent Agenda
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the minutes of the December 14,2022 Board meeting
General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 31222-31228, for a total
of $5,545.21. Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 31236-31240, for a total
of $2,391.88.
General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 31229-31235, for a
total of $4,508.14 and Accounts Payable for Approval #2, check number 31241-
31250, for a total of $1,688.65.
Police Fund Accounts Payable Police Paid #1, check number 1131, for a total of
$40,202.91.
December 2022 Payroll Paid check numbers 51054-51061 and EFTs 774-776, for a
total of $13,989.36 (phys. check amount), and Direct Deposit DD311-338, for a
total of $21,225.59.
Revenue and Expenditure report ending December 31, 2022
GL Activity Report
Building Inspection Report
Police Report
December Treasurer’s Report
Seconded by Clerk Cleveland
Discussion: None
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, and
Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Meridian Township Police Report – Chief Plaga shared the Williamstown
Township Quarterly Police Report thru December 2022. He shared that five new
police officers graduated in December and noted it will continue to take an
additional four to five months to fully train these new hires. He also shared
that Meridian Township Police still has four openings. It is their goal to be
fully staffed by April 2024. Discussion ensued regarding car/deer accidents and
culling deer populations as a solution to reduce these encounters. Supervisor
Bloomquist noted that residents have expressed interest in this process. Chief
Plaga suggested studying and using the data on car/deer accidents in
Williamstown Township as a consideration factor. He noted that public support
is critical to the success of initiatives such as these.
ACTION ITEMS
Branch School Use Policy
Trustee Duffy moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Branch School
Use Policy with changes as presented.
Seconded by: Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: The Board discussed the value of providing sample lesson plans for
teachers who might be considering this educational opportunity. Supervisor
Bloomquist will also confirm the capacity allowed in Branch School. NIESA Fire
Chief Yanz will be advising the final number. 
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, and
Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Poverty Guidelines Resolution
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board adopt Resolution #97-
2023 Poverty Exemption Guidelines for 2023.
Seconded by: Clerk Cleveland
Discussion: Supervisor Bloomquist reviewed how these guidelines and mulitpliers
inform the determination process for residents.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, and
Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Streaming Policy
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Township Board adopt the Streaming
Policy as presented.
Seconded by: Trustee Duffy
Discussion: None
Motion Passed.
Budget Amendments
Trustee Steinberg moved the Board approve the following budget amendments for
the 2022-2023 budget.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10913_10819x6316.jpg]
 
Seconded by: Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: None
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Clerk Cleveland,
and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Safe Routes to School
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Township Board approve the initial payment of $3000
for the project work performed by MSU for the Safe Routes to School design
development.
Seconded by: Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: Supervisor Bloomquist noted that the language in the documents will
be updated to reflect the partnership between the City of Williamston,
Williamstown Township, and Williamston Community Schools on this initiative. 
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer
Cutshaw, and Trustee Duffy.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
DISCUSSION ITEMS  
Budget Review  – Supervisor Bloomquist presented the current proposed budget
for 2023. She noted that there may be some minor updates as more information is
gained on the cost estimates of updating the Township Master Plan and if it is
determined that it will be a joint effort with the City of Williamston and
Wheatfield Township. Clerk Cleveland cautioned that the Election Budget may be
subject to adjustments due to the recent passage of Proposal 2 and funding
still yet to be determined in light of the upcoming election process changes.
As insights are gained in the weeks to come, the Supervisor will be sharing
additional information with the Board in an Excel spreadsheet.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA – Trustee Duffy noted that the NIESA Board has not met this month. The
meeting will occur after the Township Board meets.
Parks and Recreation Committee – Trustee Steinberg noted that the committee
will be scheduling a Parks and Recreation Meeting in the near future to plan
for 2023. Supervisor Bloomquist shared updates on the preliminary engineering
designs for the Park Drive.
Elections – Clerk Cleveland shared that the Bureau of Elections audit
determinations are scheduled to be made on January 12, 2023.
Roads – Supervisor Bloomquist will be meeting with the Ingham County Road
Department to determine recommendations.  
Supervisor Updates – Assessment notices will go out at the end of February. 
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:12 PM
None.
Closed at 8:12 PM
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Clerk Cleveland
Meeting adjourned at 8:13 PM
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10930.jpg]
February 8, 2023
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
February 8, 2023
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 7:00
p.m. on February 8, 2023. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order,
reviewed the agenda, and led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Clerk Cleveland, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy,
Trustee Eyster, and Trustee Steinberg.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:02 PM
None.
Closed at 7:02 PM
Consent Agenda
Trustee Steinberg moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the minutes of the January 11, 2023 Board meeting
General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 31251-31261, for a total
of $7,653.26. Accounts Payable Paid #2, check number 31272, for a total of
$598.26.
General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 31262-31271, for a
total of $800,245.04 and Accounts Payable for Approval #2, check number 31273-
31279, for a total of $8,808.62.
January 2023 Payroll Paid check numbers 51062-51070 and EFTs 777-779, for a
total of $7,587.47 (phys. check amount), and Direct Deposit DD339-366, for a
total of $20,703.13.
Revenue and Expenditure report ending January 31, 2023
GL Activity Report
Building Inspection Report
Police Report
Planning Commission Draft Meeting Minutes for January 25, 2023
January Treasurer’s Report
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: Clerk Cleveland noted that some checks for this month’s Payroll
were written on February 1 st , however they reflect January Payroll.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee
Steinberg, and Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Planning Commission Report – Chair Eidt shared a summary of the January 25 th
Planning Commission Meeting. A public hearing for Family and Group Child Care
Homes was held. Updates to the ordinance were made and recommended for board
approval to comply with the new law with regard to capacity increases. The
Commission reviewed recent updates to the Home Occupations: Medical Marijuana
Ordinance. A public hearing is scheduled for the March 22, 2023 meeting.
Discussions began and will continue on proposed updates to solar and wind
energy systems in an effort to comply with industry standards. Mr. Chris
Doozan, planning consultant, is preparing updated ordinance language to review
at the next Planning Commission Meeting in March.
ACTION ITEMS
Childcare Amendments
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the recommended
Child Care amendments to the Zoning Ordinance.
Seconded by: Clerk Cleveland
Discussion: None
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg,
Supervisor Bloomquist, and Trustee Eyster.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Engage Williamstown Policies
Clerk Cleveland moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Privacy
Policy and Moderation Policy for Engage Williamstown with the suggested edits.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: Minor revisions to language and punctuation were suggested.
Roll Call Vote:
Aye: Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist,
Trustee Eyster, and Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Recycling Grant Contract and Site Plan
Trustee Duffy moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Grant Contract
with the State of Michigan for the development of the permanent collection
site.
Seconded by: Trustee Steinberg 
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster,
Clerk Cleveland, and Trustee Creagh.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Ingham County Roads 2023 Projects
Trustee Eyster moved the Township Board approve the Road Committees following
recommendations:
Barry- Williamston to Lounsbury: HMA, shoulders, culvert, trees, ditch and chip
seal (2024)
Milton- Williamston to Locke: HMA, shoulders, culvert, trees, ditch and chip
seal (2024)
Wilgus- Williamston to Locke: Crush and Shape, culvert, trees, ditch, and
gravel
Hart- Repair/replace damaged culvert.
At a cost not to exceed $190,000
Seconded by: Trustee Creagh 
Discussion: None
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk
Cleveland, Trustee Creagh, and Trustee Duffy.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Budget Amendments
Trustee Creagh moved the Board approve the following budget amendments for the
2022-2023 budget.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10939_9246x8641.jpg] 
Seconded by: Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: None
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Trustee Creagh,
Trustee Duffy, and Trustee Steinberg.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Budget and Police Assessment Public Hearings
Trustee Creagh moved the Township Board schedule the Public Hearing for the
2023 Police Assessment Roll to reflect a $10 residential and $15 commercial
reduction in fees and the 2023-24 draft budget on Wednesday March 1st at 7:00
pm.
Seconded by: Clerk Cleveland
Discussion: The Board revisited the adoption of Administration Fees. The Board
requested further information on the cost covered by the admin fee. The
increased fund balance would be divided by the roads and special projects per
Policy 12. The collection is part of the assessing audit this year. The Board
would like to revisit this issue after the audit is completed.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee
Steinberg, and Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
DISCUSSION ITEMS  
Ingham County Parks Grant – Supervisor Bloomquist shared information on the
2023 Ingham County Trails and Park Millage Grant Program to help fund proposed
Red Cedar River projects. The Board is supportive of the Supervisor’s efforts
in moving forward in the grant application process.
Nuisance Ordinance Draft Revisions – The Board requested more time to review
the draft. Supervisor Bloomquist requested the Board provide any comments to
her by the March 8th meeting.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA – Trustee Duffy shared that NIESA approved their training policy at their
January meeting and continues to address their planning with the Webberville
DDA. He will inquire about NIESA providing Community CPR Training opportunities
at their next meeting.
Parks and Recreation Committee – Trustee Steinberg shared the committee is
trying to recruit membership. Harvest Festival plans will be determined by the
end of March. Supervisor Bloomquist received the Site Improvement Plan for the
Community Park Driveway and shared it with the Board. It includes extended
parking to the north and addresses the drainage issues.
Elections – Clerk Cleveland updated the Board on the outcomes of the recent
procedural county audit of Williamstown Township Precinct 2 for the 2022
General Election. She noted that we will not have a May election. Additionally,
with the recent passage of Proposal 2022-2, Clerk Cleveland shared that Bureau
of Elections and the state legislature are still in the process of determining
future election costs and procedural changes.
Cemetery – Supervisor Bloomquist updated the Board on the recent Cemetery Board
meeting regarding the proposed amended ordinance language for the resale of
green burial sites.
Supervisor Updates – Supervisor Bloomquist reminded board members of the
upcoming informational session on Wind and Solar Energy for members of the
Ingham County Chapter of the Michigan Townships Association, as well as the
Michigan Townships Association Capital Conference.
(Trustee Duffy left the meeting at 8:45pm)
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:54 PM
Jerry Eidt, Planning Commission Chair/Resident 4115 Vanneter Rd.: Mr. Eidt
expressed appreciation for Trustee Eyster’s efforts and dedication to
Williamstown Township.
Closed at 8:55 PM
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Creagh moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Clerk Cleveland
Meeting adjourned at 8:55 PM
Minutes approved by:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10954.jpg]
March 1, 2023
Williamstown Township
Board of Trustees Meeting Minutes
Public Hearing for Proposed Budget and Police Assessment Roll
March 1, 2023
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees convened the Public Hearings for
the 2023-2024 Budget and Police Assessment Roll. Supervisor Bloomquist called
the meeting to order at 7:00 p.m. reviewed the agenda, and stated the reason
for the meeting/public hearing, and led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Treasurer Cutshaw, Clerk Cleveland, Trustee
Steinberg, and Trustee Creagh. Quorum established.
Public Comment for non-agenda items
Opened at 7:05 pm
None.
Closed at 7:05 pm
Compensation Commission Recommendations
Chair Jim Brinker, presented the Commission’s salary recommendations for
Township Supervisor, Clerk, Treasurer, and Trustees. They recommend a $2,000
increase in the annual pay for the officers (Supervisor, Clerk, and Treasurer)
for the 2023-2024 budget with no additional increase for the 2024-2025 budget,
bringing their annual pay to $33,000. For the Trustees they recommend an
increase in annual pay to $5,750, from $5,400, for the 2023-2024 budget with no
additional increase for the 2024-2025 budget. Their recommendations are that
the per-meeting pay for Trustees stay the same as the current $65 per meeting
after more than two meetings in a month. Supervisor Bloomquist thanked the
Commission members for their service.
Public Hearing for the Police Assessment Roll for 2023-2024
Trustee Creagh moved to open the public hearing for the Police Assessment Roll.
Seconded by Clerk Cleveland.
The Public Hearing for the Police Assessment Roll was opened at 7:10 p.m.
Treasurer Cutshaw moved to close the public hearing.
Seconded by Trustee Steinberg.
Public Hearing for the Police Assessment Roll closed at 7:112 p.m.
Public Hearing for Proposed Township Budget for 2023-2024
Trustee Steinberg moved to open the public hearing on the 2023-2024 Proposed
Budget.
Seconded by Trustee Creagh.
Public Hearing for the Proposed Budget opened at 7:13 p.m.
Treasurer Cutshaw moved to close the public hearing.
Seconded by Trustee Steinberg.
Public Hearing for the Proposed Budget closed at 7:14 p.m.
It is noted that no action has been taken by the Board at this meeting, but the
budget will be considered at the March 8, 2023 Board meeting.
Adjournment
Trustee Creagh moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw
Meeting adjourned at 7:15 p.m.
Minutes approved by:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10994.bmp]
 
March 8, 2023
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
March 8, 2023
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 7:00
p.m. on March 8, 2023. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order,
reviewed the agenda, and led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee
Creagh, Trustee Duffy, and Trustee Steinberg.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:02 PM
None.
Closed at 7:02 PM
Consent Agenda
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the revised minutes of the February 8, 2023 Board meeting and March 1,
2023 Public Hearing
General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 31280-31302, for a total
of $137,441.19. Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 31306-31309, for a
total of $1,285.60.
General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 31303-31305, for a
total of $2,204.89 and Accounts Payable for Approval #2, check numbers 31310-
31315, for a total of $55,317.72.
February 2023 Payroll Paid check numbers 51071-51077 and EFTs 780-781, for a
total of $8,013.22 (phys. check amount), and Direct Deposit DD367-391, for a
total of $21,181.68.
Revenue and Expenditure report ending February 28, 2023
GL Activity Report
Building Inspection Report
Police Report
February Treasurer’s Report
Seconded by Trustee Creagh
Discussion:
Clerk Cleveland noted three errors in the General Ledger Account (GL) codes in
the budget amendment within the February 8 th Board Minutes. The descriptors
and amounts were correct. The following changes were requested to be reflected
in the February 8 th minutes:
101-191-903.000 be corrected to 101-191- 930 .000 (Repairs and Maintenance
Elections)
101-191-704.000 be corrected to 101- 215 -704.000 (Dep Clerk. Recording
Secretary)
101-400-705.000 be corrected to 101-400-705.001 (PC – Wages reimbursable)
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy,
Trustee Steinberg, and Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays:  None
Motion Passed.
ACTION ITEMS
123 Net Metro Act Permit
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the permit
contract with 123 Net.
Seconded by: Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: Discussion ensued regarding funds generated from this permit, the
location of the work within the community, and the possible improvements to
connectivity.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg,
Supervisor Bloomquist, and Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Budget Amendments
Trustee Creagh moved the Board approve the following budget amendment for the
2022-2023 budget.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10961_7287x6989.jpg]
Seconded by: Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: The Board discussed the demolition of the Red Cedar Antiques
building and the recovery of those funds. It was also noted that there were
unanticipated grave marking costs associated with the Green Burial expansion.
Roll Call Vote:
Aye: Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist,
Clerk Cleveland, and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Meeting Dates
Trustee Duffy moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the 2023-24 Meeting
dates as presented.
Seconded by: Clerk Cleveland
Discussion:  None.
Motion Passed.
Police Special Assessment Resolution
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve Resolution 2023-
98, Confirming the 2023 Special Assessment Roll for Police Protection within
the Township with the Special Assessment Roll total of $192,930 reflecting the
decreased assessment of $90.00 per residential unit and $160.00 per Commercial/
Industrial Unit.
Seconded by: Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: The Board noted that the reduction in the township’s cost was
passed on to the residents and businesses this year.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes:  Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Clerk
Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, and Trustee Creagh.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Budget Adoption
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve the 2023-24
Township Budget with a beginning Township Total Fund Equity of $3,173,619.00 as
of 3-3-23, with department appropriations as outlined:
Dept 101- Township Board      $115,863
Dept 171- Supervisor          $64,502
Dept 191- Elections       $43,961
Dept 209 - Assessor       $69,220
Dept 215 - Clerk             $61,605
Dept 247- Board of Review    $3,522
Dept 253 - Treasurer          $68,013
Dept 265 - Building and Grounds      $107,071
Dept 276 - Cemetery          $26,000
Dept 294 - Township Office    $73,510
Dept 371 - Building Inspector       $34,429
Dept 400 - Planning Commission       $91,593
Dept 411 - Zoning Administrator       $10,357
Dept 420 - Zoning Bd of Appeals       $3,869
Dept 441 - Public Works          $46,493
Dept 751 - Recreation          $73,990
Dept 851 - Other Expenses       $500
Dept 890 - Contingency          $40,000
Total general fund appropriations   $994,498
207 - Police fund             $277,976
209 – Cemetery Fund         $269,260
401- Capital Project Fund
Dept. 101 -Township Board      $818,280
Dept. 441 - Public Works       $203,057
Dept. 751 - Recreation          $25,960
Dept 754 - Park House          $34,201
Total 401 fund appropriations    $1,081,498        
Total Fund Appropriations    $2,623,232
Seconded by: Trustee Creagh
Discussion: The Board discussed state revenue sharing estimates, upcoming
election costs, projected drain costs, and the transition to the new Chart of
Accounts.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes:  Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer
Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, and Trustee Duffy.
Nays:  None
Motion Passed.
DISCUSSION ITEMS  
Nuisance Ordinance Draft Revisions – Board Member suggestions have been sent to
Planning Consultant Chris Doozan to be reviewed for inclusion into the draft.
Supervisor Bloomquist will be inviting Mr. Doozan to attend the April Board
Meeting to address concerns and answer questions regarding the updated draft.
Further discussion ensued regarding the storage of building materials at
construction sites, odors and fumes, consideration of project work around
stipulated holidays, as well as the new title of the ordinance.
Neighborhood Road Policy – Supervisor Bloomquist updated the Board on the
recent edits to the road policy. She noted that the main changes included the
removal of definitions of different roads so that the focus could be on
neighborhood roads. The goal was to make it easier for residents to understand.
The Board discussed the petition process outlined by the state, the possibility
of fundamental site issues being determined prior to construction, the
recommendation of a second meeting upon completion of the petition process, as
well as overall improved communication and guidance regarding the special
assessment process. Supervisor Bloomquist will provide a revised policy at the
next meeting.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA – Trustee Duffy shared information from the February meeting. He noted
that current officers were renominated and reappointed to their current
positions. Interim Deputy Chief Don Drent was appointed.
Parks and Recreation Committee - Trustee Steinberg noted that the committee did
not meet within the last month. Consideration is still being given to the
township Harvest Festival. He noted that there will be additional planting of
approximately 68 trees at the park in conjunction with Earth Day.
Elections - Clerk Cleveland shared that the Bureau of Elections presented at
the recent Michigan Township Association 2023 Capital Conference and explained
that there will be an increase in election equipment needs, funding, and human
resources to fulfill the expectations outlined in the recent passage of
Proposal 2022-2. Clerk Cleveland noted that as more is learned and determined,
she will inform the Board. She also updated the Board on upcoming preventative
maintenance and upgrades to the township tabulators and Voter Assist Terminals
that will increase speed, accessibility, and security. 
Cemetery - Supervisor Bloomquist shared that an Eagle Scout project has been
approved for fencing adjacent to the garage at Summit Cemetery. Mapping out of
the Green Burial spaces continues. She noted that residents are expressing
interest in purchasing these spaces. Revisions to costs will be considered at
the next Cemetery Board meeting.
Board of Review Updates - Supervisor Bloomquist updated the Board on the
upcoming dates and times for the Board of Review. Residents are currently
scheduling appointments for review of their assessments.
Property Tax Updates – Treasurer Cutshaw noted that Winter Tax season recently
concluded. She also shared information on the Michigan Homeowners Assistance
Fund (MIHAF). MIHAF helps homeowners by providing funds to prevent homeowner
mortgage delinquencies, defaults, foreclosure, loss of utilities or home energy
services and displacements of homeowners experiencing financial hardship. She
continues to share this information with residents, when applicable, and noted
that two homeowners in Williamstown Township were assisted this year through
this initiative.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:17 PM
None.
Closed at 8:18 PM
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Trustee Steinberg
Meeting adjourned at 8:18 PM
Minutes approved by:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10977.jpg]
 
April 12, 2023
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
April 12, 2023
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 7:00
p.m. on April 12, 2023. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order,
reviewed the agenda, and led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer
Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, and Trustee Steinberg.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:02 PM
None.
Closed at 7:02 PM
Consent Agenda
Trustee Creagh moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the minutes of the March 8, 2023 Board meeting
General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 31316-31329, for a total
of $8,490.20. Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 31343-31345, for a total
of $1,531.70.
General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 31330-31342, for a
total of $9,233.08, Accounts Payable for Approval #2, check number 31346-31350,
for a total of $8,542.47, and Accounts Payable for Approval #3, check numbers
31351-31352, for a total of $5,495.24.
March 2023 Payroll Paid check numbers 51078-51085 and EFT 782, for a total of
$8,338.69 (phys. check amount), and Direct Deposit DD392-420, for a total of
$21,843.53.
Revenue and Expenditure report ending March 31, 2023
GL Activity Report
Building Inspection Report
Police Report
February Treasurer’s Report
Planning Commission minutes
Seconded by Trustee Cutshaw
Discussion: None
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh,
Trustee Steinberg, and Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Police Report – Chief Plaga reported that patrol hours remained consistent for
the first quarter of 2023. He noted that additional service hours were needed
for resident welfare checks, which is typical during the winter months. He
updated the Board on current staffing levels with 35 trained officers. The goal
being 41. Chief Plaga reminded the Board that residents have the option to join
the Capital Area Ingham County Alerts through Everbridge. This allows them to
receive notices and emergency alerts. Supervisor Bloomquist shared resident
interest in hosting a Neighborhood Meeting for the Township. Chief Plaga
welcomed the invitation.
Planning Commission Report – Chair Eidt shared a summary of the March 22 nd
Planning Commission Meeting. He noted a Public Hearing was held for Medical
Marijuana as a Home Occupation and recommended approval of the ordinance to the
Township Board. An initial review of the draft solar and wind energy amendments
was completed. Updates will be reviewed at the next Planning Commission meeting
in May. A Public Hearing was scheduled for May for a Site Plan Review and
Special Use Permit for NCIA Trucking at 3416 Corwin Road. The commission also
reviewed communication procedures.
ACTION ITEMS
Banking Resolution
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Depository
Designation Resolution #116 Amendment.
Seconded by: Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: The Board reviewed the financial institutions that will be current
options for depositories of township funds.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Steinberg,
Supervisor Bloomquist, and Trustee Eyster.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Neighborhood Road Policy
Trustee Creagh moved to approve the amendments to the Neighborhood Road Policy
along with the recommended procedures for neighborhoods with the amendments to
include interested property owners obtaining a map of the neighborhood and
providing flexibility in the time schedule to assure inclusion in the overall
road maintenance efforts.
Seconded by: Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: The Board reviewed the updates, procedures, and timelines in the
policy. Suggestions were shared to ensure transparency, access to information,
and consistency for residents. 
Roll Call Vote:
Aye: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor
Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, and Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Eagle Point Resolution
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve the Eagle Point
Condominium Association Resolution confirming the Association’s responsibility
for their water supply.
Seconded by: Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Aye: Trustee Creagh, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster,
Clerk Cleveland, and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
DISCUSSION ITEMS  
Nuisance Ordinance Review with Chris Doozan - Mr. Doozan reviewed the March
10th Nuisance Abatement letter presented to the Board that addressed questions,
concerns, and updated revisions based on prior feedback from the Board and
residents. Further discussion ensued. Mr. Doozan will update the draft in light
of new recommendations.
Medical Marijuana Amendments - The Board reviewed recommended text amendments
involving Medical Marijuana Facilities under the Home Occupation regulations.
Mr. Doozan answered questions regarding inspections. An updated draft will be
brought back to the Board next month.
Recycling Grant - Supervisor Bloomquist updated the Board on her recent tour of
a drive-thru recycling facility in Laingsburg. Supervisor Bloomquist priced out
a similar facility, however the anticipated cost would be more than the current
awarded EGLE Recycling Grant funds. The Board supports the concept of an indoor
facility and encouraged her to look for other grant opportunities to supplement
the Township’s current funds.
Safe Routes to School - Supervisor Bloomquist shared information and a copy of
a slideshow from the Safe Routes to School second meeting. The Board discussed
questions regarding lighting and cross-walks of the proposed paths. More
meetings will be scheduled around this initiative.
Red Cedar River Grant - Supervisor Bloomquist prepared the Board to anticipate
a special Board Meeting regarding the Red Cedar River Grant project at the end
of April.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA - No Report. 
Parks and Recreation Committee -Trustee Steinberg reported that resident Jim
Flore has agreed to donate beams to replace the ones in need of repair in the
pavilion at the park on Grand River. Supervisor Bloomquist updated the Board on
the Request for Proposals for the construction of the Park Drive. They are
receiving limited responses due to the demand for construction services
statewide.
Elections - Clerk Cleveland reported that work continues at the State level on
how elections will be implemented with the passage of Proposal 2022-2. The
Capital Area Municipal Clerks Association will be meeting in early May where
she anticipates updates on decisions and processes.
Cemetery - Supervisor Bloomquist shared that two Eagle Scouts will be
completing an approved fencing project at Summit Cemetery. She also reported
that the expansion area will be planted with wildflowers by a resident and
there is interest in redesigning the current approach into the cemetery. The
Fee Schedule will be reviewed at the next Cemetery Board meeting. Currently,
there is a waiting list for residents who want to buy plots in the Green Burial
portion of the cemetery.
Supervisor Updates - Supervisor Bloomquist noted that the Michigan Township
Association Conference will be held next week in Traverse City. The recent
Solarize Meeting held on March 23rd was a success. Approximately 60 residents
attended. The hope is to have one to two more future meetings. She also noted
there will be photography class at the Township Hall on Saturday, April 15th.
In addition, Art Tour flyers are available, as well as volunteer opportunities
for this event.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 9:21 PM
Jerry Eidt, Planning Commission Chair/Resident 4115 Vanneter Rd.: Mr. Eidt
expressed appreciation for Mr. Chris Doozan, Community Planning Consultant from
McKenna. His insights, historical knowledge of, and dedication to Williamstown
Township are valued.
Closed at 9:23 PM
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Creagh moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw
Meeting adjourned at 9:24 PM
Minutes approved by:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11016.jpg]
 
May 10, 2023
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
May 10, 2023
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 7:00
p.m. on May 10, 2023. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order,
reviewed the agenda, and led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer
Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, and Trustee Steinberg.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:02 PM
None.
Closed at 7:03 PM
Consent Agenda
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the minutes of the April 12, 2023 Board meeting
General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 31353-31369, for a total
of $10,883.56. Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 31383-31385, for a total
of $1,522.88.
General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 31370-31382, for a
total of $9,789.80, Accounts Payable for Approval #2, check number 31386-31391,
for a total of $2,313.91.
April 2023 Payroll Paid check numbers 51086-51091 and EFTs 783-785, for a total
of $12005.85 (phys. check amount), and Direct Deposit DD421-446, for a total of
$22,391.03.
Revenue and Expenditure report ending April 30, 2023
GL Activity Report
Building Inspection Report
Police Report
April Treasurer’s Report
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: None
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh,
Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, and Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
ACTION ITEMS
Eagle Scout Project – Isabelle Holden
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the expenditure of
up to $650.00 to cover the cost of materials, if necessary.
Seconded by: Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: Discussion ensued regarding the design features of the fence,
planning for the variable costs of construction materials, as well as the
timeline for completion. The Board expressed their gratitude for the project
and the value it will add to Summit Cemetery.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy,
Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, and Trustee Eyster.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Grant Resolution
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Board
Resolution for the 2023 Ingham County Parks Grant Application.
Seconded by: Clerk Cleveland
Discussion: The Board confirmed that Meridian Township will act as the
fiduciary should the grant be awarded. It was noted that is supported by three
municipalities: City of Williamston, Williamstown Township, and Meridian
Township. The Board was appreciative of the collaboration and comprehensive
efforts given towards the completion of the grant application.
Roll Call Vote:
Aye: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg,
Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, and Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Park Donation
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the acceptance
of the Prime Housing Group $6000 donation to the parks into 401-000-674.001 and
increase the budget $6000 in 401-751-881.000 Park Lands restricted.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Aye: Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist,
Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Conservation Easement
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board accept the Development
Rights Easement on parcel # 33-03-03-04-300-041 from Edward and Denise Mahoney.
Seconded by: Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: The Board reviewed the current number of conservation easements in
Williamstown Township, as well as the individualized components and
responsibilities outlined in these types of agreements.
Roll Call Vote:
Aye: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster,
Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, and Trustee Creagh.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Medical Marijuana Text Amendment
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the amendments
recommended by the Planning Commission with the additional clarification of
when inspections would be required to Item 17 on Page 4 of McKenna’s letter
dated April 26, 2023.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: The Board discussed the specificity of the inspection language that
was added to the draft ordinance. They expressed appreciation regarding Mr.
Doozan’s efforts regarding the amendments.
Roll Call Vote:
Aye: Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland,
Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, and Trustee Duffy.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
2023 Road Work
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Ingham
County Recommended Road Work for 2023 with the inclusion of Branch Road at a
cost not to exceed $180,000.
Seconded by: Trustee Duffy
Discussion: Discussion ensured regarding the current condition of Branch Road,
as well as the shared financial costs for the upcoming work. 
Roll Call Vote:
Aye: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw,
Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, and Trustee Steinberg.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
RFP – Park Drive
Trustee Duffy moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the letting of the
Bid Packet for the Park Drive.
Seconded by: Trustee Creagh
Discussion: The Board discussed the materials that will be used for the
construction of Park Drive, the area that will be included in the project, and
the determination of the start date. The Board agreed to extend the due date
for the RFP and considered adding a traffic counter to aid in measuring the
traffic flow at the park, as well as in determining the annual magnitude of
impact with regard to the planned improvements.
Roll Call Vote:
Aye: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh,
Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, and Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
MSU – Rental Refund
Trustee Steinberg moved the Township refund $700.00 of the cancelled MSU rental
fee of $700.00.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: The Board discussed the current Hall Rental Agreement with regards
to cancellations of reservations within 10 days of the event
Trustee Creagh moved to amend the motion to include the cancellation is based
on the historic relationship between the public and governmental entities.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Motion Passed (voice vote)
Roll Call Vote:
Aye: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee
Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, and Trustee Eyster.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Election Equipment Purchase
Trustee Creagh moved the Board approve the purchase of the Election Equipment
required due to the recent changes in election procedures and to move $5000.00
from Contingency (101-890-965.000) to Election Capital Outlay (101-191-980.000)
to cover the cost as indicated in the Election Source Quote # 648 dated May 10,
2023.
Seconded by: Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Aye: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy,Trustee Steinberg,
Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, and Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
DISCUSSION ITEMS  
Nuisance Ordinance Review with Chris Doozan – Supervisor Bloomquist reviewed
the updated language of the ordinance with the Board. Discussion ensued
regarding holidays and timelines of residential and automobile projects.
Supervisor Bloomquist will share current suggestions with Mr. Chris Doozan and
expects the ordinance to return on the Consent Agenda in June.
Michigan Green Communities – Silver Status – Supervisor Bloomquist shared the
promotion of the Township from Bronze to Silver Status with regards to the
Board’s support of and efforts around Green Initiatives. This designation will
allow the Township to participate in the Michigan Catalyst Communities
Initiative. A press release has been shared to be posted on the township
website and distributed to news outlets.
IPAD Purchases and Policy – Supervisor Bloomquist sought the interest of the
Board in exploring the utilization of iPads for the Township Board, Planning
Commission, and Zoning Board of Appeals. It would allow efficient access to all
ordinances and policies for guidance in decision-making and allow members to
access information in a paperless format. In addition, a policy would be
created for use of these devices. She will bring back information and a
proposal in June.
Michigan Professional Municipal Clerk (MiPMC) Certification – Supervisor
Bloomquist acknowledged Clerk Cleveland’s efforts in completing the Clerk’s
Institute and earning the credentials to be a Professional Municipal Clerk. She
praised Clerk Cleveland’s accomplishment and dedication to the clerking
profession.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA – Treasurer Cutshaw attended the April 13 th meeting. She shared that
four officers were sworn in as Lieutenants and the department’s annual audit
was presented. Discussion of equipment replacement ensued, as well as the
continued work with the Webberville DDA. The Board expressed continued interest
in NIESA providing residents opportunities for training in CPR.
Parks and Recreation Committee – Trustee Steinberg shared that the committee is
making preparations for the upcoming tree planting on Saturday, May 13 th .
Elections – Clerk Cleveland recently attended the Capital Area Municipal Clerks
Association (CAMCA) quarterly meeting where State Representative Penelope
Tsernoglou, Chair of the House Elections Committee, spoke about the legislation
currently underway for Proposal 2. Preventative maintenance and updates will be
occurring on the township tabulators and voter assist terminals (VATs) across
the county in the weeks to come. Clerk Cleveland expressed her gratitude to the
Board for supporting her professional development and attendance at the Clerk’s
Institute.
Cemetery – Supervisor Bloomquist shared that the Cemetery Board will be meeting
on May 17 th . The Fee Schedule and Cemetery Rules and Regulations will be
reviewed.
Supervisor Updates – Supervisor Bloomquist reported that the Art Tour was a
great success. She also provided updates on the current subdivision road
projects and reminded the Board of the upcoming closure of Meridian Road at
Grand River from May 15 th – September 1 st for reconstruction.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:39 PM
Ron Poth, Planning Commission Member/Resident, 4075 N. Williamston Road – Mr.
Poth also reminded the Board that construction on Putnam Road will also be
commencing soon.
Closed at 8:40 PM
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Clerk Cleveland.
Meeting adjourned at 8:41 PM
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11041.jpg]
June 14, 2023
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
June 14, 2023
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 7:00
p.m. on June 14, 2023. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order,
reviewed the agenda, and led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee
Creagh, and Trustee Steinberg.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:01 PM
None.
Closed at 7:02 PM
Consent Agenda
Trustee Creagh moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the minutes of the May 10, 2023 Board meeting
General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 31392-31408, for a total
of $23,115.44. Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 31420-31421, for a total
of $907.85. Accounts Payable Paid #3, check number 31426, for a total of
$100.00.
General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 31409-31419, for a
total of $26,630.80, Accounts Payable for Approval #2, check numbers 31422-
31425, for a total of $5,877.47.
May 2023 Payroll Paid check numbers 51092-51102 and EFTs 786, for a total of
$10,897.52 (phys. check amount), and Direct Deposit DD447-481, for a total of
$26,500.49.
Revenue and Expenditure report ending May 31, 2023
GL Activity Report
Building Inspection Report
Police Report
Draft Planning Commission Minutes
Planning Commission Annual Report
Nuisance Ordinance
May Treasurer’s Report
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: None. 
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Steinberg, and
Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Williamston Community Schools Update - Dr. Adam Spina, Superintendent of
Williamston Community Schools, shared a review of the school year, district
accomplishments, as well as upcoming projects and focus areas for the 2023-2024
school year. A copy of the year-end update was provided to each Board Member.
Dr. Spina addressed considerations for housing options for families who would
like to reside within the township and/or district.
Planning Commission Report - Chair Eidt shared a summary of the May 24 th
Planning Commission Meeting. He noted Public Hearings were held for an
accessory apartment at 645 E. Haslett Rd. and for a maintenance building at
3416 Corwin Rd. (NCIA Trucking). The commission recommended approval of the
Site Plan and Special Use Permit for the accessory apartment to the Township
Board. They also recommended approval of the maintenance building, with
conditions. The commission will deliberate more on the Site Plan and Special
Use Permit for Corwin Rd. at their July meeting. There was continued discussion
of Wind and Solar Energy Systems. Meeting dates for 2023-2024 were established
and the Annual Report for 2022-2023 was approved.
ACTION ITEMS
Wilbrink – Weger Special Use Permit
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Special Use
Permit for the accessory apartment located at 645 E. Haslett Rd, Williamston,
MI.
Seconded by: Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor
Bloomquist, and Trustee Eyster.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the site plan
for 645 E. Haslett Rd., Williamston, MI 48895.
Seconded by: Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, and Trustee Eyster. Trustee
Creagh, and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Park Drive Bids
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the bid from
McKearny Asphalt for the Park Drive as outlined in the RFP bid dated 5-25-23 in
the amount of $204,808.00.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: The Board reviewed the materials that will be used by McKearny
Asphalt for Park Drive, as well as the estimated life span of the surfaces. It
was confirmed that Mannik Smith Group will oversee the project beginning in
July or August with a completion date tentatively set for September 9 th .
Roll Call Vote:
Aye: Trustee Creagh, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster,
and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Budget Amendments
Trustee Creagh moved the Board approve the following budget amendments for the
2023-2024 budget.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11052_10785x4848.jpg]
 
Seconded by: Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Aye: Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Treasurer
Cutshaw, and Trustee Creagh.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Harvest Festival Budget
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the allocation
of up to $4000.00 to cover expenses for the Harvest Festival scheduled for
October 7th .
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: The Harvest Festival Committee met and the consensus was to
continue the event. They are moving the date up to Saturday, October 7 th to
help ensure the likelihood of good weather. Some previous activity options will
remain and new ones will be added to diversify the festival attendees
experiences.
Roll Call Vote:
Aye: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh,
and Trustee Steinberg.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Brownlee Cemetery Plots
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the sale of
three cemetery lots at the price of $60.00 ea. and the cost of the transfer fee
to Mary Boardway with a total of $205.00 due.
Seconded by: Trustee Creagh
Discussion: The Board reviewed the events around the miscommunication regarding
the status of ownership of the three plots in question. Discussion ensued
regarding 2 versus 3 plots being purchased, procedures and checks to ensure
deeds for current plots are up to date, and communication processes should
discrepancies be discovered.
Roll Call Vote:
Aye: Trustee Eyster, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Supervisor Bloomquist,
and Trustee Steinberg.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Park Equipment Purchase
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the purchase of a
second RTV or similar in an amount not to exceed $20,000.00. A minimum of two
quotes shall be sought prior to purchase.
Seconded by: Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: The Board reviewed the needs of the cemeteries and parks in the
township, as well as the age and use of the current RTV. It was agreed that a
second quote would be sought and considered for this equipment purchase.
Roll Call Vote:
Aye: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor
Bloomquist, and Trustee Eyster.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Senior Contribution
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the
contribution of $3000.00 to the Williamston Senior Center for services rendered
to the Senior Community.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Aye: Trustee Creagh, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster,
and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Assessing Hire
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the hire of
Dallas Henney, MCAO, to help with completing site visits as recommended by
State Treasury as currently budgeted.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: The Board reviewed the recommendations outlined from the State
Treasury Department for yearly site visits in comparison to what the Township
typically completes.
Roll Call Vote:
Aye: Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Treasurer
Cutshaw, and Trustee Creagh.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
DISCUSSION ITEMS  
Recycling Center – Supervisor Bloomquist recommended moving forward with the
original open site plan outlined in the Recycling Grant. She continues to visit
open sites in other municipalities that would be similar to the one proposed
for the township and learns from their established processes and experiences.
Cemetery Ordinance – Supervisor Bloomquist provided the Board with information
on recent green/natural burial updates to the Cemetery Ordinance. Specifically,
the timeline for reselling a natural burial gravesite and giving families
owning the spaces the first opportunity to repurchase it. The Board also
discussed the current contributions of both the city and the township for the
operations of the cemetery. The Cemetery Committee will be meeting on June 15
th to review rules and regulations.
Charging and Fueling Infrastructure Grant – Supervisor Bloomquist reviewed the
letter recently sent by the township in support of the application submitted by
the City of Lansing to the United States Department of Transportation Charging
and Fueling Infrastructure Discretionary Grant Program. This letter does not
obligate the township to participate, but does indicate interest in having
minimally two electric vehicle (EV) sites accessible to our residents and/or
visitors. Should the proposal be selected, the Board discussed the value of the
township’s contribution, as well as participation in the feasibility study, and
the cost to consumers to use a charging/fueling station.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA – No report.
Parks and Recreation Committee – Trustee Steinberg discussed the need for a
summer watering plan for the newly planted forest at the park. It was also
noted that the new trees need mulching and refencing.
Elections – Clerk Cleveland provided a memo to the Board Members in her
absence.
Roads – Supervisor Bloomquist provided Board Members with Construction Pay
Estimate Reports for Red Cedar Manor and Meadowdale road construction. Both
projects came in under budget. She hopes to have final numbers soon, at which
point a letter and invoice will be sent to residents in each neighborhood.
Future road projects potentially include Pebblebrook. The county is currently
processing an estimate for the roadway resurfacing in this township
subdivision.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 9:02 PM
None.
Closed at 9:02 PM
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Creagh moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Meeting adjourned at 9:03 PM
Minutes approved by:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11074.jpg]
 
 
July 12, 2023
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 7:00
p.m. on July 12, 2023. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order,
reviewed the agenda, and led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer
Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, and Trustee Steinberg.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:02 PM
None.
Closed at 7:03 PM
Consent Agenda
Trustee Steinberg moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the minutes of the June 14, 2023, Board meeting
General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 31427-31437, for a total
of $29,021.35. Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 31443-31447, for a total
of $1,815.61.
General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 31438-31442, for a
total of $3,533.06. Accounts Payable for Approval #2, check numbers 31448-
31451, for a total of $5,407.29.
General Fund Accounts Payable Police Paid #1, check number 1132, for a total of
$81,076.08.
June 2023 Payroll Paid check numbers 51103-51110 and EFT 787, for a total of
$13,235.10 (phys. check amount), and Direct Deposit DD482-DD506, for a total of
$23,248.14.
Revenue and Expenditure report ending June 30, 2023
GL Activity Report
Building Inspection Report
Police Report
Treasurer’s Report for June
Seconded by Trustee Cutshaw
Discussion: None. 
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh,
Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, and Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Capital Area District Library (CADL) Williamston Update – Ms. Julie Chrisinske,
head librarian, shared CADL highlights for 2022 and provided a handout to all
of the Board members. She presented the Township with a commemorative poster
celebrating the 25 th Anniversary of CADL. It was noted that 2022 was a great
rebuilding year that resembled more typical times at the library. All in-person
programming has resumed and 30% of Williamston students are accessing library
resources via the CADL Student Success Initiative. Executive Director Scott
Duimstra, shared data on overall circulation, as well as residents’ return on
investment in millage dollars as a result of support of the CADL operating
millage.
Police Report – Chief Plaga reported two new officers were sworn in on June
30th and two new recruits begin training in August. Meridian Township is still
seeking five more applicants. With the increase in staff, officers have been
able to access specialized training opportunities. Chief Plaga noted that
National Night Out is August 1st and encouraged residents to attend. This event
helps to build connections with neighborhoods and law enforcement. Overall,
calls for services were down this quarter, as were billable hours.
ACTION ITEMS
Henry Annis – Eagle Scout Project
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Eagle Scout
Project for the Cemetery Fence with a maximum contribution of $500.00 as
needed.
Seconded by: Trustee Duffy
Discussion - This project is the second part of a privacy fence scout project
at Summit Cemetery. Scout Annis was able to secure a donation of supplies from
MPC. It was noted that this has been a great project that has improved the
cemetery. 
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy,
Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, and Trustee Eyster.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Park Drive
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the bid dated
6-28-23 from McKearny Asphalt for the Entrance work as needed in the amount of
$38,475.00.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: It was noted that improvements to this section of the entrance was
not part of the original proposal, but was added to the plan as a result of a
crater discovered in the culvert. It was confirmed that this addition will not
impact the previous plans and this culvert replacement has been approved by
MDOT.
Roll Call Vote:
Aye: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg,
Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, and Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Budget Amendments
Clerk Cleveland moved the Board approve the following budget amendments for the
2023-2024 budget.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11085_10832x2664.jpg]
 
Seconded by: Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: None
Roll Call Vote:
Aye: Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist,
Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Cemetery Ordinance
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Cemetery as
proposed with the change of the City contribution to $18,000 and the Township
contribution to $29,000 and to make the necessary budget amendments of 209-000-
601.001 to $18,000 and 209-000-601.000 to $29,000.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: The Board discussed natural burials underneath trees with regards
to tree roots, as well as how monitoring, in cases of neglect, will be managed.
Roll Call Vote:
Aye: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster,
Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, and Trustee Creagh.  
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
DISCUSSION ITEMS  
Community Center Grant – Supervisor Bloomquist attended a webinar on this topic
and learned that the grant does not apply to the Township. Trustee Steinberg
noted that the Senior Center is addressing this opportunity.
Accessory Dwelling Units (ADU) – The Board was in agreement to add this agenda
of the Planning Commission to further consider as a possible addition to the
Zoning Ordinance.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA – Supervisor Bloomquist attended the meeting in June and noted that the
focus was the collection of funds from Webberville.
Parks and Recreation Committee – Trustee Steinberg noted that there was not a
meeting in the past month. Efforts to support the forest continue and a plan to
address the encroaching weeds will need to be created. 
Elections – Clerk Cleveland provided the Board with current updates on Proposal
2 regarding the legislative process, postal permits, recent election equipment
orders, and the drop box installation plan.
Roads – Supervisor Bloomquist updated the Board on the status of Pebblebrook
neighborhood’s road improvement timeline. Additionally, Oak Leaf Hills recently
submitted petitions to begin the road improvement process. She noted that work
on the Williamstown Township roads for 2023 is almost complete.
Supervisor Updates – Supervisor Bloomquist updated the Board on the recent
change in pricing submitted by Reclaimed by Design to oversee the proposed
recycling center. Due to the fact that the fee has doubled, she will explore
other options and service providers. More prices have been sought for the
purchase of a tractor discussed at June’s meeting. In addition, the Capital
Improvement Planning committee recently met with the Supervisor and plan to
bring their recommendations to the Planning Commission at the July meeting.  
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:04 PM
Ron Poth, Planning Commission Member/Resident, 4075 N. Williamston Road – Mr.
Poth inquired about the consideration of an enclosed recycling building and the
timeline of the grant.
Closed at 8:07 PM
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Trustee Steinberg
Meeting adjourned at 8:09 PM
Minutes approved by:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11108.jpg]
 
August 9, 2023
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
August 9, 2023
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 7:00
p.m. on August 9, 2023. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order,
reviewed the agenda, and led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer
Cutshaw, Trustee Duffy, and Trustee Steinberg.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:01 PM
None.
Closed at 7:02 PM
Consent Agenda
Trustee Steinberg moved the consent agenda consisting of:
Approve the minutes of the July 12, 2023, Board meeting
General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 31452-31465, for a total
of $297,041.19. Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 31469-31471, for a
total of $1,256.81.
General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 31446-31468, for a
total of $6,811.89. Accounts Payable for Approval #2, check numbers 31472-
31483, for a total of $14,801.16.
GF AP Police for Approval #1, check number 1133, for a total of $1,250.00.
July 2023 Payroll Paid check numbers 51111-51117 and EFT 788-789, for a total
of $15,137.05 (phys. check amount), and Direct Deposit DD507-DD540, for a total
of $26,237.18.
Revenue and Expenditure report ending July 31, 2023
GL Activity Report
Building Inspection Report
Police Report
Treasurer’s Report for July
Draft Planning Commission Minutes
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: It was noted that the Township paid for two road projects in the
General Fund Accounts Payable in July and, as a result, the total was much
higher than usual. Additionally, General Fund Accounts Payable Police for
Approval was the police contribution for pre-audit charges.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Duffy,
Trustee Steinberg, and Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Planning Commission Report – Vice Chair Stanford shared a summary of the July
26th Planning Commission Meeting. The commissioners took public comment on the
draft wind and solar amendments/ordinance. In addition, they discussed the
proposed event barn site plan review and special use permit request for 5820
Shoeman Rd. The review and request of the project is tabled until the September
meeting, pending additional requested information for deliberation. Discussion
continued regarding the draft wind and solar ordinance amendments. The topics
were tabled until the September meeting for further discussion. The draft
Capital Improvement Plan was presented and reviewed.
ACTION ITEMS
Tri-County Hazard Mitigation Plan
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Resolution
to Authorize the acceptance and adoption of the 2023 Tri-County Hazard
Mitigation Plan.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: The Board discussed the value of participating in the Hazard
Mitigation Plan process and the resulting grant opportunities and/or assistance
from the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) should a need arise.
Supervisor Bloomquist confirmed the Township’s availability to residents as a
power outage/warming center in case of a prolonged emergency.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg,
Supervisor Bloomquist, and Trustee Eyster.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
AT&T Metro Act Right of Way Permit Extension
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the extension
of the AT&T Metro Act Right of Way Extension.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: Supervisor Bloomquist reminded the Board that this approval extends
the permit for 5 years and results in a portion of the Township local
stabilization fund contributions.
Roll Call Vote:
Aye: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor
Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, and Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
PC Appointments
Clerk Cleveland moved the Williamstown Township Board confirm the
reappointments of Jerry Eidt, Jim Flore, and Toby Weston, each for a 3 year
term ending September 2026.
Seconded by: Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: The Board commended the work ethic and effort of the Planning
Commission members. They continue to be impressed by their dedication, energy,
and thoughtful contributions.
Roll Call Vote:
Aye: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster,
Clerk Cleveland, and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
DISCUSSION ITEMS  
Rural Ready Community Grants – Supervisor Bloomquist updated the Board on the
grant guidelines and eligibility that must be established in order to be
identified as a rural area and therefore participate in the Rural Ready
Community Grant process. The goal is to be able to seek a grant to be utilized
for the potential development of a Joint Master Plan between the City of
Williamston, Wheatfield Township, and Williamston Township.
Safe Routes to School (SRTS) – Supervisor Bloomquist updated the Board on the
progress of this safety initiative. The community would be eligible for
$880,000 to utilize for improvements. Priorities include improving the
accessibility and reliability of a walkway at the wetland on Vanneter Rd, a
three-way stop at the intersection of Vanneter and Rowley Roads, and an off
road pathway from Bismark to Sherwood and rerouting the bus route in the
parking lot of Discovery and Explorer Elementaries. The Board commended the
process and final presentation. It was noted that it was a thorough collection
of information and data that is very helpful for planning and decision-making.
 
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA – Trustee Duffy shared updates from their July meeting. There were no
Action Items. Letters of support from the six surrounding municipalities were
needed to qualify for a recent $60,000 grant. Trustee Duffy shared that five of
the six needed letters were submitted resulting in a $50,000 grant amount. He
also noted they are very close to having a revenue sharing agreement with
Webberville.
Parks and Recreation Committee – Trustee Steinberg shared that the park
driveway and parking lot project is complete and open. He noted it was accessed
and used immediately by residents. He expressed gratitude on the recent
addition of the motorized gator for forest watering. It has increased their
efficiency and been very helpful. Mulching is complete and, between the
watering and rain, the trees are doing much better. Trustee Steinberg commended
the efforts of summer maintenance worker, Josh Wiles, in assisting the forest
crew with mulch and water. The Parks and Recreation Committee will be
coordinating with the Rotary to plan a run for the Harvest Festival. Festival
coordinators Gwen Brandon and Kerri Danstrom were also commended for their
continued efforts in planning this annual event.
Elections – Clerk Cleveland reported that the state recently provided a model
agreement for townships and municipalities considering partnerships for early
voting. Currently, Wheatfield and Locke Township have indicated interest in
partnering with Williamstown in 2024 early voting. Williamstown would be the
host site. Clerk Cleveland has set a meeting between the entities to discuss
the process, answer questions, and review the model agreement. If it is
determined that the parties would like move ahead with an early voting
partnership, the agreement would come before the Board at next month’s meeting
and shared with the state by late September.
Cemeteries – Supervisor Bloomquist noted that fees will be available for
approval at the next board meeting and that Sexton Donnelly has completed the
planning portion of the green burial sites.
Roads – Supervisor Bloomquist noted that both Special Assessment Districts that
were recently completed came in under budget. Letters of Interest for road
improvements have been submitted from Oak Leaf and Pebblebrook Subdivisions. A
meeting for Pebblebrook, discussing next steps and possible considerations,
will be scheduled and communicated soon.
Supervisor Updates – Supervisor Bloomquist shared that there will be an Ice
Cream Social at Branch School on August 27 th from 1-3pm and invited the Board,
as well as area residents. Information was shared in the recent newsletter that
accompanied resident’s tax bills. Flyers and posters will be out soon.
Treasurer – Treasurer Cutshaw shared an estate planning seminar flyer with the
Board and posted it in the Township office for residents to consider. It is
hosted by Ingham County Treasurer’s office.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:25 PM
Rob Stanford – Planning Commission Member/Resident – 5660 N. Williamston Rd. –
Mr. Stanford expressed gratitude for the kind words regarding the Planning
Commission and his pleasure in serving on this committee. He also was pleased
at the adoption of the Hazard Mitigation Plan and inquired about the
Vulnerability Analysis likely found in the document. He noted that this
analysis could open up grant opportunities as well and be useful in the Joint
Master Planning process. Mr. Stanford offered his assistance in that process,
if needed. He asked if there would be any additional communication or
coordination from Consumers Energy and/or the Township with regards to the
propane pipeline installation that is commencing and moving towards the
township.
Closed at 8:35PM
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Clerk Cleveland
Meeting adjourned at 8:36 PM
Minutes approved by:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11142.jpg]
 
September 13, 2023
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 7:00
p.m. on September 13, 2023. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order,
reviewed the agenda, and led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer
Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh,
Trustee Duffy, and Trustee Steinberg.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:01 PM
Monica Schafer, District 15 Ingham County Commissioner/Resident - 1691 Osprey
Avenue - updated the Board on her Committee Assignments for Ingham County and
welcomes questions, thoughts, and concerns from township residents.
Donna Tocarchick, 9605 Deer Trail - expressed opposition to township uniforms.
Karl Bartels, 9665 Deer Trail - commented on unnecessary spending.
Closed at 7:11 PM
Consent Agenda
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the consent agenda consisting of:
∙   Approve the minutes of the August 9, 2023, Board meeting
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 31484-31506, for a
total of $260,501.10. Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 31518-31521, for
a total of $1,716.21.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 31507-31517,
for a total of $12,112.28. Accounts Payable for Approval #2, check numbers
31522-31525, for a total of $4,815.82. Accounts Payable for Approval #3, check
numbers 31526-31531, for a total of $1,735.00.
∙   August 2023 Payroll Paid check numbers 51118-51126 and EFTs 790-791, for a
total of $11,011.46 (phys. check amount), and Direct Deposit DD541-DD574, for a
total of $25,702.51.
∙   Revenue and Expenditure report ending August 31, 2023
∙   GL Activity Report
∙   Building Inspection Report
∙   Police Report
∙   Treasurer’s Report for August
 
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: None
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh,
Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, and Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
ACTION ITEMS
NCAI Special Use Permit and Site Plan Review
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Special Use
Permit for NCIA to build a replacement maintenance and storage building on the
existing concrete pad at 3416 Corwin Road as recommended by the Planning
commission.
Seconded by: Trustee Duffy
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy,
Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, and Trustee Eyster.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the site plan for
NCIA Trucking at 3416 Corwin Road, with the variances approved by the ZBA, as
recommended by the Planning Commission.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg,
Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, and Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Budget Amendments
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Board approve the following budget amendments for
the 2023-2024 budget.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11155_6890x6193.jpg]
 
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
 
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Aye: Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist,
Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Picnic Table Purchase
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the purchase of
three additional picnic tables for the Township Park at a cost not exceed
$1800.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: The Board discussed the cost, current need of, and accessibility of
picnic tables designated for purchase.
Roll Call Vote:
Aye: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster,
Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, and Trustee Creagh.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Green Zone Amendments
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board request the Planning
Commission to review Article 24 of the Township Zoning Ordinance, the Green
Zone, to recommend amendments for consideration by the Township Board.
Seconded by: Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: None.
Motion Passed.
Early Voting Agreement
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Early
Voting Agreement with Wheatfield Township.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: Clerk Cleveland provided an overview of the Early Voting Agreement
with Wheatfield Township and answered Board questions on state reimbursements,
current grants, cost savings, and the ability to amend the agreement should
surrounding jurisdictions change Early Voting election preferences in the
future.
Roll Call Vote:
Aye: Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland,
Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, and Trustee Duffy.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Code Enforcement Position
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the hire of
Sean Haskin to the position of Code Enforcement Officer at the recommended
wages as budgeted.
Seconded by: Clerk Cleveland
Discussion: The Board reviewed the candidate’s qualifications and experiences,
as well as the Wage Recommendation.
Roll Call Vote:
Aye: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw,
Trustee Creagh, and Trustee Duffy, and Trustee Steinberg.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
DISCUSSION ITEMS  
Public Notices - Clerk Cleveland sought to compare the publication rates for
Public Notices between the Lansing State Journal (LSJ) and City Pulse to
determine if the Township could save money on Public Notices. Circulation
numbers were also requested but not shared by the providers. Since the City
Pulse could not match or beat the publication rates offered by LSJ, the
Township will continue to use the LSJ
Safe Routes to School (SRTS) - Supervisor Bloomquist updated the Board on final
reports. Next steps include moving forward on the grant application. The
process will begin shortly with a Winter deadline goal.
Joint Meeting with the City of Williamston - The Board wishes to tentatively
host this joint meeting on Wednesday, October 18th at 7pm as required by the
425 agreements with the City.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA – Trustee Duffy shared that a revenue sharing agreement with Webberville
DDA has been approved. The new agreement is for $20,000 annually. He confirmed
that Director Yanz received 5 of 6 letters of support for the $50,000 State of
Michigan Equipment Grant.
Parks and Recreation Committee – Trustee Steinberg noted that the 5K run
planned for the upcoming Harvest Festival had to be cancelled due to low
registration. Plans are moving along for the Oct. 7 th event. In addition,
September 30 th will be the Red Cedar River Day from noon–4 pm at Williamston’s
McCormick Park Launch Site.
Senior Center – Trustee Steinberg shared that the center is currently looking
to hire a Program Coordinator.
Elections – Clerk Cleveland shared that the township took delivery on most of
the new election equipment that was ordered.. Next Tuesday, September 19th is
National Voter Registration Day. This effort will focus on encouraging
residents who have moved into the township to register ahead of the 2024
elections.
Cemeteries – Supervisor Bloomquist noted that the Cemetery Board will be
meeting to discuss and finalize fee recommendations for the November Board
meeting. The cemetery software company is merging the information that the
Sexton has laid out for Green Burial sites. Additionally, the Eagle Scout
projects have been completed and the scouts did an outstanding job on
construction.
Roads – Supervisor Bloomquist and Kelly Jones, Managing Director of the Ingham
County Road Department, hosted the Pebblebrook Road Meeting on Tuesday,
September 12th to provide information and answer questions about a Special
Assessment District. Residents of this subdivision will move forward with the
collection of petitioner signatures. Oak Leaf Hills and Pine Knoll Subdivisions
continue to work through the process respectively. 
Supervisor Updates – Supervisor Bloomquist shared that the Ice Cream Social was
a success. Also, the Township Assessing Audit was recently completed by the
State of Michigan. Williamstown Township received top marks.
Treasurer – Treasurer Cutshaw shared that tomorrow, September 14th, is the last
day for Summer Taxes. They are due by 5pm. Independent Bank will also be taking
payments. Each entity will be open from 9am-5pm. Over 1,300 payments have been
processed since Thursday, September 7th. Currently, there are 262 outstanding
payments. Treasurer Cutshaw commended the efforts of Deputy Treasurer VanErp in
the tax collection process. She also noted that the new Chart of Accounts is
almost complete.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:16 PM
Donna Tocarchick, 9605 Deer Trail – questioned when township documents are
posted to the website, the number of election inspectors needed for the nine
days of early voting, the timeline for streaming meetings, and the new Code
Enforcer’s role.
Closed at 8:20PM
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Clerk Cleveland
Meeting adjourned at 8:21 PM
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11180.jpg]
 
October 11, 2023
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
October 11, 2023
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 7:00
p.m. on October 11, 2023. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order,
reviewed the agenda, and led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Trustee
Creagh, and Trustee Steinberg.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:01 PM
None.
Closed at 7:02 PM
Consent Agenda
Trustee Steinberg moved the consent agenda consisting of:
∙   Approve the minutes of the September 13, 2023 Board Meeting
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 31532-31540, for a
total of $7,154.55. Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 31553-31556, for a
total of $1,842.66, and Accounts Payable Paid #3, check numbers 31566-31567,
for a total of $382.10.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1 – Police, check number 1135, for a
total of $42,663.28.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 31541-31552,
for a total of $10,954.67, Accounts Payable for Approval #2, check numbers
31557-31565, for a total of $11,872.31, and Accounts Payable for Approval #3,
check number 31568, for a total of $1,734.76.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1 – Police, check number 1136,
for a total of $2,000.00.
∙   September Payroll Paid check numbers 51127-51134 and EFT 792, for a total
of $10,468.58 (phys. check amount), and Direct Deposit DD575-599, for a total
of $22,306.25.
∙   Revenue and Expenditure report ending September 30, 2023.
∙   GL Activity Report
∙   Building Report
∙   Police Report
∙   Cemetery Plot Repurchase
∙   Planning Commission draft minutes
∙   Acknowledge receipt of the Treasurer’s report for September 2023
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: None
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Steinberg, and
Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Meridian Township Police Report – Chief Rick Grillo introduced himself to the
Board as the new Police Chief for Meridian Township replacing retired Chief Ken
Plaga. Chief Grillo addressed current staffing levels at the department. He
noted they are operating with 32 sworn officers with 42 being their ideal
number. Recruiting and retention are the primary issues with regards to their
ability to increase/maintain staff. He also reviewed police service data for
Williamstown Township’s third quarter (July – September).
Audit Report – Brenda Seelman – Clark Schaefer Hackett CPAs and Advisors – Ms.
Seelam presented a review of the Williamstown Township Audit for the fiscal
year ending March 31, 2023. She noted that the Township received an unmodified
clean opinion for their recent audit which meets their highest standard. Ms.
Seelman provided highlights of the report with regards to the Township’s
current revenue and expenditures, as well as the capital assets and general
fund balance. The Board discussed the change in net position and noted the
expenditures were a result of the planned road projects that were able to be
completed in 2022.
Planning Commission (PC) Report – Chair Eidt shared a summary of the September
27th Planning Commission Meeting. He noted that a public hearing has been set
for the draft wind and solar amendments on November 1, 2023. There is a change
in the date for November’s meeting due to the Thanksgiving holiday. A slate of
candidates for officers will be recommended at the next meeting. Mr. Doozan,
from McKenna, will be revising language for the Green Zone and developing draft
language for Accessory Dwelling Units (ADUs). The Board commended the PC
membership and the level integrity that they bring to this work.
ACTION ITEMS
Cemetery Rules and Regulations – Cemetery Fees
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board adopt the Cemetery Fees as
recommended by the Cemetery Committee.
Seconded by: Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: Supervisor Bloomquist provided an overview of the recent changes in
the Cemetery Rules and Regulations. The committee’s goal was to update and
improve clarity in the language. The Board reviewed the cemetery fee
comparisons, discussed the suggested increases, and confirmed that resident
pricing includes both residents of Williamstown Township, as well as the City
of Williamston.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor
Bloomquist, and Trustee Eyster.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Police Assessment Roll
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board approve amending
Resolution 2023-98, Confirming the 2023 Special Assessment Roll for Police
Protection within the Township with the Special Assessment Roll total from
$192,930.00 to $192,750 with the removal of parcel # 33-03-03-28-300-008 and
reduction to $90.00 on parcel #33-03-03-22-200-007.   
Seconded by: Clerk Cleveland
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Aye: Trustee Creagh, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster,
and Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Master Plan Update
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board ask the Planning
Commission to move forward with updating the Master Plan with McKenna
Associates with an estimated cost of $28,500.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Aye: Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland,
and Trustee Creagh.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Wind and Solar Resolution
Clerk Cleveland moved the Williamstown Township Board adopt Resolution No. 130
and submit to our House and Senate Representatives and to the Governor.
Seconded by: Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: Supervisor Bloomquist shared that she will be meeting soon with
State Representative Penelope Tsernoglou and Senator Sam Singh regarding this
proposed legislation. In addition to reiterating the Township’s opposition to
this legislation, the Board discussed the value of noting suggestions and/or
solutions the Township may have or support around this effort that could also
be shared at this meeting.
Roll Call Vote:
Aye: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Trustee Creagh,
and Trustee Steinberg.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Pine Knoll and Oakleaf Hills Petition Extension
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board extend the deadline for
Pine Knoll Subdivision and Oakleaf Hills Subdivision to submit petitions to
move forward with road improvements to November 30, 2023 due to the county not
being able to provide an estimate and the need to seek a private vendor
estimate.
Seconded by: Clerk Cleveland
Discussion: The Board discussed the implementation of new process for
subdivision road improvements and the impact of the improved efforts for
resident communication around this process.
Motion Passed.
Trustee Eyster departed the meeting early, after the completion of Action
Items, at 8:30pm
DISCUSSION ITEMS  
Joint Meeting with the City of Williamston – Supervisor Bloomquist reminded the
Board of the upcoming Meeting for Wednesday, October 18 th at 7pm and reviewed
the draft agenda with the Board.
Ingham County Parks Grant – River – Supervisor Bloomquist updated the Board on
the submission of the grant application in partnership with the City of
Williamston and Meridian Township. She shared they have revised the original
submission to include two additional launch sites and improvements at Wonch
Park and Harris Nature Center. This revision diverted some funds that were
originally earmarked for river clean-ups. There will be a presentation of this
grant request on November 13 th to the Ingham County Parks and Recreation
Board.
Strategic Planning – Supervisor Bloomquist noted the last Strategic Planning
meeting was in December 2022. The Board supports the continuation of this plan.
Supervisor Bloomquist will send an email the week of October 16th with possible
early December dates and a location to review and update the Strategic Plan.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA – No Report.
Parks and Recreation Committee – Trustee Steinberg noted that the October 7 th
Harvest Festival was a great success and celebrated the efforts of Gwen Brandon
and Kerri Danstrom for this event. The consensus is to plan for another
festival for 2024 with the hopes to secure additional volunteers moving
forward.
Elections – Clerk Cleveland shared that the agreement for the township
Partnership for Early Voting with Wheatfield Township has been submitted to the
county. The Presidential Primary date is dependent upon when the Michigan
Legislature adjourns and will be finalized at that time. Planning continues, as
well as upcoming work with Precinct Chairs regarding new procedures.
Cemeteries – Supervisor Bloomquist shared the trails have been recently mowed.
They are very close to being able to sell plots in the Green Burial section of
which there is a waiting list.
Roads – Supervisor Bloomquist reported that Ingham County is close to
completing road projects for this calendar year.
Supervisor Updates – Supervisor Bloomquist shared the audit from the State Tax
Commission on Assessment Rolls and Practices. Williamstown Township received a
perfect score and the designation of Substantially Compliant.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:51 PM
Jerry Eidt – Planning Commission Chair/Resident 4115 Vanneter Rd.: Mr. Eidt
commented on the value of the township’s current Master Plan.
Ron Poth – Planning Commission Member/Resident, 4075 N. Williamston Rd.: Mr.
Poth commented on the Solar and Wind Authority legislation and the implications
of power line height on these efforts.
Closed at 8:53PM
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Creagh moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Clerk Cleveland
Meeting adjourned at 8:55 PM
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11212.jpg]
 
November 8, 2023
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 7:00
p.m. on November 8, 2023. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order,
reviewed the agenda, and led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer
Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, and Trustee Steinberg.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:01 PM
Alan Jackson, 4380 Selwood Ct. – expressed concern regarding the projected cost
estimates for road improvements in the Pine Knoll Subdivision and sought the
Board’s interest in exploring solutions to offset the cost.
Michael Engman, 4370 Selwood Ct. – expressed support for Mr. Jackson’s concerns
and suggestions regarding the proposed road improvements in the Pine Knoll
Subdivision.
Sue Alchin, 3536 Burkley Rd. – expressed concern regarding the Halloween
display in the pole barn at Wamhoff Farms during the month of October. She
shared her experiences as a neighbor to this property and questioned if a
process was followed when the display was moved from Damon Road to this
location. She stated her continued concerns should a new display be created for
the Christmas season in December and asked questions regarding the township’s
role in this situation.
Closed at 7:13 PM
Consent Agenda
Trustee Creagh moved the consent agenda consisting of:
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 31569-31578, for a
total of $3,288.40 and Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 31590-31592, for
a total of $17,116.07.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 31579-31589,
for a total of $4,419.49.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval – Police, check number 1137, for
a total of $325.00.
∙   October Payroll Paid check numbers 51135-51144 and EFTs 793-794, for a
total of $7,712.49 (phys. check amount), and Direct Deposit DD600-636, for a
total of $26,776.78.
∙   Revenue and Expenditure report ending October 31, 2023.
∙   GL Activity Report
∙   Building Report
∙   Police Report
∙   Planning Commission draft minutes of 11-1-23
∙   Acknowledge receipt of the Treasurer’s report for October 2023
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: Supervisor Bloomquist shared information about the inclusion of a
new Balance Sheet Report and would like this information to be included in the
Board packet moving forward.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh,
Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, and Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Planning Commission (PC) Report – Chair Eidt shared a summary of the November 1
st Planning Commission Meeting. A public hearing was held regarding the current
draft wind and solar amendments to the zoning ordinance. It was determined that
any action on wind and solar will be deferred until the January 24, 2024
meeting. A slate of candidates for officers was selected. Jerry Eidt will
continue as Chair, Rob Standford will continue as Vice-Chair, and Jim Brinker
will be Secretary. The commission approved a letter in response to Meridian
Township’s Master Plan. They reviewed and approved the resolution for the
Capital Improvement Plan and will be sending it to the Board. A public hearing
was set for January 24 th for the Green Zone revisions. Planning Commission
Members approved the initiation of the Master Plan update and tabled the
discussion on Accessory Dwelling Units (ADU) for the January meeting due to
time.
ACTION ITEMS
Capital Improvement Plan
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board accept the Capital
Improvement Plan (CIP) with changes to the resolution and call for a public
hearing to garner resident comment on the CIP Plan at the January 2024 Board
Meeting.
Seconded by: Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: The Board discussed the usefulness of this document as they move
forward with Strategic Planning and the 2024 Budget. A timeline for a Public
Hearing for resident feedback was planned for the January Board Meeting.
Concern was expressed on a portion of the verbiage on the Planning Commission’s
Transmission of the 2024-2029 Capital Improvement Plan to the Williamston
Township Board of Trustees. It was determined that the section should be
revised to read:
THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED that the Williamstown Township Planning Commission
will continue to review and transmit the draft Williamstown Township Capital
Improvement Plan annually to the Williamstown Township Board of Trustees to
formally adopt and file the report.
Motion Passed.
Pebblebrook SAD Extension
Treasure Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the request for
an extension to gather signatures for Pebblebrook Subdivision Road
Improvements until November 30, 2023.
Seconded by: Clerk Cleveland
Discussion: The Board discussed the value in approving this request if it
increases the opportunity to make all neighborhood residents aware of the
process and efforts in seeking subdivision road improvements. Supervisor
Bloomquist reviewed the formal communication plan for the township road
improvement process.
Motion Passed.
Election Precinct Approval
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the following
precinct locations for the 2024 Presidential Primary Election: Election Day is
Precinct 1 – St. Katherine’s Church, 4650 N. Meridian Rd., Williamston, MI,
Precinct 2 – Williamstown Township Hall, 4990 Zimmer Rd., Williamston, MI, and
Absent Voter Counting Board (AVCB) – Williamstown Township Hall. Early Voting
Center location for Williamstown Township Precinct 1 and 2, and Wheatfield
Township Precinct 1 is Williamstown Township Hall.
Seconded by: Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: The Board confirmed that there is only one precinct in Wheatfield
Township.
Motion Passed.
DISCUSSION ITEMS  
Strategic Planning – Supervisor Bloomquist confirmed that this planning session
will occur Friday, December 8 th beginning at 9:30am at the Park House – 507 E.
Grand River. She is hopeful that Board members, staff, and committee chairs
will be able to participate.
23-24 Budget Review - Supervisor Bloomquist provided a draft budget for the
Board to review. She forecasted upcoming budget amendments ahead of next
month’s Strategic Planning session. She also reminded the Board of the recent
adoption of the new Chart of Accounts and its implications on the General
Ledger numbers. The Board suggested notifying residents that the Budget process
is beginning through the website and social media.
Rural Readiness Grant - Supervisor Bloomquist shared that the grant has been
submitted and that she should know by December 15 th if it was approved.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA – Supervisor Bloomquist attended last month’s NIESA meeting. She noted
that there was minimal board activity to report. It was noted that the NIESA
2024 Budget was not ready to review at the October Meeting. Concern was
expressed that the budget only recently became available and that important
information such as administrative salaries and budget activity was absent from
the report.
Parks and Recreation Committee – Trustee Steinberg shared that the Parks and
Rec Committee will be working with Wildtypes to eliminate invasive species in
the park in early December. 
Trustee Duffy departed the meeting early at 8:30pm.
Elections – Clerk Cleveland shared that the remaining election equipment had
arrived. She noted that the Electronic Pollbook computer for Early Voting will
be delivered soon. Upcoming procedures and training for Election Inspectors
will be taking place in the near future to prepare for the Presidential
Primary.
Roads – Supervisor Bloomquist acknowledged the concerns of the Pine Knoll
residents and her willingness to help them explore their questions regarding
possible solutions to offset the high-cost estimates for their subdivision road
improvements. She noted that Oakleaf Hills and Pebblebrook resident teams
continue work on gathering signatures for their subdivision road improvement
process. The Township Road Committee will be meeting with the county in
December to plan for 2024 road needs.
Supervisor Updates – Supervisor Bloomquist invited the Board to the Branch
School Christmas Open House on December 3 rd – 2:00-4:00pm. She also updated
the Board on the actions taken to address the Halloween display in the Wamhoff
Farm pole barn. The Board discussed the Township permitting and site plan
process that is in place for residents who want to use their property for
public events.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:21 PM
Sue Alchin, 3536 Burkley Rd. - inquired about procedures involved for residents
who seek a special use permit for public events and sought clarification on the
approval process of these initiatives.
Closed at 8:25 PM
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Creagh moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Clerk Cleveland
Meeting adjourned at 8:25 PM
Minutes approved by:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11267.jpg]
December 8, 2023 Strategic Planning Session
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order at 9:30 am.
Present:
Township Board: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Creagh, Treasurer Cutshaw, Kevin
Duffy, and Trustee Steinberg.
Township Staff: Julie Bellinger, Gwen Chirico-Brandon, Kerri Danstrom, Sean
Haskins, Mac Donnelly, Dan Rhines, Kim VanErp
Planning Commission Members: Gerald Eidt, Rob Stanford   
Facilitator: Supervisor Bloomquist
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
No public attended.
Supervisor Bloomquist made opening comments and provided an overview of
resources that would inform the discussion and the process for the Strategic
Planning Session.
She reviewed the accomplishments of the Board and staff over the past several
months and sought clarification as needed. Participants discussed the current
state of each goal and what is needed going forward.
No decisions were made during this process.
Adjournment
The strategic planning session was adjourned at 12:15 p.m.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11241.jpg]
 
 
_____________________________________________ _____________
Robin A. Cleveland, Township Clerk Date
 
December 13, 2023
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
 
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 7:00
p.m. on December 13, 2023. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order,
reviewed the agenda, and led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee
Creagh, Trustee Duffy, and Trustee Steinberg.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:01PM
Deb Wolf – Trustee for the Williamston Community Schools Board of Education –
read a letter that was recently submitted to the Williamstown Township Board.
She also invited the Board to participate in an upcoming meeting in January to
address housing needs.
Closed at 7:08PM
Consent Agenda
Trustee Steinberg moved the consent agenda consisting of:
∙   Approve the minutes of the November 8, 2023 Board Meeting and the minutes
of the December 8, 2023 Strategic Planning Meeting.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 31593-31610, for a
total of $7,538.47 and Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 31630-31635, for
a total of $4,476.44.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 31611-31629,
for a total of $113,862.84 and Accounts Payable for Approval #2, check number
31636-31642, for a total of $8,247.82.
∙   November Payroll Paid check numbers 51145-51153 and EFTs 795-796, for a
total of $16,690.93 (phys. check amount), and Direct Deposit DD637-667, for a
total of $22,415.93.
∙   Revenue and Expenditure report ending November 30, 2023.
∙   Balance Sheet Ending November 30, 2023
∙   GL Activity Report
∙   Building Report
∙   Police Report
∙   Burial Space Repurchase
∙   Acknowledge receipt of the Treasurer’s report for November 2023
 
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw
 
Discussion: None
 
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy,
Trustee Steinberg, and Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None
 
Motion Passed.
 
ACTION ITEMS
Budget Amendments
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Board approve the following budget amendments for
the 2023-2024 budget.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11276_8039x8355.jpg]
 
Seconded by: Trustee Creagh
 
Discussion: Clerk Cleveland confirmed the election equipment that was included
in the Election Capital Outlay reimbursement.
 
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg,
Supervisor Bloomquist, and Clerk Cleveland
Nays: None
 
Motion Passed.
 
Diamond Dust Application
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the purchase and
application of diamond dust this fall/winter to improve the condition of the
baseball fields for the 2024 season.
 
Seconded by: Trustee Steinberg
 
Discussion: None
 
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Clerk Cleveland,
Treasurer Cutshaw, and Trustee Creagh.
Nays: None
 
Motion Passed.
 
DISCUSSION ITEMS  
School Letter – Township Board members shared their perspectives regarding a
letter dated November 6, 2023 sent to the Township from the Williamston
Community Schools Board of Education. The Board discussed the township’s role
pertaining to housing and development. It was noted that this topic was
included in their recent Strategic Planning Session. Additionally, with the
upcoming work on updating the Williamstown Township Master Plan, conversations
with community stakeholders to address housing needs will be timely. Supervisor
Bloomquist requested the Board of Education create a list of questions for the
Township to address before their proposed January meeting. This effort will
help to inform what the schools are looking for from the Township and what the
Township can provide to Williamston Schools.
 
Strategic Planning – Supervisor Bloomquist reviewed the summary from the
December 8th Strategic Planning meeting. She requested each board member share
their top three priorities for the upcoming year. These priorities will guide
the development of the 2024-25 budget.
 
23-24 Budget Review – Supervisor Bloomquist updated the Board on the 2023-24
Budget and planning for the next fiscal year. She will be meeting with each
department to prepare a budget proposal for the January Board Meeting. One item
that she would like to revisit in January is the implementation of the state
recommended Admin Fee as part of tax collection.
 
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA – Trustee Duffy reported on the November 9 th NIESA Board Meeting. He
noted that the 2024 General Fund Budget was reviewed. A detailed Treasury
Report will be provided at their upcoming December 14 th meeting that will
provide a further breakdown of each proposed budget. Conversation was reopened
regarding renovations to allow for full-time staffing at Station #62 Leroy
Township.
 
Parks Committee – Trustee Steinberg noted that an arborist worked with the park
committee members in early December to eliminate invasive species. Progress was
made in decreasing these plants. Supervisor Bloomquist discussed the plans to
apply diamond dust to the fields so that it can settle over the winter months
in preparation for the 2024 baseball and softball seasons.
 
Elections – Clerk Cleveland updated the board on upcoming mailings for the
Presidential Primary in February.. She confirmed that all election equipment
has arrived and that preparations are beginning for Election Inspector
training.
 
Roads – Supervisor Bloomquist updated the Board on the status of the three
subdivisions interested in road improvements. She indicated that petitions in
each of the subdivisions did not reach the necessary threshold and therefore
will not be moving forward with the process. The Board discussed revisiting
local road programs, the township’s Neighborhood Road Policy, and ways to make
the process easier for residents to navigate.
 
Cemetery – Supervisor Bloomquist is beginning to meet with contractors to seek
bids for the entrance bridge and shepherd’s wall at the new green burial site.
 
 
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:15 PM
 
Sarah Belanger and Deb Wolf - Vice President and Trustee for the Williamston
Community Schools Board of Education respectively - shared that the WCS Board
of Education letter was intended to be informational and a call to action. They
said the Board of Education views the housing issue as a priority for the whole
community and they value the partnership with the Township in seeking solutions
in an effort to maintain enrollment, offerings, and quality staff. They hope
Township Board members will participate in the upcoming January meeting.
 
Sue Alchin, 3536 Burkley Rd. – expressed concern regarding the Christmas Barn
display in the pole barn at Wamhoff Farms. She shared her experiences as a
neighbor to this property and the impacts on her residence due to increased
traffic, lights, and noise. She is also concerned about environmental impacts
due to a recent parking surface application. Because this is a new display,
since the one at Halloween, she questioned if the process to address events
that do not meet ordinance regulations begins again.
 
Matt Ellsworth – 4514 Petoskey Dr. – expressed appreciation for his neighbors
working to improve the Pebblebrook Subdivision community and to the Township
Board for working hard to balance competing interests.
 
Closed at 8:25 PM
 
Adjournment and Review
 
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
 
Seconded by Trustee Steinberg
 
Meeting adjourned at 8:26 PM
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11303.jpg]
 
2024 Meeting Minutes
January 10, 2024
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
January 10, 2024
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 7:00
p.m. on January 10, 2024. Clerk Cleveland called the meeting to order, reviewed
the agenda, and led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, and Trustee
Steinberg.
Trustee Keith moved Clerk Cleveland chair and moderate the January 10, 2024
meeting of the Township Board in the absence of Supervisor Bloomquist.
Public Hearing Capital Improvement Plan
Clerk Cleveland opened the Public Hearing for the Capital Improvement Plan.
Seconded by Trustee Creagh.
The Public Hearing for the Capital Improvement Plan was opened at 7:02 p.m.
Trustee Creagh provided background regarding the Township’s efforts and process
towards creating its first Capital Improvement Plan (CIP).
Donna Tocarchick – Township Resident, Planning Commission Member: Addressed
concerns, technical issues, and questions regarding the Williamstown Township
Capital Improvement Plan.
Melody Wallace – Township Resident: Addressed concerns regarding limited
broadband access in the rural areas of the township.
Clerk Cleveland moved to close the public hearing.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Public Hearing for the Capital Improvement Plan closed at 7:13 p.m.
Treasurer Cutshaw followed up by summarizing broadband plans at the county
level to address limited and/or non-service areas that were shared at the
Broadband County Update Meeting held on Tuesday, January 9, 2024 at the
Hilliard Building in Mason.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:18 p.m.   
Donna Tocarchik – Township Resident, Planning Commission Member: expressed her
appreciation that the current Township Budget is accessible on the website and
noted that representation from a public constituent of the township should have
been included in the Capital Improvement Plan process.
Melody Wallace – Township Resident: noted that the service fee for filing taxes
online for can be costly to unaware residents and expressed safety concerns
about including residents’ home addresses in the Public Comment sections of the
Township Board Minutes.
Closed at 7:21PM
Consent Agenda
Trustee Creagh moved the consent agenda consisting of:
∙   Approve the minutes of the December 13, 2023 Board Meeting.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 31643-31652, for a
total of $76,941.80 and Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 31662-31664,
for a total of $2,685.79.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 31653-31661,
for a total of $13,053.62 and Accounts Payable for Approval #2, check number
31665-31667, for a total of $2,735.80.
∙   December Payroll Paid check numbers 51154-51158 and EFT 797, for a total of
$11,347.51 (phys. check amount), and Direct Deposit DD668-694, for a total of
$22,866.85.
∙   Revenue and Expenditure report ending December 31, 2023.
∙   Balance Sheet Ending December 31, 2023
∙   GL Activity Report
∙   Building Report
∙   Police Report
∙   Acknowledge receipt of the Treasurer’s report for December 2023
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: There was a correction on the Payroll Paid line of the Consent
Agenda. The month was changed from November to December.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, and Trustee
Steinberg.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Meridian Township Police Report - Captain Crane summarized the yearly police
report data for the Board. Trustee Steinberg inquired about the progress of the
deer cull in Meridian Township and if there might be value and feasibility to
this process in Williamstown Township. It was noted that residents have
inquired about the increased population of deer and the ramifications of this
surplus. Treasurer Cutshaw inquired about options for clearing roadways of dead
animals since the road and sheriff’s departments are no longer offering
programs to clear roadkill. It was noted that residents are often left
wondering how to clear animals from the roadway and/or along personal property.
Clerk Cleveland noted that the new Township Code Enforcement Officer, Sean
Haskin, had not met Chief Grillo. It as suggested that there would be value in
setting up a meeting between the two that included Supervisor Bloomquist as
well. Captain Crane said that we would share this suggestion with Chief Grillo.
ACTION ITEMS
Ingham County Payment Reduction Program
Trustee Creagh moved that the Williamstown Township Board approve Resolution
#121, to support the Ingham County Treasury Payment Reduction Program.
Seconded by: Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: Treasurer Cutshaw provided a historical perspective on the
evolution of this program beginning with Michigan Housing Assistance Fund
(MIHAF). She emphasized that this new program is only for residents who have
received a poverty exemption from the township and that Treasurer Fox has
reiterated that costs for this new program would not come back to the
municipality. Trustee Creagh confirmed that the program cannot be abused by
delinquent taxpayers, that participants must meet the outlined program
criteria, and that the township is held harmless.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Steinberg, and Clerk Cleveland
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Adoption of CIP Plan
Trustee Creagh moved that the Williamstown Township Board table the adoption of
the Capital Improvement Plan for 2024-2029 as prepared and recommended by the
Planning Commission until the February Board Meeting.
Seconded by: Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: It was noted that when issues are raised at a public hearing, the
adoption is tabled until the issues are addressed.
Motion Passed.
Budget Amendments
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Board approve the following budget amendments for
the 2023-2024 budget.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11312_5679x6876.jpg]
Seconded by: Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: There was a correction of the amount noted in Special Projects 401-
101-982.000 it read $172, 433. The correct amount it $172,443.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Steinberg, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, and Trustee
Creagh.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Adoption of Policy 3 Amended
Trustee Steinberg moved that the Williamstown Township Board table the adoption
of Policy 003, Funding Special Projects and Road Infrastructure until the
February Board Meeting.
Seconded by: Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: The Board discussed the overlap in this draft policy with that of
Policy 12. It is noted that there are areas of improvement and clarification
within the current draft that members would like addressed.
Motion Passed.
Art Display Policy
Trustee Creagh moved that the Williamstown Township Board approve the
Williamstown Township Art Display Policy.
Seconded by: Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: The Board confirmed that this policy addresses the rules and
regulations around displaying resident’s art. It was noted that time frames of
displaying art will need special consideration during election season.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Steinberg, and Clerk
Cleveland.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
DISCUSSION ITEMS  
23-24 Budget Review – The Board will wait until February’s Board Meeting to
discuss the 23-24 Budget.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA – No report.
Parks Committee – Trustee Steinberg noted that the committee will be working on
their budget which will include planning for a new park sign. Trustee Creagh
updated the Board on the status of their 2023 Application to the Ingham County
Trails and Parks Program.
Elections – Clerk Cleveland updated the board on the recent voter mailings and
the status of election applications that are currently being processed ahead of
the upcoming Presidential Primary.
Roads – No report.
Cemetery – Treasurer Cutshaw updated the Board on the progress of the Green
Burial Site and the plans to work with local funeral homes and directors.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:35 PM
Ron Poth – Township Resident, Planning Commission Member: provided feedback he
received and the perceptions that were shared from residents regarding the
Neighborhood Road Policy and process. In addition, he addressed his perspective
on a Township’s role and responsibilities to its residents with regards to the
recent letter that was sent to the Board from Williamston Community Schools.
Closed at 8:45 PM
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Creagh moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw
Meeting adjourned at 8:51.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11340.jpg]
 
February 14, 2024
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
February 14, 2024
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 7:00
p.m. on February 14, 2024. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order,
reviewed the agenda, and led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Trustee
Creagh, Trustee Duffy, and Trustee Steinberg.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:02PM
None.
Closed at 7:03PM
Consent Agenda
Trustee Steinberg moved the consent agenda consisting of:
∙   Approve the minutes of the January 10, 2024 Board Meeting.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 31668-31682, for a
total of $11,834.38 and Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 31698-31701,
for a total of $1,964.93.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 31683-31697,
for a total of $20,321.08 and Accounts Payable for Approval #2, check number
31702-31705 for a total of $1,805.68.
∙   January Payroll Paid check numbers 51159-51164 and EFT 798-800, for a total
of $11,571.43 (phys. check amount), and Direct Deposit DD695-724, for a total
of $23,520.65.
∙   Revenue and Expenditure report ending January 31, 2024.
∙   Balance Sheet Ending January 31, 2024
∙   GL Activity Report
∙   Building Report
∙   Police Report
∙   Acknowledge receipt of the Treasurer’s report for January 2024
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: The Board noted a heading clarification on the Building Permits
Issued and Finalized in the Board packet and Public Notebook. Additionally, a
typographical error was corrected in the Consent Agenda.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee
Steinberg, and Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Planning Commission (PC) Report – Trustee Creagh shared a summary of the
January 24th Planning Commission meeting. A Public Hearing was held for the
draft Green Zone amendments and approval was recommended to the Township Board.
A resumption of the discussion and review of wind and solar amendments
occurred. Action on these topics was tabled until March 27th. A Public Hearing
on Accessory Dwelling Units was set for the March 27th PC Meeting. A schedule
was established for the Master Planning – every other month, beginning in
February. Action was tabled for a site plan review of the Red Cedar Bend
Apartments until March.
Senior Center Update – Director Julie Rudd provided recent happenings and
updates at the Williamston Senior Center and their efforts toward purchasing a
facility of their own.
ACTION ITEMS
Williamston Baseball Boosters – Resolution for Charitable Gaming Licenses
Trustee Creagh moved that the Williamstown Township Board approve the
resolution for charitable gaming licenses for the Williamston Baseball
Boosters.
Seconded by: Trustee Duffy
Discussion: Marion Palmer, secretary for the Williamston Baseball Boosters,
requested a Board resolution stating that their organization is recognized as a
non-profit organization in the community.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg,
Supervisor Bloomquist, and Trustee Eyster
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Planning Commission Request
Trustee Steinberg moved Williamstown Township Board approve the contract with
McKenna Associates to update the Parks and Rec Master Plan at a cost not to
exceed $9,750.00.
Seconded by: Trustee Creagh
Discussion:  The Board noted that Master Planning for Parks and Rec is every 5
years and is needed when seeking possible grants to support and enhance parks.
The current Williamstown Township plan will expire in 2025. Completing this in
tandem with the Township Master Plan is a cost savings. The Board also
requested the Planning Commission review the Compatible Renewable Energy
Ordinance (CREO) and parking requirements for the Zoning Ordinance for Multi-
Housing.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist,
Trustee Eyster, and Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
2024 Poverty Resolution
Clerk Cleveland moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the 2024 Poverty
Exemption Guidelines as presented.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: None
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster,
Clerk Cleveland, and Trustee Creagh.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Public Hearing March 6 – Draft Police Assessment and Draft Budget
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board call for a Public
Hearing on the 2024 Budget and Police Assessment Roll for March 6 th at 7:00 pm
at the Township Hall.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: The Board discussed a reduction in current fees in the Police
Assessment Roll by $10 for residential and commercial properties. Supervisor
Bloomquist will run a new draft roll ahead of the March Public Hearing to
reflect this adjustment. It was noted that the fees could be adjusted back to
the current rate ($90 residential property and $160 commercial property) should
more Meridian Township officers be hired and patrol hours increased. ARPA
funds, their upcoming timelines, and the need to address plans for the Park
House were also discussed. It was noted that Trustees Creagh and Eyster will be
absent for the March Public Hearing.
Motion Passed.
Adoption of the Capital Improvement Plan (CIP)
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board take off the table the
motion regarding adoption of the CIP Plan.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: None
Motion Passed.
Trustee Creagh moved that the Williamstown Township Board adopt the Capital
Improvement Plan for 2024-2029 as prepared and recommended by the Planning
Commission.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: The Board is pleased with outcomes of implementing its first CIP
process. The comments from January’s Public Hearing will be helpful in shaping
next year’s process and plan.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Trustee Creagh,
Trustee Duffy, and Trustee Steinberg.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Budget Amendments
Clerk Cleveland moved the Board approve the following budget amendments for the
2023-2024 budget.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11349_7306x10673.jpg]
Seconded by: Trustee Duffy
Discussion: The Board corrected an omission in one of the GL numbers. In
addition, the Board clarified aspects of the 425 Agreement the Township has
with the City of Williamston, as well as confirmed future reimbursements from
the State of Michigan for the Presidential Primary Election.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee
Steinberg, and Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Road Improvement Recommendations
Trustee Duffy moved the Williamstown Township Board recommend contracting with
the Ingham County Road Department to complete repairs/improvements to Zimmer
Rd. from Haslett to Milton Rd. with an estimated cost of $242,242.00.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: Supervisor Bloomquist reviewed the considerations the Road
Committee processed when making their recommendations.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg,
Supervisor Bloomquist, and Trustee Eyster.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Township Park – Field Fencing
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board, after receiving and
reviewing multiple bids, approve the bid provided by Clery Fence Co for the
needed repairs to the south diamond at the Township Park not to exceed
$5000.00.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: The Board noted that many baseball teams will be utilizing the
township fields this year. Fence repairs and improvements will continue to
ensure the safety of the players.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist,
Trustee Eyster, and Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
DISCUSSION ITEMS  
Grant Opportunities – Supervisor Bloomquist had hoped to present two grant
opportunities, but one was eliminated due to current plans for Master Planning.
The second opportunity is through EECBG for up to $100,000 for environmental
and sustainable energy improvements to facilities. The Board confirmed that
this grant does not require a match and approved the Supervisor to move forward
with a draft which will be shared with members upon completion. 
Green Zone Amendments – Supervisor Bloomquist reviewed the summary from
McKenna’s Planning Consultant Chris Doozan.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA – Trustee Duffy reported on the February 8th NIESA Board Meeting. He
noted the first payment was received from Webberville DDA per the Revenue
Sharing Agreement. A transfer of funds to a MI Class subaccount was approved.
An Election of Officers was held for a one year term beginning 3-1-24. It was
noted that Don Henley (Treasurer) is not running again. A new Treasurer will be
elected. 
Parks Committee – Trustee Steinberg and Supervisor Bloomquist met with Earl
Wolf to begin work on updating entrance signs to the Township Park on Grand
River, as well as considerations for signs designating tree species in the Red
Cedar Woodlands. Priorities were generated and included fixing the roof and
replacing the upright beams on the pavilion, as well as focusing the future
purposes of the Park House. Harvest Festival plans are in the beginning stages.
A date will be confirmed soon.
Elections – Clerk Cleveland updated the Board on the preparations for the
upcoming Early Voting opportunity for Williamstown and Wheatfield Township
residents ahead of the Presidential Primary. It will begin on February 17th and
end on February 25th. 
Roads – Supervisor Bloomquist reviewed the current recommendations and noted
that the committee will keep checking on the roads and reporting needs to the
county.
Cemetery – Supervisor Bloomquist shared that residents can now purchase plots
in the Green Burial portion of the Cemetery. The Township is seeking bids for
landscaping.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:40 PM
Judy McManaman – Township Resident - Ms. McManaman spoke on behalf of Citizens
for Local Choice. Their purpose is to restore zoning back to local townships.
They have commenced a signature campaign to be placed on the ballot in November
2024 to repeal Public Act 233 of 2023.
Ron Poth – Township Resident/Planning Commission Member – Mr. Poth addressed
the Board regarding the Compatible Renewable Energy Ordinance (CREO) and his
conversations with Ingham County Commissioners.
Closed at 8:45 PM
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Clerk Cleveland
Meeting adjourned at 8:46 PM
Minutes approved by:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11378.jpg]
 
March 6, 2024
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
March 6, 2024
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held a special meeting and Budget
Public Hearing at 7:00 p.m. on March 6, 2024. Supervisor Bloomquist called the
meeting to order, reviewed the agenda, and led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee
Duffy, and Trustee Steinberg.
Public Comment for non-agenda items
Opened at 7:02 p.m.
None.   
Closed at 7:02 p.m.
Public Hearing for Police Assessment Roll
Treasurer Cutshaw moved to open the Public Hearing for the Police Assessment
Roll.
Seconded by Trustee Steinberg.
Discussion: No Public present. Supervisor Bloomquist explained that the Police
Assessment will be lowered by $10 per parcel for FY 24-25.
Treasurer Cutshaw moved to close the Public Hearing for the Police Assessment
Roll.
Seconded by Trustee Steinberg.
Public Hearing for the Proposed Budget
Trustee Steinberg moved to open the Public Hearing for the Proposed Budget.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Discussion: No Public present. Supervisor Bloomquist discussed possible
amendments to the FY 24-25 budget due to newly discovered increased costs in
some areas of the budget.
Trustee Steinberg moved to close the Public Hearing for the Proposed Budget.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw.
Public comment for agenda items
Opened at 7:07 p.m.
None: No public present.
Closed at 7:07 p.m.
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Clerk Cleveland
Meeting adjourned at 7:10 p.m.
It is noted that no action has been taken by the Board at this meeting, but the
budget will be considered at the March 13, 2024 Board meeting.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11408.jpg]
March 13, 2024
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
March 13, 2024
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 7:00
p.m. on March 13, 2024. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order,
reviewed the agenda, and led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee
Creagh, Trustee Duffy, and Trustee Steinberg
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:01PM
Mark Grebner – East Lansing Resident – shared remarks on a recent FOIA Request
and submitted an Appeal of Denial.
Monica Schafer – Township Resident, Ingham County Commissioner – updated the
Board on current committee appointments and focus, upcoming millages, and
recent commission votes.
Closed at 7:16PM
Consent Agenda
Trustee Steinberg moved the consent agenda consisting of:
∙   Approve the minutes of the February 14, 2024 and March 6, 2024 Board
Meeting.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 31706-31715, for a
total of $5,154.68 and Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 31722-31731, for
a total of $4,779.20.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 31716-31721,
for a total of $3,663.72 and Accounts Payable for Approval #2, check number
31732-31738 for a total of $3,837.80.
∙   February Payroll Paid check numbers 51165-51170 and EFT 801-802, for a
total of $10,989.47 (phys. check amount), and Direct Deposit DD725-749, for a
total of $24,335.96.
∙   Revenue and Expenditure report ending February 29, 2024.
∙   Balance Sheet Ending February 29, 2024
∙   GL Activity Report
∙   Building Report
∙   Police Report
∙   Acknowledge receipt of the Treasurer’s report for February 2024
 
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy,
Trustee Steinberg, and Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
ACTION ITEMS
Police Assessment Resolution
Clerk Cleveland moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve Resolution 2024-
98, Confirming the 2024 Special Assessment Roll for Police Protection within
the Township with the Special Assessment Roll total of $172,890 reflecting the
decreased assessment to $80.00 per residential unit and $150.00 per Commercial/
Industrial Unit as corrected.
Seconded by: Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: The Board noted an error in the special assessment roll and updated
that correction. Additionally, they reiterated their appreciation that the cost
savings are passed on to residents.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist,
Clerk Cleveland, and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Budget Adoption
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve the 2024-25
Township Budget with a beginning Township Total Fund Equity of $2,904,406.00 as
of 3-06-24, with department appropriations as outlined:
Seconded by: Trustee Duffy  
Discussion:  Clerk Cleveland noted discrepancies on the current proposed budget
from previous financial planning documents. The Board decided to move forward
and adopt the budget as written and make amendments as needed in the coming
year.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Clerk Cleveland,
Treasurer Cutshaw, and Trustee Creagh.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Green Zone Amendments
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Green Zone
Amendments as presented from the Planning Commission.
Seconded by: Clerk Cleveland
Discussion: The Board revisited the language in the Green Zone Amendments
regarding business driveways, minimum development size, and view shed
requirements.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer
Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, and Trustee Duffy.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Budget Amendments
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Board approve the following budget amendments for
the 2023-2024 budget.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11415_6038x4771.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11418_6051x3211.jpg]
 
Seconded by: Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: None
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Clerk Cleveland,
Treasurer Cutshaw, and Trustee Creagh.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Mower Upgrade
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the purchase of
the Kubota mower from Deer Creek Sales at a cost of $7350.00.
Seconded by: Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: The Board sought clarification on the age of the Township’s current
mower, bids from Mid-West Power Equipment, typical equipment warranties, and if
this is a purchase that was planned for per the Capital Improvement Plan (CIP).
It was noted that the mower’s cost did not meet the threshold for the CIP.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy,
Trustee Steinberg, and Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Park Burn
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the burn at the
Community Park at a cost of $8375.00 by David Borneman, LLC.
Seconded by: Trustee Duffy
Discussion: The Board discussed the cycles for the prairie burns at the
Community Park, the communication plan with neighboring residents, needed
insurance certificates, and the safety protocols employed by the company.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg,
Supervisor Bloomquist, and Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
RFP for Pre-audit and Audit Services
Clerk Cleveland moved the Williamstown Township Board request proposals for our
Pre-Audit and Audit Services.
Seconded by: Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: Treasurer Cutshaw reviewed the information included on the Pre-
Audit and Audit Service Request for Proposals (RFPs). It was noted that the
current audit provider’s rates will be significantly increasing.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy,
Trustee Steinberg, and Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Streetlight Conversion DTE
Trustee Creagh moved to table the motion to convert the streetlights to LED to
the April meeting to allow for additional communication to the impacted
residents.
Seconded by: Trustee Duffy
Discussion: The Board reviewed the shared costs and financial savings on moving
forward with DTE’s Streetlight LED Conversion Plan versus conversion over time.
Concern was expressed about adding costs to the current streetlight assessments
for those neighborhoods/residents that had recently completed their roads
through a special assessment. It was agreed that communication to those
impacted is needed and the opportunity to participate in the decision in April
would be valued.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy,
Trustee Steinberg, and Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Park & Hall Trash Bin Purchase
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the purchase of
two trash bins to be combined with the recycling bins at the Township Park at a
cost of $1528.00 from Wassau Tile.
Seconded by: Trustee Duffy
Discussion: The Board sought more description of the proposed product for
purchase. It was confirmed that it is the same model bins that are currently in
use at the park.  
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist,
Clerk Cleveland, and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Adoption of 2024-25 Meeting Dates
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Township Board adopt the meeting dates as
presented, with a change of October 15th to the 16th at 6pm.
Seconded by: Trustee Creagh
Discussion: The Board updated the October special meeting date and time.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Clerk Cleveland,
Treasurer Cutshaw, and Trustee Creagh.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA – Trustee Duffy noted that NIESA had not met yet prior to the Township
Board Meeting. He addressed inquiries on salaries being omitted from NIESA
meeting budget materials.  
Parks Committee – Trustee Steinberg noted the status on proposed new signage
for the Community Park. They are exploring two new opportunities to receive
trees for the forest. Harvest Festival date will be finalized soon. 
Elections – Clerk Cleveland reviewed the outcomes of and participation in the
recent Presidential Primary in February. Results have been certified by the
county and state certification is expected soon.
Roads – Supervisor Bloomquist reported that road work requests have been turned
into the county and that tree trimming has begun. 
Board of Review - Supervisor Bloomquist reported that 23 petitions were brought
to the Board.
Cemetery – Supervisor Bloomquist noted that the Cemetery Board is waiting for
one final bid from a landscaper for the Green Burial Section. The Board will be
meeting the week of March 18 th where they expect to review the bids and
discuss opening and closing fees for Green Burials.
Williamston Community Schools – Trustees Steinberg and Duffy shared a summary
of their recent participation in a community meeting held by the Williamston
Board of Education and Superintendent Spina.
Supervisor Bloomquist will be communicating with the Township Attorney
regarding Mr. Grebner’s recent FOIA Appeal. A special meeting will be called,
if needed.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:42 PM
Kevin Mark, Township Resident – addressed student enrollment at Williamston
Community Schools.
Steven Blaske, Township Resident – introduced himself. He is a newer resident
to the township and interested in our local government and its processes.
Closed at 8:57 PM
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Clerk Cleveland
Meeting adjourned at 8:58 PM
Minutes approved by:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11451.jpg]
April 10, 2024
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
April 10, 2024
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 7:00
p.m. on April 10, 2024. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order,
reviewed the agenda, and led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee
Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Eyster, and Trustee Steinberg
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:01PM
None.
Closed at 7:02PM
Consent Agenda
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the consent agenda consisting of:
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 31739-31757, for a
total of $14,168.72 and Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 31766-31769,
for a total of $1,569.44
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1 – Police, check number 1139, for a
total of $42,597.44.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 31758-31765,
for a total of $11,405.38 and Accounts Payable for Approval #2, check number
31770-31775 for a total of $1,667.22.
∙   February Payroll Paid check numbers 51171-51202 and EFT 803-804, for a
total of $21,297.64 (phys. check amount), and Direct Deposit DD750-786, for a
total of $24,883.85.
∙   Revenue and Expenditure report ending March 31, 2024.
∙   Balance Sheet Ending March 31, 2024
∙   GL Activity Report
∙   Building Report
∙   Police Report
∙   Draft Planning Commission Minutes
∙   Acknowledge receipt of the Treasurer’s report for March 2024
Seconded by Trustee Eyster
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh,
Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, and Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Meridian Township Police Report – Chief Grillo summarized the Police Report for
the first quarter.
He noted there was a slight uptick in calls for service for this period. He
updated the Board on current staffing levels with 36 trained officers. The goal
being 42. With the increasing staffing levels, they will be able to improve
their focus on roadway safety. Chief Grillo also answered questions about
Meridian Township’s Recruitment process and the recent damage at the Community
Park.
Planning Commission (PC) Report - Chair Eidt shared a summary of the March 27
th Planning Commission Meeting. A public hearing was held for the Accessory
Dwelling Units (ADU) revisions. The commission resumed their review of wind and
solar amendments and set a public hearing date for May 22 nd . A public hearing
was also set for the May meeting for parking requirements for multiple family
residences. The Planning Commission Meeting/Workship Schedule for fiscal year
2024-2025 was adopted. The Master Plan Opinion Survey was reviewed. He
expressed the Commission’s condolences for the unexpected death of Township
Planning Assistant, Jim Howard. The Board addressed the possibility ADUs as
rentals.
ACTION ITEMS
Approval of March 13, 2024 Minutes
Treasurer Cutshaw moved that the Williamstown Township Board approve the
minutes of the March 13, 2024 Board Meeting, as corrected.
Seconded by: Trustee Creagh
Discussion: Treasurer Cutshaw noted the GL number for the Health Insurance
budget was incorrect in the March 13, 2024 Meeting minutes under Budget
Amendments in the Action Items section. It should have read: 101-215-718.000.
Motion Passed.
Contracts for Audit and Pre-Audit Services
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board approved the bid from
Maner Costerisan for Pre-Audit services in the estimated amount of $12,000 and
the bid from Clark Schaeffer Hackett for Audit services in the amount of
$15,000.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: It was noted that Maner Costerisan had submitted an RFP for both
the Pre-Audit and Audit. The rules stipulate that a single accounting firm
cannot perform both audits. Additional discussion ensued about the significant
increases in costs due to the changes in reporting standards. Supervisor
Bloomquist confirmed that these RFPs were more than what was budgeted for and
that she will bring back budget amendments next month to reflect these
increases.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy,
Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, and Trustee Eyster.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Streetlight Conversion - DTE
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board contract with DTE for
converting street lights to LED’s with the expense to be billed through the
Street Light Assessment Districts over 2 years with no interest charged.
Seconded by: Trustee Steinberg   
Discussion:  None
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg,
Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, and Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Cemetery Improvements
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the bid from
Redwood Landscaping, as amended, in the amount not to exceed $20,400 for the
foot bridge construction, with a small safety wall, and Shepherd’s Wall at
Summit Cemetery.
Seconded by: Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: The Board discussed the entrance and Shepherd’s Wall. They also
requested the addition of a safety wall on the bridge to the Redwood
Landscaping plan.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist,
Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw,
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
BS&A Planning and Zoning Training and Setup
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board approved the training
and set up in the amount of $5,175.00 for the Planning and Zoning module for
Building.net.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: Supervisor Bloomquist explained how the BS&A Building Module could
be enhanced with the addition of Planning and Zoning. The Board discussed the
cost, how the public could interface with the program, the applicability to the
Planning Commission, and the information streamlining benefits.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster,
Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, and Trustee Creagh.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Park Damage
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Supervisor
move forward with charges to be filed on the individuals responsible for the
March 24, 2024 damage at the township park.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: The Board discussed moving forward with pressing charges. Chief
Grillo reviewed the process that typically occurs in these types of situations.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk
Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, and Trustee Duffy.
Nays: None
Motions Passed.
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Township Board contract with Redwood
Landscaping or Contractor’s Landscape and Design to repair the damage from 3-
24-24 at the Township Park’s sports fields and parking lot at a cost up to
$1065, whoever can complete the project the soonest.
Seconded by: Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: The Board discussed the importance of getting the park repaired as
soon as possible with the start of the baseball and softball seasons underway.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer
Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, and Trustee Steinberg.
Nays: None
Motions Passed.
Discussion Items
Recommended revisions to the Zoning Ordinance – Accessory Dwelling Units - The
Board commended the work of the Planning Commission on these recommendations.
Updated revisions, increased square footage of the units, and the options this
ordinance provides with regards to housing and aging in place were discussed.
It was noted that residents would still need to seek approval from the Drain
Commission and Health Department, as currently required.
Park House – Supervisor Bloomquist reviewed findings of the recent assessment
completed on the Park House. Next steps would include seeking an RFP for
architectural services to complete a design of the house based on the future
use of the building. The Board questioned the vision and viability building as
an assembly spot, the feasibility of it as a revenue generating asset, and the
costs of redesigning and maintenance over time. Supervisor Bloomquist added
that any construction would have to be funded through a grant. The Board agreed
that a logical next step is to seek an architectural plan to determine possible
future costs and viability.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA – Trustee Duffy reported on the March 14 th NIESA meeting. The Board
discussed MI Class transfer guidelines, as well as information and costs
regarding the potential purchase of a boat and a UTV. The Board also approved
committee members.  
Parks Committee – Trustee Steinberg updated the Board on their progress for the
new signage at the Community Park, as well as their plans for the new trees and
acorns to be planted in the forest.
Senior Center/Ingham County Board of Commissioners – Trustee Steinberg updated
the Board on the recent support of the Ingham County Board of Commissioners to
match 50% of the $750,000 needed to purchase the old Merindorf building and
relocate the Senior Center to this location to use as their new facility.
Trustee Creagh also noted that the County Board also passed a resolution to
authorize contracts for trails and parks millage (round 8 applications). This
includes the Red Cedar River Multi-Jurisdictional Clearing Project that
includes Meridian and Williamstown Townships and the City of Williamston.
Cemetery – Supervisor Bloomquist noted that the Cemetery Board will be working
on opening and closing fees for Green Burials.
Supervisor Updates – Supervisor Bloomquist shared that she was notified of a
follow-up community meeting with the Williamston Board of Education and
Superintendent Spina on May 9th. She will be able to attend and invited other
Board members to join her. There will be a postcard communication sent to
residents regarding accessing the Master Plan Survey online. Treasurer Cutshaw
requested that a paper format be available for residents who do not have access
to the internet or for those who prefer that format. Supervisor Bloomquist
confirmed that all recent FOIA requests have been fulfilled. There will be a
Celebration of Life in honor of Planning Assistant Jim Howard on April 21st at
2pm. Regarding Broadband Equity, Access, and Deployment (BEAD) funding from the
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, a link will be placed on the township
website and Facebook page to encourage residents to participate in sharing
their status with regards to broadband access and whether they are served/
unserved/under-served at their current address in Ingham County. Supervisor
Bloomquist updated the Board on the current status of the Consumer’s Energy
Pipeline Project within township. There is a November 24th initial completion
date with final restoration planned for April 2025.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:49 PM
None.
Closed at 8:49 PM
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Clerk Cleveland
Meeting adjourned at 8:50 PM
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11487.jpg]
May 8, 2024
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
May 8, 2024
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 7:00
p.m. on May 8, 2024. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order,
reviewed the agenda, and led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer
Cutshaw, and Trustee Creagh.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:03 PM
None.
Closed at 7:03 PM
Consent Agenda
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the consent agenda consisting of:
∙   Approve the minutes of the April 10, 2024 Board Meeting.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 31776-31792, for a
total of $35,128.91 and Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 31799-31802,
for a total of $2,559.22
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 31793-31798,
for a total of $10,116.50 and Accounts Payable for Approval #2, check number
31803-31811 for a total of $4,907.58.
∙   Revised March Payroll Paid, check numbers 51171-51202 and EFTs 803-806, for
a total of $27,382.86 (physical check amount), and Direct Deposit DD750—DD786,
for a total of $24,833.85.
∙   April Payroll Paid, check numbers 51203-51209 and EFTs 807-808, for a total
of $6,046.69 (phys. check amount), and Direct Deposit DD787-813, for a total of
$21,766.99.
∙   Revenue and Expenditure report ending April 30, 2024.
∙   Balance Sheet Ending April 30, 2024
∙   GL Activity Report
∙   Building Report
∙   Acknowledge receipt of the Treasurer’s report for April 2024
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: Clerk Cleveland addressed the Revised March Payroll Paid EFTs..
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, and
Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
ACTION ITEMS
Zoning Amendments - Accessory Dwelling Units
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the recommended
revisions to the Zoning Ordinance allowing Accessory Dwelling Units.
Seconded by: Clerk Cleveland
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Supervisor
Bloomquist, and Trustee Eyster.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Budget Amendments
Trustee Creagh moved the Board approve the following budget amendments for the
2024-2025 budget.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11496_10656x4291.jpg]
 
Seconded by: Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: The Board discussed the subdivisions that will receive the street
light upgrades and the timeline for repayment.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster,
and Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Harvest Festival Budget
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve $4000 for the
Harvest Festival out of 101-751-881.000 (Park Lands).
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: The Board reviewed the past festival budget, vendor
participation, and the communication plan for the event. They requested a
report of the final costs from last year, as well as a more detailed budget
prior to this year’s event that includes updates on planning and vendors as
they commit to the festival. 
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Creagh, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland,
and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Cemetery – Green Burial Fee Schedule, Grave Cover, and Landscaping
Trustee Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the recommended
fee schedule changes for Green Burials and to review the fee schedule within
one year.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: The date on the Cemetery Board minutes was corrected to reflect the
May 1 st  meeting. Supervisor Bloomquist explained the background, consultant
collaboration, pricing considerations, and new recommendations on the Green
Burial fee schedule. Trustee Eyster emphasized the need for the Board to
consider and financially plan for future maintenance of Summit and Foote
Cemeteries when they are at capacity. She noted that there currently is not a
perpetual fund for the township cemeteries. Additionally, Trustee Creagh
requested that the Green Burial fee schedule be revisited within the next year
once experience is garnered with the new process and maintenance costs are
known.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer
Cutshaw, and Trustee Creagh.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the purchase of a
grave cover for the Green Burial Section at a cost not to exceed $3,800.00
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: The Board reviewed safety precautions that need to be considered
during a Green Burial, how the grave cover is utilized, and the projected
lifetime of the product under consideration. 
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, and
Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the purchase of
Landscaping materials per the plan dated 11-2-21 by Mannik Smith Group at a
cost not to exceed $6,000.00.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: Supervisor Bloomquist reviewed the materials needed to finish the
site plan for the Green Burial Site. She noted that this plan did not include
the scattering gardens, which will be discussed in future meetings. The Board
discussed the potential option for families to purchase items to be placed
within the site in memory of their loved ones (ex. benches, rocks, and/or
trees). The Board requested the site plan to be shared again.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Supervisor
Bloomquist, and Trustee Eyster.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Septic Line Repairs
Clerk Cleveland moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the bid from
Stevens Construction/Excavating for replacement of the drain line to the Septic
tank at the Township Hall, not to exceed $2,000.00.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: The Board discussed the current and frequent issues with the septic
system and the needed solutions.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster,
and Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None
Motions Passed.
Prime Housing Donation
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the donation
from Prime Housing Group with funds dedicated to restricted donation in 401-
000-674.001 and increase the budget $7,000.00 in 401-751-881.000.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: The Board expressed their gratitude for the generous donation and
the continued support of the Prime Housing Group as a supporter of the Township
Community Park.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Creagh, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland,
and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Nays: None
Motions Passed.
Discussion Items
Tree Planting Park and Cemetery – The Board discussed the needs and plans for
the planting of trees at the park and cemetery and the plan moving forward.
Trustee Eyster noted that the park planting was completed on May 6 th , however
organization for watering and fencing will be required. Ideas for continued
plantings included utilizing local community groups and or sports teams who
engage in community service.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA – No report.
Parks Committee – Trustee Eyster updated the Board on the new types of trees
planted at the Community Park and noted the planting is moving northward.
Incoming submissions and bids for park signage was discussed. The Board also
reviewed the shared responsibilities of the CATA bus stop between the Township
and CATA and who maintained the parking lot. There may be an opportunity to
improve the parking area, however more information is needed.
Elections – Clerk Cleveland reported that there was no new information to
share.
Roads – Supervisor Bloomquist noted that there had been a few subdivision road
inquiries.
Branch School – Supervisor Bloomquist reminded the Board of the upcoming Branch
School Historic Designation Ceremony and Open House to be held on May 19 th .
The ceremony will be from 2-4pm with an open house for the community from 3:30-
5pm. Supervisor Bloomquist noted that Tim Green is the new chair of the
Historical Committee and that Mitch Lutzke also joined the group.
Supervisor Updates – Supervisor Bloomquist noted the recent success of the Art
Tour on May 3 rd and 4 th . She credited the efforts of Gwen Brandon, Kerri
Danstrom, and the Artists who participated for the well-attended event.
Additionally, she recently participated in a meeting with the Williamston Area
Senior Center leadership and surrounding Township Supervisors to discuss the
center’s current operations, by-laws, senior programming, future plans, and
their desire to move forward with a millage request on the November ballot.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:13 PM
None.
Closed at 8:13 PM
Adjournment and Review
Clerk Cleveland moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw
Meeting adjourned at 8:14 PM
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11531.jpg]
 
June 12, 2024
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
June 12, 2024
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 7:00
p.m. on June 12, 2024. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order,
reviewed the agenda, and led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer
Cutshaw, Trustee Duffy, and Trustee Steinberg.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:03 PM
None.
Closed at 7:03 PM
Consent Agenda
Trustee Steinberg moved the consent agenda consisting of:
∙   Approve the minutes of the May 8, 2024 Board Meeting.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 31812-31830, for a
total of $15,564.70 and Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 31838-31845,
for a total of $2,369.00.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 31831-31837,
for a total of $4,261.44 and Accounts Payable for Approval #2, check numbers
31846-31854 for a total of $8,056.74.
∙   May Payroll Paid, check numbers 51210-51220 and EFTs 809-811, for a total
of $13,762.13 (phys. check amount), and Direct Deposit DD814-853, for a total
of $29,877.31.
∙   Revenue and Expenditure report ending May 31, 2024.
∙   Balance Sheet Ending May 31, 2024
∙   GL Activity Report
∙   Building Report
∙   May PC Draft Minutes
∙   May PC Annual Report
∙   Acknowledge receipt of the Treasurer’s report for May 2024
Seconded by: Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: Trustee Steinberg noted a correction on the consent agenda for
Accounts Payable for Approval #2. It should read check numbers .
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Dufty,
Trustee Steinberg, and Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Williamston Community Schools Update
- Dr. Adam Spina, Superintendent of Williamston Community Schools, shared
highlights and district accomplishments from the past school year. He also
addressed upcoming projects and focus areas for the 2024-2025 school year
including the district’s two ballot initiatives.
Senior Center Millage Proposal Update
– Julie Rudd, Director of the Williamston Senior Center, presented updates and
future action plans for the organization. She will attend the July Township
Board Meeting to finalize November election ballot language for the Senior
Center millage proposal.
Planning Commission Report
- Chair Eidt shared a summary of the Planning Commission’s Annual Report and
their May 22nd Meeting. He noted Public Hearings were held for the proposed
changes to the Wind and Solar Energy Ordinance and the amendments to the
ordinance for Parking Standards for Multiple Family Residences. The commission
recommended the approval of the parking standards to the Township Board. The
commission declined approval of a Special Land Use Application for 5820
Shoeman. The revised Site Plan for Red Cedar Bend Apartments was reviewed. A
July public hearing was set for the 3840 Vanneter Rezoning request. The Annual
Report for 2023-2024 was approved and submitted to the Township Board. Chair
Eidt also noted the May 29th visioning workshop occurred and was well-attended
by residents.
Trustee Duffy left the meeting at 7:54pm
ACTION ITEMS
Private Road Ordinance
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board request the Planning
Commission work with McKenna Associates to draft Private Roads Ordinance.
Seconded by: Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: Supervisor Bloomquist noted that Ingham County Road Commission will
no longer take on new public roads in condominium developments. Therefore,
private road ordinance language will need to be developed and drafted at the
next Planning Commission meeting. Currently, private roads are not permissible
pursuant to the Zoning Ordinance.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor
Bloomquist, and Trustee Eyster.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
ACD.net Metro Right of Way Permit Application
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve the Metro Right
of Way permit application with ACD.net.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee
Eyster, and Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
MTA Educational Opportunity
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the addition of
the Premium Education Package with the dues for a total of $7950.23.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: The Board discussed the savings to the Township for the money spent
on this package and the discounts the membership provides. Trustee Eyster
suggested finding a way to document participation to provide a metric on the
value of this membership. The Board also wants to ensure that township
committees and commissions know they have access to these learning
opportunities.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk
Cleveland, and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Safe Routes to School (SRTS) – Mannik Smith Group Proposal
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the contract
with Mannik Smith Group for the pre-engineering design required for the SRTS
Grant application at a cost not to exceed $5000.00.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: Supervisor Bloomquist provided a historical timeline of the project
and next steps.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer
Cutshaw, and Trustee Steinberg.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Park Entrance Sign Proposals
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the bid from
Johnson Sign Company in the amount of up to $20,000 for the Proposal #1 sign
with funds provided by private sources.
Seconded by: Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: Discussion ensued on the historical need for visible signage at the
Community Park. It was noted that this project has designated funding from
donations.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Steinberg, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw,
and Trustee Steinberg.
Nays: None
Motions Passed.
Discussion Items
Zoning Ordinance Amendment – Parking Standards – Supervisor Bloomquist noted
that the Planning Commission is making recommendations to amend the multiple
family parking standards. She requested that Board members submit any questions
they have to her so that they may be forwarded to Planning Consultant Doozan.
Senior Center Millage – Director Rudd answered questions from Board Members.
She will provide ballot language for the proposed millage for action at the
July meeting. 
Curbside Recycling – Supervisor Bloomquist noted that the Township’s population
increased as of the last census and met the state standard whereas curbside
recycling will need to be offered to residents. The City of Williamston
recently put out a Request for Proposals (RFP) for this service that Supervisor
Bloomquist will be reviewing. The Board discussed costs, increased traffic and
trucks on the road with this type of service, as well as the timeline the State
requires. The Board is in agreement with moving forward with Supervisor
Bloomquist exploring this requirement and the options that could be considered.
Policy 3 and Policy 12 – Trustee Eyster provided background on the development
of the new Policy 12 which is a merging of the former Policy 3 and the previous
Policy 12. The goal was to better define how the funds are moved and why, as
well as the procedures that will now be followed regarding this policy.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA – No report.
Parks Committee – Trustee Steinberg noted obstructions in the Red Cedar area
just below the dam. Based on previous Board approval, the work for removal was
authorized. It was noted that it is a shared cost with the city. An update on
the tree planting was provided.
Elections – Clerk Cleveland updated the board on timelines for the August
Primary and Early Voting. The Election Commission recently met and approved the
Absent Voter Counting Board to be located at the former Forster Woods Adult
Daycare Center building at St. Katherine’s Church. The Election Commission will
be meeting again to approve Election Inspectors and the Receiving Board.
Recently, the Clerk and Deputy Clerk attended Election Security and Election
Cycle trainings. Clerk Cleveland is developing Election Emergency Plans and
will be meeting with Meridian Township Police as it is being created. She will
also be trialing a new software to assist with scheduling and communicating
with Election Inspectors, as well as track inventory and trainings. The trial
runs through the August election.
Roads – Supervisor Bloomquist met with the Ingham County Road Department.
Topics discussed included Special Assessment Districts and maintenance on those
new roads, new subdivision roads, county staffing shortages, and the
department’s equipment needs.
Branch School – Supervisor Bloomquist noted that May’s dedication went really
well. There has been interest for using the space by educators. Upcoming Open
House dates include the Ice Cream Social (September 8th) and Christmas Open
House (December 7 th ).
Cemetery – Supervisor Bloomquist shared that the first green burial has
occurred. Work for the bridge will begin mid-July and plantings will begin in
the fall after the construction is complete.
Supervisor Update – Supervisor Bloomquist reminded the Board that on June 20 th
at 4:30pm there will be a dedication for Planning Assistant Jim Howard at the
Community Park. Additionally, the Ingham County Chapter of the Michigan
Township Association will have its next meeting on June 26 th at the new Locke
Twp Hall – invitations were sent to members.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 9:32 PM
None.
Closed at 9:32 PM
Adjournment and Review
Clerk Cleveland moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw
Meeting adjourned at 9:33 PM
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11571.jpg]
July 10, 2024
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
July 10, 2024
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 7:00
p.m. on July 10, 2024. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order,
reviewed the agenda, and led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer
Cutshaw, and Trustee Steinberg.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:01 PM
Julie Rudd – Director of the Williamston Senior Center - spoke to recent
updates on and activities at the newly acquired Senior Center building
(formerly Merindorf’s). She also updated the Board on recent meetings with area
Township Boards with regards to the ballot language that will be used for their
upcoming Millage request in November.
Closed at 7:05 PM
Consent Agenda
Trustee Steinberg moved the consent agenda consisting of:
∙   Approve the minutes of the June 12, 2024 Board Meeting.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 31855-31866, for a
total of $17,518.50 and Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 31876-31878,
for a total of $1,821.63.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 31867-31875,
for a total of $8,243.22 and Accounts Payable for Approval #2, check number
31879-31883 for a total of $1,257.32.
∙   June Payroll Paid, check numbers 51221-51231 and EFT 812, for a total of
$12,907.51 (phys. check amount), and Direct Deposit DD854-884, for a total of
$24,863.30.
∙   Revenue and Expenditure report ending June 30, 2024.
∙   Balance Sheet Ending June 30, 2024
∙   GL Activity Report
∙   Building Report
∙   Police Report
∙   PC Minutes
∙   Acknowledge receipt of the Treasurer’s report for June 2024
Seconded by: Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: Trustee Eyster confirmed the AP and Payroll Check Numbers from May
to June.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Steinberg,
and Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Meridian Township Police Report – Chief Grillo shared updates with the Board on
current department staffing, including new hires, retirements, and upcoming
promotions. The department was recently awarded a Traffic Grant which will be
used for speed enforcement throughout the township. He noted that there was a
20% increase in calls for service for Williamstown Township this past quarter,
mostly traffic related issues. The Chief reminded the Board that this year’s
National Night Out is on August 6 th . The Board asked questions related
pedestrian safety and illumination requirements for resident’s who bike and
walk, as well as inquiries about the recent service calls and the data options
available with the new speed signs that will be erected on various roads.
ACTION ITEMS
Zoning Ordinance Amendment – Parking Standards
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Zoning
Ordinance Amendment for Parking Standards as recommended by the Planning
Commission.
Seconded by: Clerk Cleveland
Discussion: The Board discussed the criteria that was used to establish the
parking standards.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor
Bloomquist, and Trustee Eyster.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Senior Center Millage Question – November Ballot
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Township Board approve Resolution
#132-2024 as presented.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: The Board expressed their desire to support the new Senior Center
building and the improved services it will offer to the township’s senior
residents. They confirmed that the proposed millage would replace the funds
previously provided through the Township’s General Fund, that the ballot
language for November’s Millage is unique to each township seeking the
proposal, as well as the numbers designated for the Resolution.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee
Eyster, and Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Policy 12 Adoption
Trustee Eyster moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the revised Policy
12 and rescind Policy 3.
Seconded by: Treasurer Cutshaw
Discussion: The Board commended the work, organization, and clarity in process
that Trustee Eyster’s efforts provided on this policy. 
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk
Cleveland, and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Discussion Items
None.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA – No report.
Parks Committee – It was noted that eight new trees were donated and planted by
George and Janet Eyster at the Community Park. It was suggested that mowing
occur around previous plantings to assist in watering.
Elections – Clerk Cleveland updated the Board on the upcoming August 6 th
Primary. Early Voting will begin on July 27 th and end on August 4 th . She
reminded the Board that voters can vote only one party in the partisan sections
of the ballot. Absent Voter Ballots were mailed in late June and are already
being returned via the mail and Township drop box. The Election Commission met
and approved the Election Inspectors for August. The week of July 15th the
inspectors will have training, the Public Accuracy Test will occur, and the set
up for Early Voting will begin. The Board inquired about the current number of
Election Inspectors scheduled for August and how the Clerk works to ensure
there is balanced party representation at the sites.
Roads – Supervisor Bloomquist noted that the North Zimmer Road work was
completed up to Milton Rd.
Branch School – Supervisor Bloomquist reminded the Board of the upcoming Ice
Cream Social in September.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:45 PM
None.
Closed at 7:46 PM
Adjournment and Review
Clerk Cleveland moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw
Meeting adjourned at 7:47 PM
Minutes approved by:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11612.jpg]
 
August 14, 2024
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
August 14, 2024
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 7:00
p.m. on August 14, 2024. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order,
reviewed the agenda, and led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer
Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, and Trustee Steinberg.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:01 PM
None.
Closed at 7:01 PM
Consent Agenda
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the consent agenda consisting of:
∙   Approve the minutes of the July 10, 2024 Board Meeting.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 31884-31908, for a
total of $49,914.60 and Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 31922-31925,
for a total of $1,701.11.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 31909-31921,
for a total of $16,307.98, Accounts Payable for Approval #2, check number
31926-31930 for a total of $4,830.18, and Accounts Payable for Approval #3,
check number 31931 for a total of $3,858.00.
∙   AP Police Paid #1, check number 1141 for a total of $3,500.00.
∙   July Payroll Paid, check numbers 51232-51242 and EFTs 813-817, for a total
of $11,726.45 (phys. check amount), and Direct Deposit DD885-917, for a total
of $25,258.70.
∙   Revenue and Expenditure report ending July 31, 2024.
∙   Balance Sheet Ending July 31, 2024
∙   GL Activity Report
∙   Building Report
∙   Police Report
∙   PC Minutes
∙   Acknowledge receipt of the Treasurer’s report for July 2024
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: None
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh,
Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, and Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Planning Commission Report – Chair Eidt shared a summary of the Planning
Commission’s (PC) July 24th Meeting. He noted that Planning Consultant Doozan
provided an update on wind and solar energy systems since the last public
hearing. It was explained that new approaches have been made at the State
level, which would amend the previously reviewed regulations. It was requested
that the PC call for another public hearing on the revised regulations which
will be September 25th. A public hearing was held for the rezoning application
for 3840 Vanneter Rd. The proposed Private Road Ordinance was reviewed. A
revised ordinance will be presented at the September meeting. It was noted that
this ordinance should not be confused with regulating driveways. It was further
clarified that this ordinance does not regulate long driveways or shared
driveways. Ron Poth was elected Vice Chair of the Planning Commission in light
of the resignation of Mr. Rob Stanford. Additional public hearings were
scheduled for the September 25th Meeting for Energy Storage Systems and the
3962 Vanneter Rezoning application. Due to the number of public hearings in the
queue, Trustee Creagh suggested that it might be in the Planning Commission’s
best interest to hold a special extra meeting to ensure they are able to
complete all their tasks in timely manner.
ACTION ITEMS
Planning Commission Appointment
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the appointment of
Kevin Mark to the Planning Commission to fill the vacancy with a term expiring
September 2027.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: The Board expressed their appreciation for Mr. Rob Stanford’s
service and expertise on the Planning Commission (PC). The Board welcomed Kevin
Mark and noted his previous work with Emergency Management and Homeland
Security will help to make him a great addition to the PC team.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy,
Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, and Trustee Eyster.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
BS & A Upgrade
Trustee Creagh moved to postpone action on the proposal for BS&A to upgrade our
system to the cloud until September to allow the Board time to get clarity on
the questions and concerns posed.
Seconded by: Trustee Duffy
Discussion: Supervisor Bloomquist shared what was learned when BS&A presented
information about their new cloud-based program. The Board discussed timelines
for implementation, how updates differ between the current and new platform,
concerns regarding roles and responsibilities of BS&A and their customers
should security be compromised, as well as the cost and the funds designated to
pay for this program. The Board asked for a meeting with BS&A to discuss these
questions and concerns. Supervisor Bloomquist will follow-up with BS&A
regarding this request.
Motion Passed.
Treasurer’s Resignation
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board reluctantly accept the
resignation of Treasurer Jill Cutshaw effective 8-31-24 and acknowledge the
dedication and expertise she bestowed on the office of Treasurer.
Seconded by: Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: The Board shared gratitude for Treasurer Cutshaw’s years of service
to the Township and her willingness to participate on various committees over
the years.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist,
Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, and Treasurer Cutshaw.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Treasurer’s Appointment
Treasurer Cutshaw moved the Williamstown Township Board appoint Kim VanErp,
current Deputy Treasurer, as the Williamstown Township Treasurer to fill the
vacancy due to the resignation of Jill Cutshaw.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: It was noted that Kim VanErp’s skillset and her familiarity with
the many departments in the office makes her well-suited for the job of
Treasurer. Trustee Creagh confirmed with the Supervisor that the position was
posted and no one else had expressed interest. The Board recognized Kim’s
dedication to the Township and shared they look forward to working with her in
her new role.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster,
Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, and Trustee Creagh.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Budget Amendment Policy 12
Treasurer Cutshaw moved that the amount of $289,151 be moved from 101 to 401
per policy 12, and that the budget for Transfer In be revised to $289,151 and
the budget for Special Projects and Roads be adjusted to show the additional
funds of $144.575.50 to each account.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk
Cleveland, Treasurer Cutshaw, and Trustee Creagh, and Trustee Duffy.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Discussion Items
Cluster Zoning Density and Open Space – Supervisor Bloomquist referenced the
letter submitted to the Board by Planning Consultant Doozan. She reviewed the
recommendations regarding the regulations concerning minimum open space and lot
size, frontage on a public road for a new proposed development, and why it
merits reconsideration by the Planning Commission (PC). Trustee Creagh
emphasized the value on process to determine clarity on the need for possible
rezoning. It was confirmed that Private Roads have no bearing on this issue.
There was Board consensus for the this to be sent to the PC.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA – Treasurer Cutshaw attended the August 8 th Meeting. She shared that a
presentation was given by Stryker who produces the equipment that is used by
NIESA. She noted that there has been an increase in calls due to car accidents.
Parks Committee – Trustee Steinberg noted that it has been a quiet month for
the park. He acknowledged the nine newly planted oak trees, the park sign which
is in production, and the Harvest Festival which is scheduled for Saturday,
October 5th.
Senior Center – Trustee Steinberg updated the Board on building updates to the
new Senior Center and the local organizations who are contributing their time,
equipment and talents to the renovation of the building. Clerk Cleveland shared
with the Board that the millage language which will appear on the November
ballot was approved last month and has been sent to the Ingham County Clerk.
Elections – Clerk Cleveland noted that there was a 40.49% voter turnout for the
August Election. The nine days of Early Voting saw an increase to 103 voters.
All precincts balanced. One tabulator had issues at the Absent Voter Counting
Board which will require some additional attention by the vendor prior to
November. She expects County Certification by week’s end and State
Certification by the end of August. She praised the work of the Election
Inspectors for Williamstown Township and shared November Election preparations
are already underway. 
Cemetery – Supervisor Bloomquist shared that Redwood Landscaping had started
their work at the Green Burial site.
Roads – Supervisor Bloomquist shared that the Road Committee will be meeting
soon. She would like the committee to explore adding some maintenance work
language to the Neighborhood Road Policy in an effort to lengthen the life of
the roads recently redone by Township subdivisions.
Branch School – Supervisor Bloomquist reminded the Board that Branch School Ice
Cream Social will be September 8 th from 2:00-4:00 pm. 
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:00 PM
Jerry Eidt, Township Resident and Planning Commission Chair - thanked Treasurer
Cutshaw for her service, expertise, and contributions to the Township. He also
noted that it was an honor and privilege to work as an Election Inspector in
the August Primary.
Kim VanErp, Township Resident and Deputy Treasurer – followed up to one of the
security questions posed earlier in the meeting by the Board and assured them
that BS&A has a server in Virgina and one in Wyoming so if one goes down the
other will take over. In addition, she celebrated the work of Treasurer
Cutshaw, the years of they have worked together, and thanked those who have
contributed to their combined success.
Closed at 8:07 PM
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Treasurer Cutshaw
Meeting adjourned at 8:09
Minutes approved by:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11654.jpg]
 
September 11, 2024
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
September 11, 2024
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 7:00
p.m. on September 11, 2024. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order,
reviewed the agenda, and led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer
VanErp, Trustee Duffy, and Trustee Steinberg.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:02 PM
Michelle Rosa – Township Resident – introduced herself to the Board as a
candidate for the District 15 Ingham County Commissioner.
Sue Alchin – Township Resident – expressed her continued concerns regarding
event barns. She questioned the language in the Township ordinance and how it
is enforced. She shared her experiences as a neighbor to property that has held
various events in their barn. Ms. Alchin requested that the Board share what
has been done to address her concerns and the violations against the ordinance.
Closed at 7:12 PM
Consent Agenda
Trustee Steinberg moved the consent agenda consisting of:
∙   Approve the minutes of the August 14, 2024 Board Meeting.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 31932-31942, for a
total of $202,451.72 and Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 31958-31963,
for a total of $12,762.92.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 31943-31957,
for a total of $5,697.17, and Accounts Payable for Approval #2, check number
31964-31971 for a total of $4,382.51.
∙   AP Police Paid #1, check number 1143 for a total of $800.00.
∙   August Payroll Paid, check numbers 51243-51271 and EFTs 819-820, for a
total of $24,675.63 (phys. check amount), and Direct Deposit DD918-948, for a
total of $25,725.06.
∙   EFT 818, for a total of $5,3390.35, and AP Police Paid, check number 1142,
for a total of $42,687.15. (Both should have been in the August Consent
Agenda.)
∙   Revenue and Expenditure report ending August 31, 2024.
∙   Balance Sheet Ending August 31, 2024
∙   GL Activity Report
∙   Building Report
∙   Police Report
∙   PC Minutes
∙   Acknowledge receipt of the Treasurer’s report for August 2024
Seconded by: Trustee Duffy
Discussion: Clerk Cleveland noted the two additional items that were
inadvertently omitted from the August Consent Agenda, as noted above.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Duffy, Trustee
Steinberg, and Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
ACTION ITEMS
BS&A Upgrades
Trustee Duffy moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the proposal from
BS&A to upgrade our systems to the Cloud format with a cost of $39,300 for
implementation to be expensed out of ARPA funds and a beginning annual cost of
$31,185.00 to be expensed out of Township Board Repairs and Maintenance.
Implementation date request to be determined.
Seconded by: Treasurer VanErp
Discussion: Trustee Steinberg addressed the performance language used in the
BS&A contract and questioned its meaning, how it applies to the actual cloud-
based program regarding security, and where responsibility lies should the
system be compromised. The Board reviewed aspects of the contract related to
security to process these questions and expressed overall support for the
upgrade. Clerk Cleveland presented reasons to consider postponing the actual
transition the new cloud-based platform until the new fiscal year (April 2025).
Trustee Eyster acknowledged the current waiting period for the upgrade and
suggested that it may be advantageous to “get in line” upon purchasing the
product with the option to postpone the implementation.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg,
Supervisor Bloomquist, and Trustee Eyster.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Budget Amendments
Clerk Cleveland moved the Board approve the following budget amendments for the
2024-2025 budget.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11661_6795x5333.jpg]
Seconded by:
Discussion: Trustee Eyster noted that audit fees were higher this year than
what was budgeted. Supervisor Bloomquist reviewed each proposed budget
amendment.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor
Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, and Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Legal Counsel
Trustee Eyster moved that the Williamstown Township Board approve the
Supervisor moving forward with the Fahey Schultz engagement letter.
Seconded by: Trustee Steinberg
Discussion:  Supervisor Bloomquist provided the background on the decision to
select Fahey Schultz to represent Williamstown Township regarding Event Barns.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster,
Clerk Cleveland, and Treasurer VanErp.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Discussion Items
Police Contract – Supervisor Bloomquist reviewed the proposed updates to the
Agreement for Law Enforcement Services between the Charter Township of Meridian
and Williamstown Township. It was noted that hours will be increased from 40 to
60 hours per week beginning in April 2025, so long as staffing levels at the
department stay above 36 or more officers. It was also noted that there is 13%
increase in overall costs in 2025 with an additional 3% increase in 2026 and
2027.
Recycling Grant Extension – Supervisor Bloomquist reviewed the past work on
Township Recycling initiatives and the grant that had been awarded last year in
support of this work. The Township is able to seek an extension to the grant
for one year. This additional time will provide for opportunities to explore
more options and potentially partner with the county for recycling. The Board
was in consensus to move forward with the extension.
SRTS Grant – Supervisor Bloomquist updated the Board on the status of the
application process and the improvements the Safe Routes to School (SRTS) Grant
will provide for township residents. Estimated costs are still being
determined. A special meeting to review the proposal will be tentatively
scheduled for September 26 th at 5:30pm. The Grant is due Oct. 3rd.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA – Trustee Duffy noted that there has not been a meeting yet for
September, therefore there was nothing new to report from last month.
Parks Committee – Trustee Steinberg updated the Board on the committee’s
meeting with Consultant Chris Doozan regarding the current work on and
revisions to the Master Plan. The meeting included representatives from the
Township Soccer and Baseball organizations. Supervisor Bloomquist noted that
the new park sign should be installed at month’s end and shared the current
vendors scheduled for the Harvest Festival on October 5th. Trustee Eyster
updated the Board on the status of the newly planted Trees. One tree has been
lost but is under warranty.
Senior Center – Trustee Steinberg confirmed Trustee members could have signs of
support at their homes for the upcoming Senior Center Milage.
Elections – Clerk Cleveland updated the Board on the preparations underway and
the current timelines for the upcoming November Election. The election
equipment will be tested on October 17 th . The Clerk will be hosting an
Elections Security event for residents in conjunction with the testing. More
information will be forthcoming. She is also seeking a grant through the
Institute for Responsive Government. Trustee Steinberg acknowledged the efforts
of Secretary of State Jocelyn Benson and County Clerk Barb Byrum regarding
election security.
Cemetery – Supervisor Bloomquist updated the Board on the progress of the
landscaping at the Green Burial site. The land bridge and shepherd’s wall has
been completed. The final step will be ordering the trees for the area.
Roads – Supervisor Bloomquist noted that the Road Committee will be meeting on
September 25 th to draft the proposed road policy contract for next year.
Branch School – Supervisor Bloomquist noted that the Ice Cream Social was not
as well-attended as last year. It was observed that it was a cooler day and the
River Days event was happening simultaneously. She shared that the Ingham
County Historical Commission is planning a future event. This is an effort to
promote their new One Room Schoolhouses book that came out in May. Copies of
the book will be available to purchase at each participating school when the
event is officially scheduled. A reminder about the Branch School Christmas
open house on Dec. 8 was also shared.
Supervisor Updates – Supervisor Bloomquist welcomed Treasurer VanErp to her
first meeting and noted her seamless transition from Deputy Treasurer to
Treasurer. She also noted that Dali Giese will be stepping down from the
Planning Commission. She expressed gratitude for her work on behalf of the
Township and her years of service. 
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:26 PM
Sue Alchin – Township Resident - thanked the board for taking action on Event
Barns.
Toby Weston – Township Resident and Planning Commission Member – expressed
gratitude for the service that Dali Giese provided the Planning Commission. He
also thanked Supervisor Bloomquist for her advocacy and efforts on the the Safe
Routes to School initiative. He noted its importance to and safety for the
residents of the Township.
Closed at 8:30 PM
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Clerk Cleveland
Meeting adjourned at 8:30
Minutes approved by:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11698.jpg]
 
September 26, 2024
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
September 26, 2024
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held a special meeting at 5:30 p.m.
on September 26, 2024. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order,
reviewed the agenda, and led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp, Trustee
Creagh, Trustee Duffy, and Trustee Steinberg.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 5:32 PM
None.
Closed at 5:32 PM
ACTION ITEMS
Safe Routes to School Grant Application
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board adopt Resolution #133
supporting the construction of a non-motorized pathway in Williamstown
Township.
Seconded by: Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: Supervisor Bloomquist provided an overview of the scope of the
project, cost estimates for the segment to be completed, ineligible costs
related to the grant/project, and the timeline should the grant be awarded. In
addition, she reviewed the revised map and the current schools that would be
included in this grant cycle. The Board discussed this project as a first step
towards the goal of having a more expansive network of sidewalks/paths for the
township neighborhoods, students, and residents to improve their access to the
schools and the broader township community. It was noted that it may be useful
to create a map that could be accessed by residents to show not only what the
overall goal of the Safe Routes to School is, but the progression of the
expansion and/or future additions, as well as what has been completed through
the grant thus far.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee
Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board adopt Resolution #134
to approve ownership of safe routes to school within Williamstown Township.
Seconded by: Trustee Creagh
Discussion: Supervisor Bloomquist reviewed the maintenance expectations for the
projected project, as well as what would be budgeted yearly for its care and
upkeep.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg,
Supervisor Bloomquist, and Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Institute for Responsive Government Grant Acceptance
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board accept the $6000.00 grant
from the Institute for Responsive Government for the exclusive use for the
nonpartisan public purpose of planning and operationalizing secure and
accessible election administration in Williamstown Township.
Seconded by: Trustee Steinberg
Discussion:
Clerk Cleveland reviewed the process for the acceptance of the funds and how it
will function with the current Clerk’s budget. Related to the budget, she
revisited how funds were accessed and used when previous grants were awarded
for elections. Clerk Cleveland expressed how helpful this grant will be in
supporting elections moving forward.
Roll Call Vote:
Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Clerk
Cleveland, and Treasurer VanErp.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 5:55 PM
Toby Weston – Township Resident and Planning Commission Member - expressed his
appreciation for the special meeting, as well as all the work and effort in
pursuing the grant. He reiterated the value of this worthwhile endeavor. As a
member of the Safe Routes to School Committee, he noted that there are several
opportunities of additional smaller scaled projects that could be pursued.
Completed incrementally, these smaller projects could have great impact
collectively over time. Mr. Weston urged the Board to consider establishing a
group of residents to work towards this goal of connecting our students and
residents to our schools/township. He also inquired as to the materials that
would be used should the path include future expansion to Sherwood Road.
Gwen Chirico-Brandon – Township Resident and Employee – inquired about the
implications of the funds that are allotted, if some of Mr. Weston’s ideas were
implemented. Additionally, she questioned how budgets are created if the
project is completed in segments and each segment has unique environmental
needs.
Closed at 6:10 PM
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Clerk Cleveland
Meeting adjourned at 6:10.
Minutes approved by:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11736.jpg]
October 9, 2024
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 7:00
p.m. on October 9, 2024. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order,
reviewed the agenda, and led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer
VanErp, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, and Trustee Steinberg.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:02 PM
Roz Peacock – Township Resident - commented on the proposed Red Cedar Bend
Apartments and presented questions regarding the development and property
developers.
Jerry Eidt – Township Resident and Planning Commission Chair – expressed
gratitude for the years of service Trustee Janet Eyster and Supervisor Wanda
Bloomquist have given to Williamstown Township.
Jim Giguere – property developer – expressed his support of the zoning requests
on Vanneter Road.
Closed at 7:08 PM
Consent Agenda
Trustee Creagh moved the consent agenda consisting of:
∙   Approve the minutes of September 11, 2024 and September 26, 2024 Board
Meetings.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 31972-31986, for a
total of $6,369.73 and Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 32001-32006, for
a total of $2,131.78.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 31987-32000,
for a total of $30,729.27, and Accounts Payable for Approval #2, check number
32007-32011 for a total of $3,193.58.
∙   AP Police Paid #1, check number 1144 for a total of $44,624.94.
∙   September Payroll Paid, check numbers 51272-51280 and EFTs 823-826, for a
total of $12,910.14 (phys. check amount), and Direct Deposit DD949-975, for a
total of $23,245.76.
∙   Revenue and Expenditure report ending September 30, 2024.
∙   Balance Sheet Ending September 30, 2024
∙   GL Activity Report
∙   Building Report
∙   Police Report
∙   Draft PC Minutes
∙   Acknowledge receipt of the Treasurer’s report for September 2024
 
Seconded by: Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: Treasurer VanErp noted a time correction on page four of the
September 11th minutes.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Creagh,
Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, and Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Audit Report – Daniel Morris – Clark Schaefer Hackett CPAs and Advisors – Mr.
Morris presented a summary of the recent Williamstown Township Audit for the
fiscal year ending March 31, 2024, and answered Board questions. He noted that
the Township received an unmodified clean opinion for 2023-2024. Mr. Morris
provided highlights of the report regarding the Township’s current revenue and
expenditures, as well as changes in the fund balance that resulted in an
overall increase. His summary included information on internal controls and a
recommendation on the journal entry process that will be addressed this fiscal
year.
Meridian Township Police Report – Chief Grillo reviewed quarterly township
public safety data and shared recent staffing updates with the Board. He
further updated the department’s security work in preparation for the November
General Election. The Halloween Open House for Meridian Township will be
Saturday, October 26th from 10am to 1pm and Chief Grillo encouraged
Williamstown residents and the Board to attend the fun and informative event. 
Planning Commission Report – Chair Eidt shared a summary of the Planning
Commission’s (PC) September 25 th Meeting. Public Hearings for Rezoning at 3850
and 3962 Vanneter Road from RR to R-1 were held, as well as Public Hearings for
Zoning Regulations for Wind and Solar Energy Systems and Energy Storage
Facilities. All were recommended to the Board for approval. The Private Road
Ordinance, Wetland Buffer, and Miscellaneous Zoning Amendments were reviewed,
and Public Hearings were set for the November 14 th meeting. A Waiver Request
for the Red Cedar Bend Apartments was recommended to the Board with the goal of
meeting as many of the requirements as possible. The election of PC Officers
was postponed until the November Meeting.
ACTION ITEMS
Rezoning Request – Lightfoot and Giguere
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the request to
rezone property located at 3840 Vanneter, parcel #’s 33-03-03-36-251-001 and
33-03-03-36-251-002 owned by the Lightfoot Trust from RR to R-1 as recommended
by the Planning Commission. The rezoning request is consistent with the Future
Land Use Map.
Seconded by: Trustee Duffy
Discussion: The request for rezoning and the Future Land Use Map were
discussed.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee
Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, and Trustee Eyster.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the request to
rezone property located at 3962 Vanneter, parcel # 33-03-03-36-301-003 owned by
the Perkins Trust from RR to R-1 as recommended by the Planning Commission. The
rezoning request is consistent with other development in the area and should be
reflected on the Future Land Use Map.
Seconded by: Trustee Duffy
Discussion: None  
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg,
Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, and Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Red Cedar Bend PUD Request
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the waiver request
from JJDB Properties LLC for the Red Cedar Bend Apartments from the 20-acre
minimum size requirement for Planned Use Development.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: Mr. Todd Calloway, architect, and Mr. Kevin McIntyre, Developer for
JJDb Properties LLC, summarized the development history of the proposed Red
Cedar Bend Apartments and their reasons for seeking the waiver.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist,
Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, and Treasurer VanErp.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Police Contract
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the proposed
contract as presented for 2025, 2026, and 2027.
Seconded by: Clerk Cleveland
Discussion: Chief Grillo explained updates regarding staffing, patrol hours,
and services in the new proposed Meridian Township Police Services contract for
2025-2027. Notably, the hours will increase to 60 hours per week in April 2025
and have the potential to return to 80 hours weekly coverage should Meridian
Township Police become fully staffed and the Board request a need for more
service.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster,
Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp, and Trustee Creagh.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Neighborhood Road Policy
Trustee Creagh moved to table action until November for recommended amendments
to be added to the revised Neighborhood Road Policy.
Seconded by: Trustee Duffy
Discussion: Supervisor Bloomquist reviewed the suggested revisions to the
current policy and provided historical background and clarity on the process
that neighborhoods utilize when seeking a potential Special Assessment to
improve their road(s). The Board expressed concern that the proposed changes
could result in less contact from the Township with neighborhoods seeking these
improvements potentially leading to more confusion and frustration. The Board
requested that additional amendments be added to the proposed policy that
include a plan for additional communication from the Township regarding the
status of the process and contact information for residents whose neighborhood
roads are under consideration for improvement.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk
Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Creagh, and Trustee Duffy.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Financial Signatories and Approved Banking
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board adopt Resolution #73-
2024 regarding Bank Signatories.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: None
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, and Treasurer
VanErp, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, and Trustee Steinberg.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown township Board adopt the amendments to
the Depository Designation Resolution #116-2024.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion:  None
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Creagh,
Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, and Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Police Assessment Roll
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board approve amending
Resolution 2024-98, Confirming the 2024 Special Assessment Roll for Police
Protection within the Township with the Special Assessment Roll total from
$$172,890 to $172,970.00 with the addition of 33-03-03-29-251-006.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: Supervisor Bloomquist reviewed the current and proposed rates for
Police Services and protection in Williamstown Township.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee
Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, and Trustee Eyster.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Computer Upgrades
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown township Board approve recommended
purchase for the computer upgrades up to $2450.
Seconded by: Trustee Creagh
Discussion:  Supervisor Bloomquist reviewed the technology replacement plan and
details regarding the Township’s Fire Wall, as well as the cost savings with
the new proposed subscription.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg,
Supervisor Bloomquist, and Trustee Eyster, and Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Discussion Items
Wind, Solar, and Energy Storage Proposed Regulations – Supervisor Bloomquist
reviewed the efforts, process, and time the Planning Commission has applied
revising the regulations for the Township in relation to the preemptive
language passed by the legislature and signed by the Governor. She requested
the Board review the proposed regulations and provide her with any questions
and comments.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA – Trustee Duffy updated the Board on the NIESA Board Meeting from
September 12 th including the approved purchase of a new ambulance and the
renewal of a Flagstar CD. He also noted that NIESA hosted its own Fire Academy
led by NIESA Staff where 10 new firefighters were able to seek certification. A
September 16th graduation ceremony was held. On September 21 st a successful
controlled burn of a house was conducted where the new fire fighters could
participate and apply their recent learning.
Parks Committee – Trustee Steinberg celebrated the efforts of the recent 3rd
Annual Community Park Harvest Festival where over 400 adults and children
attended. It was also noted that there will be a dedication of the Meditation
Circle developed and funded by the Eyster Family. It is tentatively set for
October 29th. The High School is planning to host a Cross-Country Meet at the
park.
Senior Center – Trustee Steinberg noted the Senior Center sent out a mailing
regarding the upcoming millage request. More information is available on their
website. The Rotary and Senior Center will be hosting a Taste of Williamston on
October 22 nd at the new Senior Center location.
Elections – Clerk Cleveland noted that as of October 9 th , 2,034 ballots had
been sent to Township Residents and 22% have been returned. The Election
Commission met and approved the slate of Election Inspectors. Clerk Cleveland
will be creating their schedule and assignments soon. She invited the Board and
the Township residents to an Informational Election Security Open House that
will be held in conjunction with the Public Accuracy Test on Thursday, October
17 th from 2:30pm – 4:30pm.
Cemetery – No new updates to report.
Roads – No new updates to report.
Branch School – Supervisor Bloomquist reminded the Board that the Branch School
Christmas Open House will be on December 8th.
Supervisor Updates – The Strategic Planning Session scheduled for Wednesday,
October16th will be rescheduled for after the elections so that the new Board
can attend the work session on future planning. The date is to be determined.
Trustee Duffy sought an update on the legal counsel efforts regarding the
Burkley Road Event Barn. Trustee Eyster expressed her gratitude for the
opportunity to serve the Township and on the Board.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 9:05 PM
Roz Peacock – Township Resident – commented on the Wind and Solar Ordinance and
requested that the Board review the information in Article 8.02, subsection QQ
in the Zoning Revisions Regarding Solar Energy Systems. She expressed concern
regarding the purpose in this section and the perceived biases of the
information.
Closed at 9:08 PM
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Clerk Cleveland
Meeting adjourned at 9:15 pm
Minutes approved by:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11779.jpg]
 
November 13, 2024
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
November 13, 2024
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 7:00
p.m. on November 13, 2024. Supervisor Bloomquist called the meeting to order,
reviewed the agenda, and led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer
VanErp, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, and Trustee Steinberg.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:02 PM
Mark Eyster – resident of Williamston City – expressed praise for Trustee
Eyster’s service as an elected official to the Township and the broader
community of Williamston.
Jerry Eidt – resident of Williamstown Township – shared that it was an honor to
serve with Wanda and Janet and expressed his gratitude for their help over the
years. 
Closed at 7:05 PM
Consent Agenda
Trustee Steinberg moved the consent agenda consisting of:
∙   Approve the minutes of October 9, 2024 Board Meeting.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 32012-32033, for a
total of $15,828.31 and Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 32051-32053,
for a total of $1,302.51.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 32034-32050,
for a total of $13,699.00, and Accounts Payable for Approval #2, check numbers
32054-32059 for a total of $158,559.80.
∙   October Payroll Paid, check numbers 51281-51291 and EFTs 823-826, for a
total of $14,458.99 (phys. check amount), and Direct Deposit DD976-1006, for a
total of $27,382.56.
∙   Revenue and Expenditure report ending October 31, 2024.
∙   Balance Sheet Ending October 31, 2024
∙   GL Activity Report
∙   Building Report
∙   Police Report
∙   Draft PC Minutes
∙   Acknowledge receipt of the Treasurer’s report for October 2024
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Creagh,
Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, and Supervisor Bloomquist.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
ACTION ITEMS
Budget Amendments
Trustee VanErp moved the Board approve the following budget amendments for the
2024-2025 budget.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11786_6370x7326.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11789_9447x3351.jpg]
 
Seconded by: Trustee Creagh
Discussion: The Board reviewed the fund balance of the 401 accounts. Trustee
Eyster explained sources of information used to identify the adjustment needed
for Fiscal Year 2024-2025. She further clarified the process that helps to
identify monies that will carry over into the next year.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee
Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, and Trustee Eyster.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Neighborhood Road Policy
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the recommended
revisions to the Neighborhood Road Policy and recommended petition process as
amended.
Seconded by: Trustee Duffy
Discussion: The Board discussed components of the updated process to further
clarify the roles and responsibilities of the stakeholders, as well as utilize
active vs passive language in the steps. Two specific edits include: 
6. After the petitions are turned into the Township, the Township will conduct
a verification process and if the petitions meet the requirements of the
policy, public hearings will be scheduled to complete the process.
8. The petitioner(s) will be the contact person(s) for correspondence between
the Township and neighborhood for items that are not addressed in the
Neighborhood Road Policy *such as dates of construction, time frame, etc.) The
petitioners should make arrangements to inform residents that some services may
be interrupted during the construction and will need to adjust during road work
and may need to make other arrangements for services.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee VanErp, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg,
Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, and Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
2025 Road Improvements
Trustee Eyster moved the Board approve the request to the Ingham County Road
Department, the improvements to Barry and Turner Rd. as recommended and to
revert the Hart Rd. to gravel at an estimated cost of $293,745.
Seconded by: Trustee Duffy
Discussion: Trustee Creagh inquired if the resident who lives on Hart Road is
aware of the recommendation. It was confirmed the resident will be informed
prior to the road work being completed. Trustee Eyster provided historical
perspective on the original decision to pave Hart Road with asphalt. The Board
discussed the Road Department’s budget, plans, and timelines for scheduled
improvements to Sherwood Road.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist,
Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, and Treasurer VanErp.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Wind, Solar, and Energy Proposed Regulations
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the planning
commission recommended revisions to Section 8.02, subsection KK., wind energy
regulations, dated 7-27-24.
Seconded by: Clerk Cleveland
Discussion: Trustee Eyster commended the PC effort that went into each of the
proposed regulations.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster,
Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp, and Trustee Creagh.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the planning
commission recommended revisions to Section 8.02, subsection QQ, solar energy
systems, dated 7-27-24.
Seconded by: Clerk Cleveland
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk
Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Creagh, and Trustee Duffy.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the planning
commission recommendation to amend Section 8.02 and add subsection TT regarding
adding Energy Storage Facilities, dated 7-27-24.  
Seconded by: Clerk Cleveland
Discussion: Trustee Creagh expressed gratitude for PC Chair Jerry Eidt’s
leadership and the great work from the PC membership. 
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Supervisor Bloomquist, Trustee Eyster, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp,
Trustee Creagh, and Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
ARPA Funds
Trustee Steinberg moved that the remaining ARPA funds in the amount of $127,543
be spent on the allowable use of revenue loss as allowed in the US Treasury
final rule and that the government service identity is road work contracted
with Ingham County allocated during the period of preface, which is March 3,
2021 to December 31, 2026.
Seconded by: Treasurer VanErp
Discussion: None.
Motion Passed.
PC and Compensation Committee Appointment
Trustee Creagh moved the Township Board approve the Supervisor’s appointment of
Jill Cutshaw to the Planning Commission with a term expiring September 2027.
Seconded by: Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: The Board discussed the timeline of the vacancies, and confirmed
that other applications were received and on file.
Motion Passed.
Treasurer VanErp moved the Township Board approve the Supervisor’s appointment
of Gwen Brandon to the Planning Commission with a term expiring September 2027
to fulfill the balance of Jim Brinker’s term.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: Concern was expressed on the timing of this vacancy with Jim
Brinker’s resignation noted as December 1 st . The question was raised as to
whether this was technically a vacancy at this time. It was noted that it would
be a vacancy before the next Board Meeting.
Motion Passed.
Clerk Cleveland moved the Township Board approve the Supervisor’s appointment
of Jill Cutshaw to the compensation commission with a term expiring 12/5/2028.
Seconded by: Treasurer VanErp
Discussion: The Board discussed the frequency of the compensation commission’s
meetings (odd years), how many members typically serve, and if there were any
other candidates who expressed interest.
Motion Passed.
Treasure VanErp moved the Township Board approve the Supervisor’s appointment
of Mickey Martin to the compensation commission with a term expiring 12/5/25.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: The Board discussed the candidate’s qualifications.
Motion Passed.
Clerk Cleveland moved the Township Board approve the Supervisor’s reappointment
of David Foran to the compensation commission with a term expiring 12/5/29.
Seconded by: Trustee Eyster
Discussion: None.
Motion Passed.
Discussion Items
Strategic Planning – It was determined that this planning session will occur
Friday, December 6 th from 9am – 12pm in the Township Board Room. It was
suggested that the current Draft of the Master Plan be available for reference,
as well as the results of the Township Opinion Survey. It was also confirmed
that invitations would be extended to representatives from the various
commissions and committees.
Budget Review – Supervisor Bloomquist noted that the Budget provided at the
meeting is reflective of this year’s budget and does not include anything
proposed for the Fiscal Year 2025-2026. She noted that pay will need to be
addressed, as well as Financial Management and Audit Fees, which have increased
significantly this year. She will be seeking input on any upcoming projects for
the next Fiscal Year. She advised that the Board create a rough draft budget in
December and that this topic should be a part of the Strategic Planning
session.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA – Trustee Duffy updated the Board on the NIESA Board Meeting from October
10 th . He noted that the Board approved their schedule for 2025. The meeting
was conducted at the Webberville Station and upon the conclusion of the meeting
the Board toured their recently constructed “hot house” that is used for onsite
training.
Parks Committee – Trustee Steinberg noted that they are preparing to label the
trees in the park. The plan is to place the labels near the pathway close to
the species. Trees have been flagged and the process should begin soon. It was
also noted that the new sign was erected and that it is a great addition to the
park.
Senior Center – Trustee Steinberg reminded the Board that the Williamston Area
Senior Center Open house will be Saturday, December 7 th from 12pm – 4pm. More
details to follow. 
Elections – Clerk Cleveland provided an update on the timeline for certifying
the recent General Election. She is hopeful that it will be completed at the
County-level within the next week. She noted that it was a great turnout for
Williamstown Township residents. 81.28% of registered voters participated,
which is the highest rate since she began working at the Township. The average
voter participation in the county was 66%. She expressed her appreciation for
the Township Election Inspectors and noted that their engagement and desire to
serve our residents makes them an outstanding group. Trustee Eyster and
Treasurer VanErp commended Clerk Cleveland on how well the elections were run
in 2024 and noted that there is a great deal of work she does behind the scenes
to make them run as smooth as they do.
Cemetery – Supervisor Bloomquist shared information on an interesting burial
that will occur in May of 2025. Webberville resident and World War II Veteran
James Schwartz’s bones were identified in the Philippines recently. His remains
will be returned to Williamston, and he will be buried next to his great-
grandparents in Summit Cemetery.
Roads – Reported earlier in the meeting.
Branch School – Supervisor Bloomquist reminded the Board that the Branch School
Christmas Open House will be on December 7 th from 2 to 4pm. She noted that
Santa will be there, as well as crafts for the kids/visitors.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:18 PM
Ron Poth – resident of Williamstown Township and incoming Supervisor -
expressed his gratitude for Supervisor Bloomquist and Trustee Eyster and their
years of service to the Township. He is looking forward to working with the
Board.
Tim Green - resident of Williamstown Township and Williamstown Township
Historical Committee Chair – expressed his gratitude to Supervisor Bloomquist’s
guidance and expertise in running the Township and Clerk Cleveland’s election
efforts.
Closed at 8:20 PM
Board Members thanked Supervisor Bloomquist and Trustee Eyster for their years
of service to the Township, commitment to the residents, and the knowledge they
shared.
Supervisor Bloomquist expressed her gratitude for the kind words and shared her
pleasure in serving the community. She noted that her departure is bittersweet
but knows the Township will be in good hands and she will remain involved
within the community.
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Clerk Cleveland
Meeting adjourned at 8:28 pm
 
Minutes approved by:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11829.bmp]
 
December 11, 2024
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
December 11, 2024
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 7:00
p.m. on December 11, 2024. Supervisor Poth called the meeting to order and led
the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Poth, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker,
and Trustee Creagh.
Trustee Steinberg arrived at 7:02 pm.
Approval of Agenda
Motion by Trustee Creagh, second by Trustee Brinker to approve the agenda.
Motion passed.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:01 PM
Kevin Mark – resident and Planning Commission Member – expressed concerns about
the inconsistent access and ability to utilize the technology in the Board Room
and its impact on all those who regularly attend meetings. His suggestions
included posting the password for Guest WiFi and displaying the agenda on the
screens so that participants can follow along more easily. Mr. Mark also
expressed concerns about safety on our township roadways and the number of
citations that are issued by Meridian Township Police.
Closed at 7:05 PM
Consent Agenda
Trustee Creagh moved the consent agenda consisting of:
∙   Approve the minutes of the November 13, 2024 Board Meeting.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 32060-32073, for a
total of $20,122.41 and Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 32079-32089,
for a total of $15,703.01.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 32074-32078,
for a total of $1,871.94 and Accounts Payable for Approval #2, check numbers
32090-32097 for a total of $2,699.14.
∙   October Payroll Paid, check numbers 51292-51324 and EFTs 833-835, for a
total of $22,818.99 (phys. check amount), and Direct Deposit DD1007-1037, for a
total of $24,382.45.
∙   Revenue and Expenditure report ending November 30, 2024.
∙   Balance Sheet Ending November 30, 2024.
∙   GL Activity Report
∙   Building Report
∙   Police Report
∙   Draft PC Minutes
∙   Acknowledge receipt of the Treasurer’s report for November 2024
Seconded by: Treasurer VanErp
Discussion: Trustee Steinberg asked that the minutes reflect that the resident
on Hart Rd. will receive information prior to the road work being completed in
2025. He also confirmed that other PC Applicant’s information was on file.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker, Trustee Creagh,
Trustee Steinberg, and Supervisor Poth.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Planning Commission Report – Chair Eidt shared summaries of the Master Plan
Workshop (10/23) and the Planning Commission (PC) Meeting (11/14). The Master
Planning Workshop on October 23rd consisted of an economic analysis of our
area, as well as a presentation on our local parks. On November 14th at the PC
Meeting, a Public Hearing for the proposed Private Road Ordinance was held, as
well as a Public Hearing for Miscellaneous Zoning Amendments. All were
recommended to the Board for approval. Action on the Committee for Officer
Elections was tabled until the January 22nd meeting. Planned Unit Development –
Cluster Zoning Amendments were reviewed. A Public Hearing was set for the
January 22nd meeting. The Future Land Use Map, as well as Planned Trails and
Greenway Corridors Map were also discussed. It was decided that subcommittees
will be formed with other shareholders to provide further guidance on these
subjects. Chair Eidt inquired how the new Board would like information shared
regarding Master Plan sessions and Planning Commission Meetings. The Board
concurred that updates are not critical after Master Planning sessions but
would like him to continue to provide summaries after PC Meetings. It was noted
that Sean Haskin will be resigning his position as Planning Assistant and Code
Enforcement. Mr. Doozan may be able to temporarily assist in the transition.
ACTION ITEMS
Budget Amendments
Clerk Cleveland moved the Board approve the following budget amendments for the
2024-2025 budget.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11836_7444x4981.jpg]
 
Seconded by: Trustee Brinker
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Steinberg,
Supervisor Poth, and Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Foster Swift Lawsuit
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board adopt Resolution #135-
2024 to support Foster Swift’s appeal regarding the Michigan Public Service
Commission’s October 10, 2024 order.
Seconded by: Treasurer VanErp
Discussion: The Board discussed liability implications should the resolution be
adopted in support of the appeal regarding the Michigan Public Service
Commission’s order divesting municipalities from any meaningful local zoning
authority. It was determined that there wouldn’t be any liability to the
Township.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Brinker, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Poth,
Clerk Cleveland, and Treasurer VanErp.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Reappointment of the Board of Review
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board re-appoint Jerry Eidt,
Brian Johnston, and Mike Rice to the Board of Review, and Lisa Fletcher as
alternate Board of Review member with terms expiring 12-15-26.
Seconded by: Trustee Brinker   
Discussion: Trustee Steinberg confirmed that Lisa Fletcher attends the
meetings, even though she is an alternate.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Creagh, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Poth, Clerk Cleveland,
Treasurer VanErp, and Trustee Brinker.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
PC Commission Appointment
Trustee Steinberg moved the Township Board approve the Supervisor’s suggested
appointment of Aaron Porter to the Planning Commission with a term expiring
September 2027 to fulfill the balance of Ron Poth’s term.
Seconded by: Trustee Creagh
Discussion: None,
Motion Passed.
Maner Costerisan – Adam Frost
Clerk Cleveland moved the Board approve the agreement as presented for
accounting services with Maner Costerisan.
Seconded by: Trustee Brinker
Discussion: Treasurer VanErp provided information on the consulting services
that Mr. Frost will provide the Township on a quarterly basis. The Board
discussed rate comparisons for these services. It was noted that Maner
Costerisan is already under contract.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Poth, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp,
Trustee Brinker, and Trustee Creagh.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Discussion Items
Private Road Ordinance and Zoning Amendments – Supervisor Poth requested the
Board review the Proposed Private Road Ordinance and Revisions to the Zoning
Ordinance ahead of the approval process at January’s Meeting.
Winter Taxes – Treasurer VanErp shared that a record number of residents have
come into the office to inquire about the significant increase in their winter
taxes. To assist the Board if they get questions from residents, she reviewed
the information and graphs she has created to help taxpayers better understand
how the amount is computed and where the taxes are allocated. She also reminded
the Board that this information is graphically shared along with the tax bills.
Strategic Planning – Supervisor Poth noted that the meeting was postponed in
December. The new date for the planning session will occur Friday, January 17
th from 1pm-3pm at the Township Hall. Information and resources will be sent
out in advance of the meeting.
Correspondence from Mr. Grebner – Supervisor Poth addressed the communication
that had been shared to the Board and Planning Assistant from Mr. Mark Grebner,
whose clients are Cheryl Underwood and Brian Wamhoff. As of the Board Meeting,
there hadn’t been any communication from the Township Attorney regarding this
letter and its assertions. Trustee Brinker noted the possibility that perhaps
the letter hadn’t yet been received by the attorney. Board members shared
compliance concerns regarding the Township Ordinances and possible courses of
action. It was concluded that it was hard to make any determinations without
hearing from the lawyers first. Supervisor Poth noted that he would contact the
attorneys and possibly seek perspective from the Michigan Township Association.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA – No report.
Parks Committee – No Report.
Senior Center – Trustee Steinberg shared that 300 people attended the December
Holiday Open House and over 30 new members joined. Work will commence on
Friday, December 13 th to officially move to the new location. All participants
who would like to assist are welcome.
Elections – No report.
Cemetery – There is a meeting scheduled for January.
Roads – No report.
Branch School – Clerk Cleveland noted that the Branch School Christmas Open
House was well attended by about 40 people. They enjoyed the atmosphere, music,
snacks, and crafts.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:28 PM
Kevin Mark – resident and Planning Commission Member – shared his perspective
on visitor parking at the Christmas Decoration display on Burkley Road. 
Closed at 8:31 PM
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Creagh moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Clerk Cleveland
Meeting adjourned at 8:32pm
Minutes approved by:
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11890.jpg]
 
2025 Meeting Minutes
January 8, 2025
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
January 8, 2025
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 7:00
p.m. on January 8, 2025. Supervisor Poth called the meeting to order and led
the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Poth, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker,
Trustee Creagh. Trustee Duffy, and Trustee Steinberg.
Approval of Agenda
Motion by Trustee Creagh, second by Trustee Brinker to approve the agenda.
Motion passed.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:02 PM
Monica Schafer – resident and District 15 County Commissioner - welcomed new
members of the board. Commissioner Schafer reported on her upcoming committee
assignments and focus, as well as reviewed 2024 County Commission
accomplishments. 
Sue Alchin – resident – addressed the Board regarding her recently filed
complaint regarding the neighboring Holiday Display on Burkley Road and her
concerns on the enforcement of the Event Barn Township Ordinance.
Closed at 7:14 PM
Consent Agenda
Trustee Steinberg moved the consent agenda consisting of:
∙   Approve the minutes of the December 8, 2024 Board Meeting.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 32098-32100, for a
total of $3,408.76 and Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 32104-32109, for
a total of $727.28.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 32101-32103,
for a total of $759.46 and Accounts Payable for Approval #2, check numbers
32110-32120 for a total of $1,157.48.
∙   AP Police Paid #1, check number 1148 for a total of $45,380.55.
∙   December Payroll Paid, check numbers 51325-51331 and EFTs 836-839, for a
total of $11,038.20 (phys. check amount), and Direct Deposit DD1038-1066, for a
total of $21,131.21.
∙   Revenue and Expenditure report ending December 31, 2024.
∙   Balance Sheet Ending December 31, 2024.
∙   GL Activity Report
∙   Building Report
∙   Police Report
∙   Draft PC Minutes
∙   Acknowledge receipt of the Treasurer’s Report for December 2024
Seconded by: Trustee Brinker
Discussion: None.
 
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee
Steinberg, Supervisor Poth, and Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Meridian Township Police Report - Captain Crane reviewed quarterly township
public safety data and shared recent staffing updates and promotions with the
Board. He addressed quarterly citations and the visibility of patrol cars
within the Township. He will be sharing data with the Board that outlines their
presence in relation to their allotted hours. Trustee Steinberg inquired about
the ease and feasibility of a speed study to help inform where their patrol
focus should be. Captain Crane explained that residents can also communicate
their traffic concerns through the traffic concern link on the Meridian
Township Police Department website. The Board commended the department for
their home and wellness checks, as well as their elections support.
ACTION ITEMS
Central Security Upgrades
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the bid by
Central Security Alarm Inc. in the amount of $2,128 to replace the equipment
needed to make the security system fully operational again and the $59.95
monthly monitoring cost.
Seconded by: Trustee Duffy
Discussion: Supervisor Poth provided the Board with an overview of the issues
with and needs of the current security system and what an updated product could
offer the township. The Board inquired about the security status of other
township sites like Branch School, the Summit Cemetery Barn, and the Park House
and whether they should be updated as well. Supervisor Poth will check into
these additional sites.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Brinker, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg,
Supervisor Poth, Clerk Cleveland, and Treasurer VanErp.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Reappointment of Board of Review – Mike Rice
Trustee Duffy moved the Williamstown Township Board re-appoint Mike Rice to the
Board of Review with the term expiring 12-5-26.
Seconded by: Trustee Creagh
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Poth, Clerk
Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp, and Trustee Brinker.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Zoning Amendments
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the zoning
amendments recommended by the Planning Commission as presented.
Seconded by: Treasurer VanErp   
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Poth, Clerk Cleveland,
Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker, and Trustee Creagh.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Private Road Ordinance
Trustee Brinker moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Private Road
Ordinance recommended by the Planning Commission as presented.
Seconded by: Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: State funding of roads was discussed. Inquiry was made regarding
local developers’ perspectives on the ordinance. It was noted that they have
been present at Public Hearings and had opportunities to share their insights.
It was remarked that there was a typo on page 3. Mr. Doozan will be able to
make the correction.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Poth, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp,
Trustee Brinker, Trustee Creagh, and Trustee Duffy.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
2025 Private Tax Poverty Exemption
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the 2025
Poverty Exemption Guidelines as presented.
Seconded by: Trustee Brinker
Discussion: Treasurer VanErp noted that there has been an overall increase in
residents seeking/qualifying for the exemption. A large majority have moved
from a Poverty Exemption to Veteran Exemption. It was remarked that there was a
date error on the 2 nd page of the document that will be updated.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Supervisor Poth, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker,
Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, and Trustee Steinberg.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Discussion Items
Recycling Schedule – The Board discussed the need to continue to review the
current schedule to analyze the cost and benefits to the Township in comparison
to how many estimated residents are utilizing this monthly service. It was
noted that some initial findings indicate that plastics are increasingly
difficult to recycle because so little is accepted. There is no rebate for
glass. Paper and cardboard are the main items that generate income. The Board
recalled that the Township’s population increased as of the last census and met
the state standard whereas curbside recycling will need to be offered to
residents. There was support to continue to move forward with the analysis and
options.
Expansion of Park Board, Art Tour Board, and ZBA – Supervisor Poth addressed
the need for additional membership on some important Township committees. It
was noted that participants could be Board Members or residents and that an odd
number up to 7 would be an ideal goal. It was also noted that with our
population now over 5,000 that the ZBA should adjust to be a five member
committee versus three members. Due to this requirement, it will be sent to the
Planning Commission to be addressed.
Strategic Planning – Supervisor Poth sought the Board’s input regarding agenda
development for the upcoming Strategic Planning session on Friday, January 17
th . Topics suggested include future plans for Park House, connectivity of park
trails, recycling, and township storage. It was also suggested that Chris
Doozan be invited so that he could update members on the Master Planning and
the proposed land use changes.
Green Burial Vehicle Problems – Supervisor Poth shared recent issues with
visitors to the Summit Cemetery Green Burial section. Some are mistakenly
perceiving that the walking path is accessible with their vehicles and getting
stuck. He noted that there may need to be some considerations/site plan
adjustments moving forward to prevent this from occurring in the future. One
suggestion was a gate.
New Sick Time Laws to be approved in February – Clerk Cleveland and Treasurer
VanErp shared their policy revision work in preparation for this new state law
that goes into effect on February 21st. Once complete, they will share a draft
with the Board for their input, as well as have it reviewed by the Township
attorney. They hope to have it voted on by the February meeting.
Budget 2025 Rough Draft by February Meeting – Supervisor Poth plans to have a
draft budget for 2025-2026 to review at the February Board meeting. The Board
further discussed the Budget and Public Hearing process.
New Door Locks for Township Hall – Supervisor Poth sought the Board’s interest
in seeking proposals for new door locks, including the option of keyless entry
systems. The Board supported this initiative.
Wamhoff Display Update – Supervisor Poth confirmed receipt of Ms. Alchin’s
complaint that was recently filed. In addition, he provided the Board with an
update on the Wamhoff December display that included inspections by Meridian
Township Police, NIESA, and the Township Building Inspector. The Board
requested a copy of Ms. Alchin’s complaints. Discussion ensued regarding Event
Barn Ordinance language, visitor safety at the site, liability should an
accident occur, the applicability of a Special Use Permit in this situation,
nuisance protections for neighbors, and next steps in seeking solutions.
State Shared Revenue (SSR) – Treasurer VanErp shared this report with the Board
and explained its importance as SSR is generated from Michigan’s sales tax and
is the main source of income for the Township. The report is updated every
other month and will be included with the Treasurers report moving forward. She
noted that we are currently below the estimates from last year’s levels.  
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA – Trustee Duffy reported on the December 12, 2024, NIESA Board Meeting.
Public Hearings for the 2025 General and Building & Equipment Budgets were held
and approved. A Letter of Engagement to use Drake Accounting was also approved.
Twelve outdated training mannequins were donated to Williamston and Webberville
schools.
Parks Committee – No report.
Senior Center – The center was moved on Friday, December 13 th to its new
location. Due to the help, the endeavor only took two hours.
Elections – No report.
Cemetery – Treasurer VanErp noted that the committee is working to schedule a
meeting.
Roads – Supervisor Poth noted that Ingham Country Road Commission will be
hosting individual meetings with Township Supervisors in the coming weeks. A
couple of township neighborhoods have expressed interest in improving their
roads.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:53 PM
Monica Schafer – resident and District 15 County Commissioner – noted
residents’ concerns from December’s Board Meeting regarding increased millage
rates and higher tax bills. She shared their concerns and remarked that she is
receiving the same concerns.
Closed at 8:57 PM
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Clerk Cleveland
Meeting adjourned at 8:58 PM
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11979.jpg]
January 17, 2025 Strategic Planning Session
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
January 17, 2025 Strategic Planning Session
Call to Order
Supervisor Poth called the meeting to order at 1:00 pm.
Present:
Township Board: Supervisor Poth (Facilitator), Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer
VanErp, Trustee Brinker, Trustee Creagh, and Trustee Steinberg.
Township Staff: Julie Bellinger, Kerri Danstrom, Mac Donnelly, Dan Rhines, and
Mark Stevenson
McKenna/Township Planning: Chris Doozan, Planning Consultant
Planning Commission Members: Kevin Mark, Toby Weston
Historical Committee Members: Tim Green, Mitch Lutzke
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
No public attended.
Supervisor Poth made opening comments.
Supervisor Poth welcomed participants, made opening comments, and provided an
overview of the Strategic Planning process that had occurred in the Township
since 2022. He reviewed the accomplishments of the Plan, Board, and staff. He
noted the resources that would inform the discussion for the session and the
topics that would be discussed.
Planning Consultant Chris Doozan presented a Master Plan Update. He shared the
process that has informed the work thus far and key findings with regards to
Township demographics, housing, transportation, land use, economics, and parks
and recreation.
Participants provided updates regarding trails, recycling, storage, the Park
House, and Township communications. Discussion ensued around each topic. Needs
were addressed and next steps were planned.
Committee chairs and members from the Cemetery, Historic Branch School, Roads,
Parks, and Art Tour/Harvest Festival provided highlights from 2024, possible
projects for 2025, the status of their membership, and upcoming needs for their
domain.
Adjournment
The strategic planning session was adjourned at 3:35 p.m.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11936.jpg]
 
February 19, 2025
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
February 19, 2025
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 7:00
p.m. on February 19, 2025. Supervisor Poth called the meeting to order and led
the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Poth, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker,
Trustee Creagh. Trustee Duffy, and Trustee Steinberg.
Approval of Agenda
Motion by Trustee Brinker, second by Trustee Creagh to approve the agenda.
Discussion: None.
Motion passed.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:01 PM
None.
Closed at 7:01 PM
Consent Agenda
Trustee Steinberg moved the consent agenda consisting of:
∙   Approve the minutes of the January 8 and 17, 2025 Board Meetings.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 32121-32143, for a
total of $241,241.98, Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 32155-32167, for
a total of $2,565.94, Accounts Payable #3, check number 32171, for a total of
$368.18, and Accounts Payable #4, check numbers 32176-32177, for a total of
$1,162.43.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 32144-32154,
for a total of $7,820.11, Accounts Payable for Approval #2, check numbers
32168-32170 for a total of $7,132.69, and Accounts Payable for Approval #3,
check numbers 32172-32175 for a total of $3,731.76.
∙   January Payroll Paid, check numbers 51332-51339 and EFTs 841-845, for a
total of $9,360.22 (phys. check amount), and Direct Deposit DD1067-1089 for a
total of $20,337.50.
∙   Revenue and Expenditure report ending January 31, 2025.
∙   Balance Sheet Ending January 31, 2025.
∙   GL Activity Report
∙   Building Report
∙   Police Report
∙   Draft PC Workshop Minutes
∙   Acknowledge receipt of the Treasurer’s report for January 2025
Second by: Treasurer VanErp
Discussion: The Board corrected two grammatical errors on the Consent Agenda.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee
Steinberg, Supervisor Poth, and Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
ACTION ITEMS
Harvest Festival Date
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board approve October 4 th ,
2025, as the Harvest Festival date.
Seconded by: Clerk Cleveland
Discussion: It was noted that this does not conflict with any current sports
schedules at this time.
Motion Passed.
Budget Amendments
Clerk Cleveland moved   the Board approve the following budget amendments for
the 2024-2025 budget.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11986_7105x5836.jpg]
 
Seconded by: Trustee Brinker
Discussion: The Board clarified the difference between the two accounts named
“Utilities-Park” and “Park Utilities.” They also confirmed that GL 101-751-
920.000 is Branch School Utilities instead of Park Utilities. A correction was
needed on the final amendment, so it was removed from the table. The motion was
amended to reflect this change. The correction will be addressed for March’s
Board Meeting. Trustee Creagh noted that as next year’s budget is being
drafted, the importance of funding a budget more fully to allow for flexibility
due to the variances in costs in things such as utilities. This will be taken
into consideration.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Poth, Clerk
Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp, and Trustee Brinker.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Park Board Expansions
Trustee Brinker moved the Williamstown Township Board expand the Park Board by
two seats for a total of seven seats.
Seconded by: Clerk Cleveland    
Discussion: Trustee Steinberg confirmed the need for more Park Board membership
and shared his future priorities and plans. Active participation and
involvement from membership will be essential. It was noted that there are
applicants and residents who have expressed interest in serving.
Motion Passed.
Newsletter Approval
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board approve funding a
quarterly newsletter up to $2,800 for the first edition in March 2025 and to be
included in the 2025-2026 budget for future editions.
Seconded by: Trustee Duffy
Discussion: The Board discussed the printing costs and the impacts of postage
on the total price. The Board would like to see quotes from two additional
printers, to make a total of three, thus ensuring that the Township is securing
the best possible price.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Poth, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp,
Trustee Brinker, Trustee Creagh, and Trustee Duffy.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Locksmith Quote Approval
Trustee Duffy moved the Williamstown Township Board accept the quote from
Secure Lock and Door for the Township Hall lock replacements in the amount of
$620.
Seconded by: Trustee Creagh
Discussion: It was noted that one additional key will need to be secured and is
reflected in the motion.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Supervisor Poth, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker,
Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, and Trustee Steinberg.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Budget & Draft Police Assessment Public Hearing March 5 th  
Clerk Cleveland moved the Williamstown Township Board call for a Public Hearing
on the 2025 Budget and Police Assessment Roll for March 5 th at 7:00 pm at the
Township Hall.
Seconded by: Treasurer VanErp
Discussion: Supervisor Poth welcomed feedback on the draft budget. The Board
requested copies of the updated budget prior to the Public Hearing on March 5
th .
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Supervisor Poth, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker,
Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, and Trustee Steinberg.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Consultant Approval
Clerk Cleveland moved the Williamstown Township Board approve seeking
consulting/bids for the following Township projects: Township Hall renovation,
Park bathroom, Park soccer fields, Park pavilion and Branch School.
Seconded by: Trustee Brinker
Discussion: Discussion ensued around each project. It was noted that there is
expertise within the Township to address the needs of some of these projects.
Motion Passed.
Administrator Purchase Limit
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board approve administrator
expenditures within approved budget categories and in the normal course of
business up to $1,000 without prior approval by the Township Board requiring
post monthly reporting until June 1 st of 2025.
Seconded by: Trustee Brinker
Discussion: The Board expressed value in monthly reporting of expenditures in
this category. Discussion ensued around the Township’s current Financial
Policies, as well as the possibility of creating a subcommittee to review them
and make recommendations moving forward. Treasurer VanErp and Cleveland noted
that they have begun this work but welcomed assistance. The goal is to have an
updated draft policy by the April Board Meeting.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee
Steinberg, Supervisor Poth, and Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Sick Leave Policy - ESTA
Trustee Brinker moved the Williamstown Township Board to adopt Policy 15 to
comply with ESTA.
Seconded by: Trustee VanErp
Discussion: Clerk Cleveland provided an overview of this new state law and the
updated Township Policy 15. It is currently slated to go into effect on
February 21st
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Brinker, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg,
Supervisor Poth, Clerk Cleveland, and Treasurer VanErp.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
2025 Compensation Committee Recommendations
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board accept the Compensation
Committee recommendations as written.
Seconded by: Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: The Board acknowledged the complexity this task presents and shared
their appreciation of the recommendation and efforts of the committee.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Poth, Clerk
Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp, and Trustee Brinker.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Discussion Items
Fireworks Permit Request – A resident on Zimmer Road is requesting this permit
as part of her husband’s memorial at the end of March. Discussion ensued around
the application and approval process, additional questions members had, and the
need to establish a fee for this type of request.
Budget 2025 Rough Draft by February Meeting – Supervisor Poth provided an
overview of the draft budget. He noted additional work will occur in the days
ahead to fine tune the income and expenses, as well as identifying the types of
accounts that historically need additional funds throughout a fiscal year as
remarked in the Budget Amendments portion of the Board Meeting.
2025-2026 Board Meeting Draft Schedule – The Board discussed the draft
schedule, as well as the possibility of adding three additional meetings in the
designated months that have five Wednesdays. In addition, the feasibility of
moving the time to 6:30pm was considered.
Internet Provider to Accommodate BS&A Cloud Data Movement – Treasure VanErp and
Deputy Treasurer Stevenson have been researching internet providers that could
provide increased infrastructure to the Township to accommodate the transition
to the BS&A Cloud Upgrade. WOW is currently the only provider who can support
the infrastructure needs. The Board discussed the Coaxial and Fiber options.
They questioned if there could be a resident benefit if the Township
transitioned to fiber. Treasurer VanErp will inquire about the question.
Business Licenses – The Board discussed the need to better understand the
intent and purpose of a Business License renewal, the current process and form
used, and if the current $10 fee is enough to cover the expenses of the work
involved.
Recycling Schedule – This month’s data indicated that 118 residents utilized
recycling this month. Revenue was lost in February due to contamination in the
plastics from a large amount of gardening pots that were dropped off after
hours. This service will continue to be monitored.
Park Sign Plaques Placement – Supervisor Poth updated the Board on the plaque
placement on each side of the Community Park sign as an acknowledgement of the
DNR’s financial support from the Michigan Natural Resources Trust Fund.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA – Trustee Duffy reported on the NIESA Board Meeting from February 13th.
The Webberville Downtown Development Authority (DDA) renewed the Fiscal Year
Agreements for Revenue Sharing with NIESA for 2025-2026 and 2026-2027. In
addition, the Election of Officers took place and the consideration of
purchasing six props that would allow for a hands-on training experience for
NIESAs 53 EMS/Fire staff members at their training facility.
Parks Committee – Trustee Steinberg reported that the Parks and Trails
committee is working to schedule a meeting. He reiterated the need to establish
park priorities and subcommittees to research components of these determined
areas of concern and growth.
Elections – Clerk Cleveland reported that there will not be a May Election for
Perry. She noted that recently a bracket broke on one of the tabulator bins.
She is working with Election Source to repair it. Clerk Cleveland reminded the
Board that the Ingham County Chapter of the Michigan Townships Association will
be having their next General Meeting at the Leslie Township Office on February
26th at 5:30pm. The Board is invited to attend with RSVPs needed by Tuesday,
February 25th at noon.
Cemetery –Supervisor Poth and Treasurer VanErp shared updates from the recent
Cemetery Board meeting. This included information on recent Green Burial site
purchases, the preventative measures being implemented to ensure cars do not
drive into the Green Burial area, the need for adherence to the burial
guidelines outlined in the Township Ordinance, and the need to consider
alternate common memorial walls. It was recently determined that the current
Shepherd’s Wall is unsuitable because most of the stones are too small to carve
on. Pat Shelley was elected chair of the Cemetery Board. A Historical Committee
representative was also in attendance and presented information about working
with the Cemetery Board to provide signage at the cemeteries with historical
facts and information about each site embedded in a QR code. It was suggested
that the local Rotary organization be contacted for a grant to assist with
purchasing signage.
Roads – Supervisor Poth updated the Board on road projects slated for Barry and
Turner Roads. Hart Road has been removed from the project list. In addition,
Windy Brook will not be moving forward with their road needs. He shared what he
learned at his meeting with Ingham County Road Commission regarding bike
signage, police enforcement of trucks on secondary roads, and the future plans
for road resurfacing on Sherwood Road upon the completion of the Grand River
Bridge.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 9:15 PM
Kevin Mark – resident and Planning Commission Member – confirmed the meeting
time for the March Public Hearing and noted the increased traffic on Sherwood
Road due to the bridge construction.
Closed at 9:16 PM
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Clerk Cleveland
Meeting adjourned at 9:10 PM
Minutes approved by:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-12032.jpg]
 
March 5, 2025
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
March 5, 2025
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held a special meeting and Budget
Public Hearing at 7:00 p.m. on March 5, 2025. Supervisor Poth called the
meeting to order, reviewed the agenda, and led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Poth, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker,
Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, and Trustee Steinberg.
Public Comment for non-agenda items
Opened at 7:07 p.m.
None.   
Closed at 7:07 p.m.
Public Hearing for Police Assessment Roll
Trustee Creagh moved to open the Public Hearing for the Police Assessment Roll.
Seconded by Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: The Board discussed Meridan Township Police’s current monthly
contracted hours (40), and the implications should the proposed increase (60
hours) occur. The Board noted that the most budget-feasible increase, based on
the current assessment funds that will be collected, would be 50 contracted
hours per month. It was emphasized that Meridian Township Police staffing and
the increased traffic on area roads due to the Grand River Bridge Construction
are important factors to consider when determining the necessary patrol hours.
The impact of past reductions was discussed, as well as the possible need to
increase the assessment in the future. Current assessment language stipulates
that only a 3% yearly increase can be applied to the residents each fiscal
year. This possible increase would be utilized to help fund future increases in
hours should the need dictate, and staffing allow.
Trustee Creagh moved to close the Public Hearing for the Police Assessment
Roll.
Seconded by Trustee Steinberg
Motion Passes.
Public Hearing for the Proposed Budget
Trustee Brinker moved to open the Public Hearing for the Proposed Budget.
Seconded by Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: Supervisor Poth reviewed the process he used when creating the
proposed budget. Discussion ensued on the proposed budget related to Capital
Improvement Plan Projects from 2024 that the Board would like to pursue, as
well as Township needs noted in January’s Strategic Planning Meeting.
Increasing designated budgets to reflect inflation and increased goods and
services was also addressed. Other budget-related topics discussed included
ARPA funds, Policy 12, roads, as well as the needs at the Community Park and
how best to fund them. It was noted that it has been nine years since the Park
and Township Field Usage Fee Schedule has been reviewed, and with the proposed
improvements, it may be a logical consideration for the future.
Clerk Cleveland moved to close the Public Hearing for the Proposed Budget.
Seconded by Treasurer VanErp
Motion Passes.
Public comment for agenda items
Opened at 8:22 p.m.
Kevin Mark – resident and Planning Commission Member – inquired about the
Township’s Fiscal Year and Audit timeline and supported a Field Usage Fee
Schedule review and possible fee adjustment consideration.
Closed at 8:24 p.m.
Adjournment and Review
Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Brinker
Meeting adjourned at 8:25 p.m.
It is noted that no action has been taken by the Board at this meeting, but the
budget will be considered at the March 12, 2025 Board meeting.
Minutes approved by:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-12077.jpg]
 
March 12, 2025
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
March 12, 2025
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 7:00
p.m. on March 13, 2025. Supervisor Poth called the meeting to order and Trustee
Duffy led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Poth, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker,
Trustee Creagh, and Trustee Duffy.
Approval of Agenda
Motion by Trustee Brinker, second by Trustee Creagh to approve the agenda.
Discussion: None.
Motion passed.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:04 PM
Bruce Wigginton – Township Resident - spoke about deer management and the
possible option of adopting a program to reduce the numbers of deer to promote
safety, diminish damage to vegetation, and address disease concerns.
Gerry Eidt – Township Resident and Planning Commission Chair - voiced his
opposition to deer management programs, such as culling, and would like an
alternative process submitted.
Closed at 7:11 PM
Consent Agenda
Trustee Creagh moved the consent agenda consisting of:
∙   Approve the minutes of the February19, 2025 Board Meeting and March 5, 2025
Budget Public Hearing.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 32178-32183, for a
total of $2,892.80, Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 32190-32194, for a
total of $1,639.52, and Accounts Payable Paid #3, check numbers 32195-32198,
for a total of $2,633.60.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 32184-32189,
for a total of $5,042.20, and Accounts Payable for Approval #2, check numbers
32199-32202 for a total of $1,420.18.
∙   February Payroll Paid, check numbers 51340-51344 and EFTs 846-849, for a
total of $6,844.90 (phys. check amount), and Direct Deposit DD1090-1113 for a
total of $20,931.99.
∙   Revenue and Expenditure report ending February 28, 2025.
∙   Balance Sheet Ending February 28, 2025.
∙   GL Activity Report
∙   Building Report
∙   Police Report
∙   Draft PC Committee Minutes
∙   Acknowledge receipt of the Treasurer’s report for February 2025 and State
Shared Revenue Report
Second by: Treasurer VanErp
Discussion: Kim Van Erp pointed out that a change was made on the bank balance
“Current Through Date.” Trustee Brinker asked if the Consent Agenda needs to be
read or could it be stated “as presented”. Board agreed that moving forward it
will be “as presented”.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy,
Supervisor Poth, and Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Planning Commission Report
Chair Eidt updated the Board on the February 26 th Planning Commission Meeting.
A Planned Development Conceptual Review for Red Cedar Bend Apartments was held.
Chair Eidt summarized the verbal and written concerns of the development, the
space the developer is working with, and the possible ways space could be
increased. A Public Hearing was scheduled for Red Cedar Bend Apartments for
March 26 th at 7pm. The Board noted the impact the development may have on the
residents of the neighboring trailer park, inquired about wetlands, and sought
clarification regarding the presented plans. An election of officers was also
completed at the meeting
ACTION ITEMS
Fireworks Display Permit
Trustee Brinker moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the fireworks
application submitted by Micah Winzeler for Cindy Brown at 5565 Zimmer Road.
Seconded by: Trustee Creagh
Discussion: Discussion ensued regarding event communication with neighbors.
Motion Passed.
Budget Amendments
Trustee Brinker moved   the Board approve the following budget amendments for
the 2024-2025 budget.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-12084_6201x4283.jpg]
Seconded by: Trustee Creagh
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Supervisor Poth, Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker,
Trustee Creagh, and Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Police Assessment Resolution
Treasurer VanErp moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Resolution
2025-98, confirming the 2025 Special Assessment Roll for Police Protection
within the Township with the Special Assessment Roll total of $210,170,
reflecting the assessment of $96.00 per residential unit and $180.00 per
commercial/industrial unit.
Seconded by: Clerk Cleveland    
Discussion: Discussion ensued regarding unit costs and adjustments made to
assessment amounts after a Public Hearing has already been held. The possible
increase in patrol hours and the implications thereof for future budgets was
also noted. The option of a special Public Hearing to address the cost changes
was deliberated.
Trustee Creagh motioned to table the Police Assessment Resolution until April 9
th when the Public Hearing can be continued at 6:30 pm at the Township Hall.
Second by: Trustee Brinker
Motion Passed.
Budget Adoption
Trustee Duffy  moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve the 2025-26
Township Budget with a beginning Township Total Fund Equity of $3,313,385.00 as
of 3-12-25, with department appropriations as outlined:
 
Dept 101- Township Board          $136,804
                                  
Dept 171- Supervisor              $68,230
                                  
Dept 191- Elections               $69,970
                                  
Dept 209- Assessor                $75,198
                                  
Dept 215- Clerk                   $76,955
                                  
Dept 247- Board of Review         $3,933
                                  
Dept 253- Treasurer               $81,539
                                  
Dept 265- Building and Grounds    $121,249
                                  
Dept 276- Cemetery                $29,000
                                  
Dept 294- Township Office         $80,655
                                  
Dept 371- Building Inspector      $38,480
                                  
Dept 400- Planning Commission     $88,963
                                  
Dept 411- Zoning Administrator    $19,260
                                  
Dept 420- Zoning Bd of Appeals    $3,554
                                  
Dept 441- Public Works            $48,826
                                  
Dept 751- Recreation              $86,844
                                  
 
Total General Fund Appropriations $1,030,765
                                  
207 - Police Fund                 $287,330
                                  
209 – Cemetery Fund             $213,439
                                  
401- Capital Project Fund          
                                 $205,000
Dept. 101- Township Board          
                                 $370,000
Dept. 441- Public works            
                                 $281,770
Dept. 751- Recreation              
                                 $9,500
Dept 754- Park House               
                                 $866,270
Total 401 Fund Appropriations      
                                 $2,317,689
Total Fund Appropriations          
                                  
 
Seconded by: Trustee Creagh
Clerk Cleveland left the meeting at 7:21pm to retrieve meeting materials and
returned at 7:24pm.
Discussion: The Board discussed the forthcoming utilities upgrade to support
the transition to BS&A Cloud and the likely budget overage this may cause.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Supervisor Poth, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker,
Trustee Creagh, and Trustee Duffy.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Adoption of 2025-2026 Meeting Dates
Trustee Brinker moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Board meeting
dates and times for the Fiscal Year 25-26.
Seconded by: Trustee Creagh
Discussion: The Board discussed adjusting the starting time.
Motion Passed.
Internet Provider for BS&A Cloud Upgrade
Treasurer VanErp moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the contract
with WOW! Business Services for Internet services for the Williamstown Township
Hall. The contract will begin with coaxial for up to 5 months at $160.98 a
month while the fiber optic cable is installed. Fiber optic contract will be
for 2 years at 390.88 per month.
Seconded by: Trustee Brinker
Discussion: The Board discussed whether there could be a resident benefit when
the Township transitions to fiber. Treasurer VanErp reported there is not a
resident benefit with this installation.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Supervisor Poth, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker,
Trustee Creagh, and Trustee Duffy.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Discussion Items
Deer Management – The Board discussed current data regarding deer populations,
the various options local townships can consider for deer management, as well
as the factors that need to be deliberated when planning a program. A
subcommittee will be formed to study this more and report back to the Board. It
will be comprised of Trustees Creagh and Brinker, Chair Eidt from the Planning
Commission, and Bruce Wigginton.
Land Purchase for Park Access to Sherwood Rd – The Board discussed the future
possibility of acquiring land north of the Community Park (across the river) to
provide access to the park trails from Sherwood Rd. The option of pursuing a
Michigan DNR Trust Fund Grant to support this was also noted.
Recycling Schedule – The Board discussed monthly recycling. The program
continues to average approximately 120 households per month. Funds continue to
be lost due to contamination and participation levels. Other programs and
options that residents could utilize were discussed, should the Township
service be eliminated.
Business Licenses – The Board discussed the input from the Police and Fire
Chief regarding this process. A suggestion considered was transitioning to a
registry.
Red Cedar Bend Apartments – The Board discussed the Red Cedar Bend proposed
development on Grand River. Discussion ensued regarding what was reviewed and
suggested at the recent Planning Commission Meeting (2.26.25), as well as at
the recent Williamston Community Schools Housing Committee Meeting (3.11.25).
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA – No new updates.
Parks Committee – Trustee Creagh reported that some oak trees are being donated
to plant at the Community Park. There is currently a Parks and Recreation
Subcommittee working to update this its Master Plan.
Elections – Clerk Cleveland reported that there will be an election for Perry
Schools on May 6 th . Perry will do the election for our voters; however the
Township will assist in getting the ballots out. There will not be nine days of
early voting needed because it is a local election. The school district will
incur the costs for this election.
Cemetery – Cardinal Fabrication will be determining a quote for the gate.
Additional quotes will be secured.
Roads – No new updates.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:59 PM
None.
Closed at 8:59 PM
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Trustee Creagh
Meeting adjourned at 9:05 PM
Minutes approved by:
 
____________________________________________ ______________
Julie Bellinger, Recording Secretary Date
____________________________________________ _______________
Robin A. Cleveland, Township Clerk Date
 
April 9, 2025
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
April 9, 2025
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 6:30
p.m. on April 9, 2025. Supervisor Poth called the meeting to order and Clerk
Cleveland led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Poth, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker,
Trustee Duffy, and Trustee Steinberg.
Approval of Agenda
Motion by Treasurer VanErp , second by Trustee Steinberg to approve the agenda.
Discussion: None.
Motion passed.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 6:33 PM
None.
Closed at 6:33 PM
Consent Agenda
Trustee Brinker moved to approve the consent agenda, as presented, consisting
of:
∙   Approve the minutes of the March 12, 2025 Board Meeting.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 32203-32212, for a
total of $16,276.27, Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 32217-32218, for a
total of $1,032.02.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 32213-32216,
for a total of $7,374.90.
∙   February Payroll Paid, check numbers 51344-51354 and EFTs 851-858, for a
total of $16,801.43 (phys. check amount), and Direct Deposit DD1114-1150 for a
total of $24,834.31.
∙   Revenue and Expenditure report ending March 31, 2025.
∙   Balance Sheet ending March 31, 2025.
∙   GL Activity Report
∙   Building Report
∙   Police Report
∙   Draft PC Committee Minutes
∙   Acknowledge receipt of the Treasurer’s report for March 2025
Second by: Trustee Duffy
Discussion: Treasurer VanErp noted that State Shared Revenue Report is
generated only on the even-numbered months so it will only be included in the
Consent Agenda in the odd-numbered months. Discussion ensued regarding Trustee
abstention from approving the minutes of a meeting that one does not attend.
Clerk Cleveland will share the advice of the Michigan Township Association
regarding this matter.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg,
Supervisor Poth, and Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Police Report
Chief Grillo reviewed quarterly Township public safety data and shared recent
staffing updates. He noted that the department recently discovered an error in
their information dashboard programming, impacting the reporting of citations
dating back to 2024. While the State fixes the error, the department completed
a hand count of all citations. Chief Grillo provided the actual number of
citations issued in 2024 as 93 and this year, as of March 21, 2025, 22
citations have been issued. Meridian Township will issue new reports that
provide the updated data. In addition, he reviewed the fiscal benefits of
adopting the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code and Meridian Township’s experience
with it over the last 15 years. Chief Grillo also provided car deer crash data
from the Township spanning 2020-2025. He credited Meridian Township’s success
in managing their deer population to the department’s collaboration with
scientists and the DNR to target problematic areas. The Board expressed
interest in inviting the staff who oversee the program to the Board’s Deer
Management Subcommittee meeting.
Planning Commission Report
Chair Eidt updated the Board on the March 26th Planning Commission meeting. A
public hearing was held for the Phase I Planned Development Conceptual Review
for Red Cedar Bend Apartments, 2365 E. Grand River. He summarized the nine-step
planned development process the developers must follow. The proposed
development received preliminary approval with conditions due to missing
components when they presented at the public hearing. The developers will
return to the April 23rd Meeting. The commission approved the 2025-2026 meeting
and workshop dates.
Clerk Cleveland moved to take the Police Assessment Roll Public Hearing from
the Table that was laid there at the March 12, 2025 meeting.
Second by Trustee Brinker.
Motion Passed
PUBLIC HEARING – POLICE ASSESSMENT ROLL
Supervisor Poth opened the public hearing at 6:59 pm.
Discussion: None.
Public Comment:
Kevin Mark - Township Resident and Planning Commission Member - addressed the
process of determining the amount that residents and business owners will pay
this year and why he believes it should be increased by $10 versus $16.
Jerry Eidt – Township Resident and Planning Commission Chair – expressed his
approval of Special Assessment Roll for Police Protection program and the
decision-making process on how residents and businesses are assessed.
Motion by Trustee Brinker to close the public hearing.
Second by Treasurer VanErp.
Motion passed.
ACTION ITEMS
Police Assessment Roll
Trustee Brinker moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve Resolution 2025-
98, Confirming the 2025 Special Assessment Roll for Police Protection within
the Township with the Special Assessment Roll total of $194,199.00, reflecting
the assessment of $90.00 per residential unit and $168.00 per Commercial/
Industrial Unit.
Seconded by: Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: The Board discussed the current budget for Police Services,
possible increases in patrol coverage, and how best to plan for that in the
future.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Poth, Clerk Cleveland,
Treasurer VanErp, and Trustee Brinker.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
New Hours for Office
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board approve closing the
Township Office at 6:00 pm on Wednesdays effective immediately.
Seconded by: Trustee Brinker
Discussion: The Board discussed the activity of the office from 5pm-7pm and the
desire to still accommodate residents’ work schedules.
Motion Passed.
Max Annis – Eagle Scout Project
Trustee Duffy moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the proposal of Max
Annis for his Distinguished Conservation Award project in the Township Park
with a maximum expenditure of $500.
Seconded by: Trustee Brinker
Discussion: Max presented his Boot Scraper project plans and visuals to the
Board. He is working towards attaining the Distinguished Conservation Award for
the Scouts. The goal with the installation is to help prevent traveling
invasive plant species from entering or leaving the park on the bottoms of
shoes. Discussion ensued around possible placements of the scrapers, two vs.
three in total, his work with Earl Wolf on the signage that will accompany the
removal mechanism, and the recurring, as well as total, costs of the project.
The Board was supportive of the endeavor and its purpose in limiting invasive
species at the park. Max hopes to have the project completed by September 2025.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Supervisor Poth, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker,
Trustee Duffy, and Trustee Steinberg.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Trustee Duffy left the meeting at 7:31pm
Discussion Items
Cemetery Gate - Discussion ensued regarding the need to protect the Green
Burial site from vehicles driving in the area, the suggested gates in the
quote, and the range in prices. It was noted that this decision should be
informed by the Cemetery Committee. The Board supported this determination and
will have this committee work to recommend what type of barrier should be
installed at the entrance to the Green Burial site.
Deer Management – Deer Management Subcommittee member Jerry Eidt updated the
Board on their group’s upcoming meeting plans and their desire to serve the
community to find management solutions to this issue.
Park Bathroom & Pavillion - Dan Rhines, who works for the Township’s
Maintenance and Grounds Department, addressed the current state of the
Community Park’s Eloos and the structure surrounding them, as well as the
overall needs regarding restroom facilities. He provided the Board with a
summary of their recent meeting with the Ingham County Environmental Health
Department regarding the Eloos and the drainfield at the Park House. He shared
their findings and recommendations. In addition, Mr. Rhines provided the Board
with structural needs of the park pavilion. It was noted that Tim O’Neil,
Township Building Inspector, will be inspecting and providing determination of
needs on both pavilions at the park and hall. Trustee Steinberg also shared the
on-going bird issues at the pavilion and the solutions the DNR recommended.
Adoption of Michigan Motor Vehicle Code – Supervisor Poth sought the Board’s
perspective on adopting the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code. Clerk Cleveland
advised the Township check with the attorney before implementation. It was
noted that the revenue generated from this program could go back into the
police funds.
Park Lawn Mower Purchase – Supervisor Poth presented the Board with the current
mowing needs at the parks and cemeteries, as well as the increased demand
during athletic and spring/summer seasons. He addressed current equipment and
staffing required to trailer and move equipment to accommodate maintenance
needs in all the various Township areas. Discussion ensued regarding meeting
the demands, the value of having a mower dedicated to the Community Park, the
cost of a new and/or used mower, ways to cover the costs, and storage needs.
Supervisor Poth will bring information and quotes back to the Board at the
April 30 th meeting.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA – No report.
Parks Committee – Trustee Steinberg updated the Board on the committee’s
current plans to have a spring clean-up and the recent donation of six oak
trees. Placement plans will need to be determined, as well as a watering
schedule.
Elections – Clerk Cleveland shared that there is a May 6 th Election for Perry
Public Schools. Williamstown Township will consolidate with Perry Township for
this election. The 255 Perry Schools voters in our Township have been notified
by letter of this plan for this election. Voters who are on the Permanent
Ballot List were mailed their ballots on April 1 st . The Township will be open
additional hours, from 8am to 4 pm on Saturday, May 3 rd , and from 7:00am to
8:00pm on Tuesday, May 6 th – Election Day for voter registration.
Cemetery – No new updates.
Roads – Supervisor Poth noted that brush clearing has been completed on Turner
and Barry Roads and repaving will begin soon.
Safe Routes to School and River Clean-up – Supervisor Poth shared some
information from Trustee Creagh regarding updates on the river clean-up and
that the Safe Routes To School Grant had been awarded and what will be
completed with these funds.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:24 PM
Kevin Mark – Township Resident and Planning Commission Member – sought
confirmation on when the Township Newsletter will be mailed out and expressed a
desire for the Board to focus on the park restrooms and pavilions versus a new
tractor.
Closed at 8:26 PM
Clerk Cleveland reviewed voting and abstention guidance and language provided
in the Michigan Township Association Handbook.
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Steinberg moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Trustee Brinker
Meeting adjourned at 8:29 PM
Minutes approved by:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-12134.jpg]
 
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
April 30, 2025
 
 
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 6:30
p.m. on April 30, 2025. Supervisor Poth called the meeting to order and Trustee
Creagh led the Pledge of Allegiance.
 
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Poth, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker,
Trustee Creagh, and Trustee Steinberg.
 
Approval of Agenda
Motion by Trustee Creagh, second by Trustee Steinberg to approve the agenda.
 
Discussion: None.
 
Motion passed.
 
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 6:32 PM
 
Kevin Mark – Township Resident and Planning Commission Vice-Chair – expressed
concern about the proposed Red Cedar Bend Apartments and its recent Phase II
approval with 15 conditions. Supervisor Poth clarified that the Township
Planning Consultant will monitor those conditions.
 
Closed at 6:36 PM
 
Consent Agenda
Trustee Brinker moved to approve the consent agenda, as presented, consisting
of:
∙   Approve the minutes of the April 9, 2025 Board Meeting.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 32219-32240, for a
total of $6,321.05, Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 32247-32251, for a
total of $13,030.50, and Accounts Payable Paid #3, check numbers 32252-32256,
for a total of $752.82.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 32241-32246,
for a total of $3,170.99 and General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #2
32257-32271 $37,937.09.
∙   Draft PC Committee Minutes
 
Second by: Trustee Steinberg
 
Discussion: Clerk Cleveland noted that on months with two Board meetings, the
Consent Agenda will be significantly reduced. Many of the typical reports are
monthly and would appear at the first meeting of the month.
 
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Steinberg,
Supervisor Poth, and Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None
 
Motion Passed.
 
Planning Commission Report
Chair Eidt updated the Board on the April 23rd Planning Commission Meeting. The
Red Cedar Bend Apartments Phase 2 Planned Development Review was presented and
discussed. The Commission voted to recommend approval to the Township Board
subject to conditions. Chair Eidt noted that some of the conditions had
environmental components, as well as tax implications. A public hearing has
been set for May 28th for the Wamhoff Farms Seasonal Display. A Capital
Improvement Plan subcommittee was formed to address updates to the plan. The
Future Land Use chapter of the Master Plan was reviewed, as well as the updated
map. Trustee Steinberg questioned if neighbors near the Wamhoff Farm Display
had voiced concern. Chair Eidt noted that none had so far, but they may at next
month’s public hearing. Trustee Creagh noted that when the Red Cedar Bend
Apartment developers presented in March, he directed them to speak with
Treasurer VanErp regarding their plans for requesting a Payment In Lieu Of
Taxes (PILOT) plan with the county. He asked if contact had been made.
Treasurer VanErp confirmed that it had not.
 
Michigan Class Presentation – Kristin Angel
Ms. Angel, Senior Director of Investment Services for Michigan CLASS, presented
information on their organization which is a local government investment pool
operating since 1991 and serving over 880 public agencies.
 
ACTION ITEMS
 
Financial Policy Updates – Section 7
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board approve adopting the
Financial Policy update of Section 7.
 
Seconded by: Trustee Brinker
 
Discussion: None.
 
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Poth, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp,
Trustee Brinker, and Trustee Creagh.
Nays: None
 
Motion Passed.
 
Park Lawn Mower Purchase
Trustee Brinker moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the purchase of
the Kubota Z781 lawnmower.
 
Seconded by: Trustee Creagh
 
Discussion: Supervisor Poth sought input from the Township Maintenance and
Grounds Department on the needs of the park athletic fields, the equipment that
would be best equipped to meet the demands, and the storage requirements. It
was determined that the Kubota Z781 demo unit was the most cost effective
choice of the higher horsepower machines. Clerk Cleveland suggested amending
the initial motion to include the price of the equipment.
Clerk Cleveland moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the amendment to
the initial motion to include the cost ($12,407) of the mower.
 
Seconded by: Treasurer VanErp
 
Discussion: None.
 
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Brinker, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Poth,
Clerk Cleveland, and Treasurer VanErp.
Nays: None
 
Motion Passed.
 
Trustee Brinker moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the purchase of
the Kubota Z781 lawnmower at the cost of $12,407.
 
Seconded by: Trustee Creagh
 
Discussion: None.
 
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Poth, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp,
Trustee Brinker, Trustee Creagh.
Nays: None
 
Motion Passed.
 
Prime Housing Donation
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board approve accepting the
Prime Housing donation of $7,000 to be spent on Parks and Parks related
activities.
 
Seconded by: Trustee Brinker
 
Discussion: The Board expressed their gratitude for this generous donation and
was reminded that this money goes into a restricted fund that can only be spent
on the parks.
 
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Supervisor Poth, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker,
Trustee Duffy, Trustee Creagh, and Trustee Steinberg.
Nays: None
 
Motion Passed.
 
Discussion Items
 
Michigan Class Participation – Board discussion ensued regarding the liquidity
of the investments that Michigan Class offers, as well as the higher yields.
 
Deer Management – Trustee Creagh updated the Board on the recent subcommittee
meeting and the details of their session including a plan to meet with Meridian
Township to understand their deer management process, meet with Mr. Chad Fedewa
Michigan DNR Deer/Elk Specialists to get a statewide perspective, as well as
create and implement a resident survey to inform how best to tailor a program
to fit the Township’s needs. It was suggested that utilizing the summer
newsletter to share information could be a useful tool to disseminate
information. Trustee Creagh noted that thoughtful consideration to the various
perspectives regarding deer management needs to be given throughout the
process.
 
Park Bathroom & Pavilion – Supervisor Poth shared the recent findings from the
Township Building Inspector regarding the current conditions of the Park
Bathrooms and Pavilion. He noted that considerable infrastructure and
replacement work needs to be done. McKenna Planning Consultant Chris Doozan
will be working on a master plan for the park to provide a vision for moving
forward.
 
Adoption of Michigan Motor Vehicle Code – Supervisor Poth noted that he is
gathering more information regarding this Code and seeking legal counsel.
 
Truck Routes Ordinance – Supervisor Poth noted that there is a connection
between the Truck Ordinance and the Motor Vehicle Code. He would like to
revisit this ordinance when more information is gathered.
 
Reports – Departments and Committees
 
NIESA – No report.
 
Parks Committee – Trustee Steinberg updated the Board on the status of new oak
tree plantings. It will likely take place in early June. A team of residents
will be working to identify the variety species of trees around the perimeter
of the park trails. It was also suggested that the Board consider drafting a
policy regarding the financial support of local Eagle Scout Projects. It was
noted that there are some deep potholes in the bus stop parking lot and
questions were raised if those could be filled. Supervisor Poth requested that
the Park Committee review the Public Parks Ordinance No. 39 and report any
recommendations back to the Board. This could be completed in tandem with the
master plan work for the park. Supervisor Poth wants to ensure signage for the
trails is sufficient and provides those who bring animals to the parks the
correct information. Trustee Creagh updated the Board on the status of the Red
Cedar River being designated a Blue Water Trail. In addition, he noted that Top
Notch tree removal will be in the river in the next few weeks removing debris
and that signage will need to be added at the M-43/Grand River bridge launch
alerting kayakers that it is closed due to the MDOT bridge construction.
Kayakers will be routed on to Harris Nature Center.
 
Elections/Clerk – Clerk Cleveland reminded the Board of the upcoming election
for Perry Schools, as well as the hours the Township is required to be open to
accommodate any voter needs ahead of May 6th. She also requested that
subcommittees communicate meeting times to ensure that they can be properly
noticed for the residents, as well as noting participant attendance after
meetings so that payroll can be adjusted, if necessary. Clerk Cleveland updated
the Board recent IT security conversations with Meridian Township Police and
reminded the Board to report any suspicious emails or activity so that
authorities can be contacted.
 
Cemetery – Treasurer VanErp updated the Board on discussions and decisions at
the recent Cemetery Committee meeting on April 30th. The committee will be
seeking additional designs and choices for the gate to the Green Burial site.
In addition, it was determined that the current rocks on the Shepherd’s Wall
are too small for the optional engraving to commemorate those buried in the
Green Burial section at Summit Cemetery. Future considerations will need to be
made for this memorialization effort. Improvements and projects that have been
completed were checked against the current Capital Improvement Plan (CIP) so
that the CIP subcommittee can move forward with their projections.
 
Roads – Supervisor Poth noted that road work that has begun on Barry and Turner
Roads. Residents have expressed concern regarding the recent tree trimming and
branch removal on area roads. This will be shared with Ingham County. There are
no neighborhoods seeking a special assessment for road work thus far. The Road
Committee will be meeting in June.
 
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:26 PM
 
Kevin Mark – Township Resident and Planning Commission Vice-Chair – shared his
former work experiences with investigating financial crimes and his perspective
on making fiscal decisions with careful consideration to ensure security and
minimize risk.
 
Donna Tocarchick – Township Resident and Planning Commission Secretary – shared
questions about the plans for the Smart Office monitors in the Board Room,
streaming the meetings for residents to access online from home, where to fine
previous meetings’ merged documents on the website, and sought clarifications
on how revenue is generated through the adoption of the Michigan Motor Vehicle
Code. Clerk Cleveland noted that the technicians had finalized their repairs on
the Smart Home system on April 29th and training is currently scheduled,
streaming meetings live is a possibility, and that, once uploaded, Board
Meeting merged documents remain on the website until the week before the next
scheduled monthly meeting. Supervisor Poth clarified that townships that adopt
the Michigan Motor Vehicle code collect approximately $18-20 for every ticket
issued. Currently, funds from traffic tickets issued do not come to
Williamstown Township.
 
Trustee Creagh departed the meeting at 8:30pm.
 
Closed at 8:35 PM
 
Adjournment and Review
 
Trustee Steinberg moved to adjourn the meeting.
 
Seconded by Clerk Cleveland.
 
Meeting adjourned at 8:36 PM
 
Minutes approved by:
 
 
 
____________________________________________ ______________
Julie Bellinger, Recording Secretary Date
 
 
____________________________________________ _______________
Robin A. Cleveland, Township Clerk Date
 
 
 
April 30, 2025
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
April 30, 2025
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 6:30
p.m. on April 30, 2025. Supervisor Poth called the meeting to order and Trustee
Creagh led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Poth, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker,
Trustee Creagh, and Trustee Steinberg.
Approval of Agenda
Motion by Trustee Creagh, second by Trustee Steinberg to approve the agenda.
Discussion: None.
Motion passed.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 6:32 PM
Kevin Mark – Township Resident and Planning Commission Vice-Chair – expressed
concern about the proposed Red Cedar Bend Apartments and its recent Phase II
approval with 15 conditions. Supervisor Poth clarified that the Township
Planning Consultant will monitor those conditions.
Closed at 6:36 PM
Consent Agenda
Trustee Brinker moved to approve the consent agenda, as presented, consisting
of:
∙   Approve the minutes of the April 9, 2025 Board Meeting.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 32219-32240, for a
total of $6,321.05, Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 32247-32251, for a
total of $13,030.50, and Accounts Payable Paid #3, check numbers 32252-32256,
for a total of $752.82.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 32241-32246,
for a total of $3,170.99 and General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #2
32257-32271 $37,937.09.
∙   Draft PC Committee Minutes
Second by: Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: Clerk Cleveland noted that on months with two Board meetings, the
Consent Agenda will be significantly reduced. Many of the typical reports are
monthly and would appear at the first meeting of the month.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Steinberg,
Supervisor Poth, and Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Planning Commission Report
Chair Eidt updated the Board on the April 23rd Planning Commission Meeting. The
Red Cedar Bend Apartments Phase 2 Planned Development Review was presented and
discussed. The Commission voted to recommend approval to the Township Board
subject to conditions. Chair Eidt noted that some of the conditions had
environmental components, as well as tax implications. A public hearing has
been set for May 28th for the Wamhoff Farms Seasonal Display. A Capital
Improvement Plan subcommittee was formed to address updates to the plan. The
Future Land Use chapter of the Master Plan was reviewed, as well as the updated
map. Trustee Steinberg questioned if neighbors near the Wamhoff Farm Display
had voiced concern. Chair Eidt noted that none had so far, but they may at next
month’s public hearing. Trustee Creagh noted that when the Red Cedar Bend
Apartment developers presented in March, he directed them to speak with
Treasurer VanErp regarding their plans for requesting a Payment In Lieu Of
Taxes (PILOT) plan with the county. He asked if contact had been made.
Treasurer VanErp confirmed that it had not.
Michigan Class Presentation – Kristin Angel
Ms. Angel, Senior Director of Investment Services for Michigan CLASS, presented
information on their organization which is a local government investment pool
operating since 1991 and serving over 880 public agencies.
ACTION ITEMS
Financial Policy Updates – Section 7
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board approve adopting the
Financial Policy update of Section 7.
Seconded by: Trustee Brinker
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Poth, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp,
Trustee Brinker, and Trustee Creagh.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Park Lawn Mower Purchase
Trustee Brinker moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the purchase of
the Kubota Z781 lawnmower.
Seconded by: Trustee Creagh
Discussion: Supervisor Poth sought input from the Township Maintenance and
Grounds Department on the needs of the park athletic fields, the equipment that
would be best equipped to meet the demands, and the storage requirements. It
was determined that the Kubota Z781 demo unit was the most cost effective
choice of the higher horsepower machines. Clerk Cleveland suggested amending
the initial motion to include the price of the equipment.
Clerk Cleveland moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the amendment to
the initial motion to include the cost ($12,407) of the mower.
Seconded by: Treasurer VanErp
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Brinker, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Poth,
Clerk Cleveland, and Treasurer VanErp.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Trustee Brinker moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the purchase of
the Kubota Z781 lawnmower at the cost of $12,407.
Seconded by: Trustee Creagh
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Poth, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp,
Trustee Brinker, Trustee Creagh.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Prime Housing Donation
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board approve accepting the
Prime Housing donation of $7,000 to be spent on Parks and Parks related
activities.
Seconded by: Trustee Brinker
Discussion: The Board expressed their gratitude for this generous donation and
was reminded that this money goes into a restricted fund that can only be spent
on the parks.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Supervisor Poth, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker,
Trustee Duffy, Trustee Creagh, and Trustee Steinberg.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Discussion Items
Michigan Class Participation – Board discussion ensued regarding the liquidity
of the investments that Michigan Class offers, as well as the higher yields.
Deer Management – Trustee Creagh updated the Board on the recent subcommittee
meeting and the details of their session including a plan to meet with Meridian
Township to understand their deer management process, meet with Mr. Chad Fedewa
Michigan DNR Deer/Elk Specialists to get a statewide perspective, as well as
create and implement a resident survey to inform how best to tailor a program
to fit the Township’s needs. It was suggested that utilizing the summer
newsletter to share information could be a useful tool to disseminate
information. Trustee Creagh noted that thoughtful consideration to the various
perspectives regarding deer management needs to be given throughout the
process.
Park Bathroom & Pavilion – Supervisor Poth shared the recent findings from the
Township Building Inspector regarding the current conditions of the Park
Bathrooms and Pavilion. He noted that considerable infrastructure and
replacement work needs to be done. McKenna Planning Consultant Chris Doozan
will be working on a master plan for the park to provide a vision for moving
forward.
Adoption of Michigan Motor Vehicle Code – Supervisor Poth noted that he is
gathering more information regarding this Code and seeking legal counsel.
Truck Routes Ordinance – Supervisor Poth noted that there is a connection
between the Truck Ordinance and the Motor Vehicle Code. He would like to
revisit this ordinance when more information is gathered.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA – No report.
Parks Committee – Trustee Steinberg updated the Board on the status of new oak
tree plantings. It will likely take place in early June. A team of residents
will be working to identify the variety species of trees around the perimeter
of the park trails. It was also suggested that the Board consider drafting a
policy regarding the financial support of local Eagle Scout Projects. It was
noted that there are some deep potholes in the bus stop parking lot and
questions were raised if those could be filled. Supervisor Poth requested that
the Park Committee review the Public Parks Ordinance No. 39 and report any
recommendations back to the Board. This could be completed in tandem with the
master plan work for the park. Supervisor Poth wants to ensure signage for the
trails is sufficient and provides those who bring animals to the parks the
correct information. Trustee Creagh updated the Board on the status of the Red
Cedar River being designated a Blue Water Trail. In addition, he noted that Top
Notch tree removal will be in the river in the next few weeks removing debris
and that signage will need to be added at the M-43/Grand River bridge launch
alerting kayakers that it is closed due to the MDOT bridge construction.
Kayakers will be routed on to Harris Nature Center.
Elections/Clerk – Clerk Cleveland reminded the Board of the upcoming election
for Perry Schools, as well as the hours the Township is required to be open to
accommodate any voter needs ahead of May 6th. She also requested that
subcommittees communicate meeting times to ensure that they can be properly
noticed for the residents, as well as noting participant attendance after
meetings so that payroll can be adjusted, if necessary. Clerk Cleveland updated
the Board recent IT security conversations with Meridian Township Police and
reminded the Board to report any suspicious emails or activity so that
authorities can be contacted.
Cemetery – Treasurer VanErp updated the Board on discussions and decisions at
the recent Cemetery Committee meeting on April 30th. The committee will be
seeking additional designs and choices for the gate to the Green Burial site.
In addition, it was determined that the current rocks on the Shepherd’s Wall
are too small for the optional engraving to commemorate those buried in the
Green Burial section at Summit Cemetery. Future considerations will need to be
made for this memorialization effort. Improvements and projects that have been
completed were checked against the current Capital Improvement Plan (CIP) so
that the CIP subcommittee can move forward with their projections.
Roads – Supervisor Poth noted that road work that has begun on Barry and Turner
Roads. Residents have expressed concern regarding the recent tree trimming and
branch removal on area roads. This will be shared with Ingham County. There are
no neighborhoods seeking a special assessment for road work thus far. The Road
Committee will be meeting in June.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:26 PM
Kevin Mark – Township Resident and Planning Commission Vice-Chair – shared his
former work experiences with investigating financial crimes and his perspective
on making fiscal decisions with careful consideration to ensure security and
minimize risk.
Donna Tocarchick – Township Resident and Planning Commission Secretary – shared
questions about the plans for the Smart Office monitors in the Board Room,
streaming the meetings for residents to access online from home, where to fine
previous meetings’ merged documents on the website, and sought clarifications
on how revenue is generated through the adoption of the Michigan Motor Vehicle
Code. Clerk Cleveland noted that the technicians had finalized their repairs on
the Smart Home system on April 29th and training is currently scheduled,
streaming meetings live is a possibility, and that, once uploaded, Board
Meeting merged documents remain on the website until the week before the next
scheduled monthly meeting. Supervisor Poth clarified that townships that adopt
the Michigan Motor Vehicle code collect approximately $18-20 for every ticket
issued. Currently, funds from traffic tickets issued do not come to
Williamstown Township.
Trustee Creagh departed the meeting at 8:30pm.
Closed at 8:35 PM
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Steinberg moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Clerk Cleveland.
Meeting adjourned at 8:36 PM
Minutes approved by:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-12189.jpg]
 
May 14, 2025
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
May 14, 2025
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 6:30
p.m. on May 14, 2025.
Clerk Cleveland called the meeting to order and Trustee Steinberg led the
Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker, Trustee Creagh,
Trustee Duffy, and Trustee Steinberg.
Approval of Agenda
Motion by Trustee Creagh, second by Trustee Brinker to approve the agenda.
Discussion: None.
Motion passed.
Public Comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 6:31 PM
None
Closed at 6:31PM
Consent Agenda
Trustee Steinberg moved to approve the consent agenda, as presented, consisting
of:
∙   Approve the minutes of the April 30, 2025 Board Meeting.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 32272-32277, for a
total of $20,550.75, and Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 32285-32289,
for a total of $2,512.21.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 32278-32284,
for a total of $1,493.23, and General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #2
32290-32291, for a total of $3,083.19.
∙   GF Payroll Paid, check numbers 51356-51359, for a total of $2,894.54
(Physical Check amount), Direct Deposit DD1151-DD1176, for a total of
$22,388.76.
∙   Revenue/Expenditure Report for April 2025
∙   GL Activity Report
∙   Balance Sheet through 4-30-25
∙   Building Report
∙   Police Report
Second by: Trustee Brinker
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee
Steinberg, and Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
ACTION ITEMS
Michigan Class Investment Approval
Trustee Brinker moved the Williamstown Township Board support the use of MI
Class to be included in the options for Township Investments as the Township
Treasurer sees fit.
Seconded by: Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: The Board discussed this financial option when diversifying
investments. The Treasurer noted where the investment information is found in
the monthly Treasurer’s Report.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Brinker, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Clerk
Cleveland, and Treasurer VanErp.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Purchasing Policy
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board approve Purchasing Policy
#16 as presented, and rescind any previous Township purchasing policies.
Seconded by: Treasurer VanErp
Discussion: Discussion ensued and suggestions were made regarding the language
of the policy pertaining to authorizations, consistency between policy
sections, emergency purchases, staff purchases, and adding a reporting
component.
Trustee Creagh motioned to table the Purchasing Policy until June 11 th Board
Meeting.
Second by: Trustee Steinberg
Motion Passed.
Park Lawn Mower Quotes
Treasurer VanErp moved the Williamstown Township Board approve purchase of the
Z960 M 31 HP Kawasaki lawnmower for the price of $16,702.00, and render the
April 30, 2025 Board approval of the mower purchase null and void.
Seconded by: Trustee Brinker
Discussion: Clerk Cleveland explained that the April 30, 2025 proposal that was
approved by the Board was rescinded by the proposer because the pricing was
incorrect. New proposals were sought from that company, and other companies’
proposals were verified to present at this meeting.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp,
Trustee Brinker, and Trustee Creagh.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Discussion Items
Eagle Scout Policy – The Board supports moving forward with an updated policy
that is congruent both with the guidelines and process set forth by Scouting
and procedures currently in place at the Township. A draft will be brought back
to the next meeting.
Park House Security – The Board supports seeking security system estimate
should plans move forward with utilizing Park House for storage.
Allowable Park Trail Uses – The Board discussed the current language regarding
horses at the Community Park. The Parks and Trails subcommittee is going to
review it and make suggestions. 
Replacement Check Policy – The Board considered processes for when vendors
misplace or lose checks. Members discussed proactive ideas to employ to
minimize this potential including mailing checks after events, vendors picking
up checks in person, and possibly offering ACH. These options would be
determined and included in future vendor contracts.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA – Trustee Duffy reported on the April Meeting. He shared information
regarding the purchase of a new chase vehicle for the department. The NIESA
Board would like to seek additional accessory kit bids for this vehicle. A
decision was also made to reorder the meeting agendas to a “old business/new
business” model.
Parks Committee – Trustee Steinberg updated on the Board on the increased
number (36) of new oak tree plantings that will be donated to the Community
Park from Wild Type. Planting plans are in process. Trustee Steinberg noted
that there are other park supporters who would also like to donate items to the
park at no recognition or reimbursement. He inquired about the process for
accepting donations and suggested a policy be developed. The responsibilities
of the Harvest Festival have been transitioned to the Parks Committee. The date
is Saturday, October 4 th . The Township Office will begin contacting potential
vendors soon.
Elections/Clerk – Clerk Cleveland reported that the Perry Election was held on
May 6 th and went smoothly. There were no audits for us or Perry Township for
this election.
Cemetery – Treasurer VanErp reported that the Sexton is currently seeking out
alternative gate ideas for the Green Burial Site.
Roads – No report.
Clerk Cleveland noted that the Maintenance and Grounds Department is looking
for seasonal help and that the office may need to hire an office assistant
soon.
Trustee Creagh updated the Board on the Deer Management Subcommittee progress.
They are hoping to set a meeting for June.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:39 PM
Kevin Mark – Township Resident and Planning Commission Vice-Chair – addressed
the Board on the need for a new Park Pavilion and the possibility of using the
Prime Housing annual donation towards this construction. He also suggested
honoring their monetary support of the pavilion with a plaque.
Closed at 7:41 PM
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Trustee Steinberg.
Meeting adjourned at 7:43 PM.
Minutes approved by:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-12239.jpg]
 
 
June 11, 2025
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
June 11, 2025
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 6:30
p.m. on June 11, 2025.
Supervisor Poth called the meeting to order and led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Poth, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker,
Trustee Creagh, and Trustee Steinberg.
Approval of Agenda
Motion by Trustee Creagh, second by Trustee Brinker to approve the agenda.
Discussion: None.
Motion passed.
Public Comment for agenda items
Opened at 6:31 PM
Sue Alchin – Township Resident – inquired if the Wamhoff Seasonal Display would
be addressed and decided at this evening’s Board Meeting.
Closed at 6:31PM
Consent Agenda
Trustee Brinker moved to approve the consent agenda, as presented, consisting
of:
∙   Approve the minutes of the May 14, 2025 Board Meeting.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 32292-32300, for a
total of $4,289.03, and Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 32310-32314,
for a total of $1,972.35.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 32301-32308,
for a total of $14,921.87, and General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #2
32315-32321, for a total of $3,485.32.
∙   GF Payroll Paid, check numbers 51360-51362, for a total of $2,693.13
(Physical Check amount), Direct Deposit DD1177-DD1197, for a total of
$22,987.40
∙   EFT Report 863-865, for a total of $8,089.78.
∙   Remittance Check Report 51363-51366, for a total of $2,656.86.
∙   Revenue/Expenditure Report for May 2025
∙   GL Activity Report
∙   Balance Sheet
∙   Building report
∙   Police Report
∙   PC draft minutes
∙   ZBA draft minutes
∙   Treasurer’s Report – May
Second by: Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: Clerk Cleveland noted that two new reports are included in this
month’s Consent Agenda. They are the EFT and Remittance Check Reports. The new
BS&A Cloud Payroll Report currently does not include these items whereas
previous program did. Therefore, the needed information was run as two separate
reports to ensure that the Board had a complete view of May’s Payroll.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Steinberg,
Supervisor Poth, and Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Williamston Community Schools Update
- Dr. Adam Spina, Superintendent of Williamston Community Schools, shared
highlights and district accomplishments from the past school year. He also
addressed upcoming projects and focus areas for the 2025-2026 school year
including upcoming construction projects.
Planning Commission Report
- Chair Eidt shared a summary of the Planning Commission’s May 28 th meeting. A
public hearing was held for the Wamhoff Farms Seasonal Display at 3518 Burkley
Road. He noted that opposition was expressed from the neighbor to the North.
Concerns included increased traffic, disruption due to visitors of the event,
and lights from the barn exterior and vehicles. Deliberation on this special
land use permit will take place at the June 25 th meeting. The Existing Land
Use chapter of the Master Plan was reviewed and modified, as well as the 5 Year
Parks and Recreation Action Plan.
Township Historical Committee Update
– Resident and Township Historical Committee member, Mitch Lutzke, updated the
Board on the Committee’s recent endeavor towards seeking a State Historic Site
designation for Branch School. This would be the needed first step before
seeking a designation from the National Registry. It is a 12-18 month process
which also may require some costs to the Township (for example, should the
designation be granted there would be a requirement to purchase a sign). The
Historic Committee thought it important to seek Board support and approval for
this endeavor before moving forward. The Board also inquired about the status
of the school bell tower and the need for preventative maintenance.
ACTION ITEMS
Branch School
Clerk Cleveland moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Williamstown
Township Historical Committee to begin and complete the Michigan State Historic
Preservation Office application and process to seek both State and National
Historic designations for Branch School.
Seconded by: Treasurer VanErp
Discussion: The Board supports the work of the Historic Committee and agreed to
move this inquiry to Action Items for this June 11 th meeting versus waiting
until July.
Motion Passed.
Red Cedar Bend Apartments
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board table the Red Cedar Bend
Apartments discussion until the July 9 th Board Meeting.
Seconded by: Trustee Brinker
Discussion: Chris Doozan, Planning Consultant, shared his letter to the Board
which provided an overview of the Red Cedar Bend project and the review process
for a Planned Development such as this. Discussion ensued about the Planning
Commission’s role in the Planned Development process, the Payment In Lieu Of
Taxes (PILOT) program the developers are seeking and how those are negotiated,
the proposed plan for the sidewalk and reducing the size from 8 ft. to 5 ft.,
and the 425 Agreement with regards to the water hook-up. The Board expressed a
desire to have more information regarding the sidewalks, the PILOT, and its
financial implications thereof, before making a formal decision.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Brinker, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Poth,
Clerk Cleveland, and Treasurer VanErp.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
River Trail Resolution
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the River Trail
Resolution to facilitate application to the State to be a DNR designated water
trail.
Seconded by: Trustee Brinker
Discussion: Trustee Creagh discussed stakeholder support for this process in
seeking Water Trail designation by the DNR. He noted that Top Notch Tree
Service would be in the river over the next few weeks to remove branches and
wood debris to ensure the river is passable. 
Motion Passed.
Purchasing Policy
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board remove the Purchasing
Policy from the table for discussion and action.
Seconded by: Trustee Brinker
Discussion: None.
Motion Passed.
Clerk Cleveland moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Purchasing
Policy for the Township.
Seconded by: Trustee Creagh
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Poth, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp,
Trustee Brinker, and Trustee Creagh.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Financial Policy
Trustee Brinker moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Financial
Policy for the Township.
Seconded by: Trustee Creagh
Discussion: Treasurer VanErp noted that the change in policy in the Bank
Accounts and Bank Reconciliation was a suggested practice from the Township
Accountant.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Supervisor Poth, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker,
Trustee Creagh, and Trustee Steinberg.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Discussion Items
Farmland Preservation Application – Clerk Cleveland shared the summary and
guidance from the State Agency (MDARD) that oversees these applications. The
Board will review the application and supporting documents ahead of their July
9 th meeting.
Donation and Sponsorship Policy – Treasurer VanErp provided an overview of the
proposed policy. The Board will review the draft and send any revisions,
comments, and questions to the Treasurer prior to July 9 th .
Recycling – The Board reviewed the recent data from May’s recycling and the
continued costs to the Township. The Board discussed ending the recycling in
the fall. Discussion ensued about setting a date for when to end, how to
communicate the decision with the residents with alternative locations for
future recycling, and other specialized dates/programs that could be offered in
its place.
Board E-Packet Timeline – Supervisor Poth checked-in with the Board regarding
the distribution of information prior to Board Meetings and if the current
process was meeting their needs. The Board determined the process was
sufficient, however, if future meetings included a significant amount of
information, then they thought it could be useful to have it sent earlier.
Reports – Departments and Committees
NIESA – No report.
Parks Committee – Trustee Steinberg updated the Board on the May 20 th planting
of 24 oak trees. Discussion of the upcoming Master Plan for the Park was also
discussed with perspective from Chris Doozan. The Township Residents will be
invited to this brainstorming session with details to be shared in the upcoming
Township Newsletter and the website.
Elections/Clerk – Clerk Cleveland updated the Board on the results of the Perry
Election held on May 6 th . She noted that there may be a November election.
Notification to clerks will occur soon regarding this possibility.
Cemetery – No report.
Roads – Supervisor Poth updated the Board on upcoming items for Township roads.
The Road Committee will be convening in the next month to begin establishing
recommendations for next year and discuss how branches are cleared from area
roadways. One neighborhood has recently applied for a Special Assessment. Barry
Road resurfacing will commence within the next month. The Township lawyer is
currently rendering their opinion on the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code with
regard to the Township Truck Ordinance. Supervisor Poth hopes to have
information at the next meeting.
Red Cedar Bend Apartments – Chris Doozan inquired about communicating the
suggested change to the sidewalk size with the developers.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:41 PM
Sue Alchin – Township Resident – expressed support for extending the proposed
sidewalk at the proposed Red Cedar Bend Apartments east to the trailer park.
Jerry Eidt – PC Chair and Township Resident – expressed his appreciation to the
Board for their work and continued efforts on behalf of Williamstown Township
residents.
Jeremy Cunningham – Township Resident – shared his experiences with the Special
Assessment process for roads. He questioned if there were any new plans to
address the plights of deteriorating area roads.
Closed at 8:48 PM
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Creagh moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Trustee Brinker.
Meeting adjourned at 8:49 PM.
Minutes approved by:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-12290.jpg]
 
July 9, 2025
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
July 9, 2025
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 6:30
p.m. on July 9, 2025.
Supervisor Poth called the meeting to order and Trustee Steinberg led the
Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Poth, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker,
Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, and Trustee Steinberg.
Approval of Agenda
Motion by Trustee Steinberg, second by Trustee Creagh to approve the agenda.
Discussion: None.
Motion passed.
Public Comment for agenda items
Opened at 6:32 PM
None.
Closed at 6:32 PM
Consent Agenda
Trustee Brinker moved to approve the consent agenda, as presented, consisting
of:
∙   Approve the minutes of the June 11, 2025 Board Meeting.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 32322-32334, for a
total of $16,508.65, Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 32344-32346, for a
total of $1,737.61, and Accounts Payable Paid #3, check numbers 32352-32353,
for a total of $1630.11.
∙   Police Funds Accounts Payable Paid, check number 1150, for a total of
$49,108.31.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 32335-32343,
for a total of $30,479.50, and General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #2
32347-32351, for a total of $1,172.06.
∙   GF Payroll Paid, check numbers 51367-51373, for a total of $2,493.05
(Physical Check amount), Direct Deposit DD1198-DD1234, for a total of
$26,283.14.
∙   EFT Report 866-868, for a total of $8,059.91.
∙   Revenue/Expenditure Report for June 2025
∙   GL Activity Report
∙   Balance Sheet
∙   Building Reports
∙   Police Reports
∙   PC draft minutes
∙   Treasurer’s Report – June
∙   State Shared Revenue
Second by: Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: The Board discussed the current data on this quarter’s State Shared
Revenue (SSR) report, as well as the implementation of Master Class and the
ways Treasurer VanErp is looking to maximize earnings for the Township.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Poth, Clerk
Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp, and Trustee Brinker.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Meridian Township Police Report - Assistant Chief Bart Crane summarized the
June Police Report and Dedicated Hours data for the Board. He addressed
stakeholders’ concerns regarding the signage for the detours due to the bridge
construction on Grand River. He reviewed how road detours are to be properly
marked. He noted that enforcement action could occur if signs are tampered with
and/or moved by residents/motorists on the road. The Board inquired about
motorists rolling through the four-way stop sign at Sherwood and Zimmer and
overall sign setbacks at the detours.
Planning Commission Report - Chair Eidt shared a summary of the Planning
Commission’s (PC) June 25th meeting. He noted that deliberation occurred
regarding the Wamhoff Farms Seasonal Display at 3518 Burkley Road for the
months of October (10/17 – 10/31) and December (12/1 to 12/23). The PC
recommended to the Board approval of the Special Land Use for Wamhoff Farms
Seasonal Display subject to conditions. In addition, the PC recommended to the
Board to approval of the Cremer Farms, LLC, Application for Farmland
Developmental Rights Agreement. Chair Eidt also noted that the Planning
Commission Annual Report was completed and sent to the Board.
ACTION ITEMS
Wamhoff Farms Seasonal Display
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Special Use
Permit for the Wamhoff Farms Seasonal Display.
Second by Trustee Duffy
Discussion: The Board discussed the fence condition set by the Planning
Commission to address concerns that had been raised regarding excessive light
for neighbors. Mr. Wamhoff noted that the neighbor directly to the north had
listed their house with a realtor. He expressed a desire to postpone the fence
until he could meet and discuss the fence with the new neighbor to arrive at a
mutual agreement regarding its construction. The Board discussed the need to
have fencing in place by the first event in October. Trustee Creagh suggested
amending the motion to give Mr. Wamhoff a timebound opportunity to speak to his
new neighbor about fence construction and placement.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee
Steinberg, Supervisor Poth, and Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Special Use
Permit for the Wamhoff Farms Seasonal Display with the following conditions.
Prior to October 17 th , the applicant shall have an agreement with their
neighbor to forgo or have constructed a 6-foot-high vinyl fence, approximately
75 feet in length, along the north property line in the front. The exact
location of the fence shall be mutually agreeable to both parties. The
agreement shall be submitted in writing to the Township Board.
Seconded by: Trustee Duffy
Discussion: The Board discussed whether a special use permit could ever expire.
It was confirmed that the Special Use Permit runs with the property owner and
is good for as long as the events occur at Wamhoff Farms and the usage conforms
with the agreed upon proposal and conditions.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Brinker, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg,
Supervisor Poth, Clerk Cleveland, and Treasurer VanErp.
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
Cremer - Farmland Preservation Application
Trustee Brinker moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Farmland
Preservation Application for Cremer Farms.
Seconded by: Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: Trustee Creagh provided an overview of the Farmland Preservation
Program as it relates to this application.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Poth, Clerk Cleveland,
Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker, and Trustee Creagh.
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
ZBA Appointment
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the appointment of
Township Supervisor Ron Poth to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
Seconded by: Trustee Duffy
Discussion: Supervisor Poth explained that he should be formally appointed to
the Zoning Board of Appeals by the Township Board. He also noted that the ZBA
needs to appoint one more member. Ideally, he would like to see representation
from the northern part of the Township, as well as work towards having
membership from different professions to provide for varying perspectives.
Interested residents could seek consideration for this position by completing
an Application for Public Service.
Motion Passed.
Planning Commission Annual Report
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Planning
Committee Annual Report to the Township Board.
Seconded by: Trustee Brinker
Discussion: None.
Motion Passed.
Recycle Grant
Trustee Duffy moved the Williamstown Township Board decline the Recycling Grant
awarded from EGLE for the Township to build a recycling facility.
Seconded by: Trustee Brinker
Discussion: The Board discussed this limited funding source, the considerations
on moving away from recycling, and the additional funds that would have been
needed to build a recycling facility. 
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee
Steinberg, Supervisor Poth, and Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None.
Motion Passed.
Discussion Items
Horses on Park Trail – Supervisor Poth shared the current ordinance language
regarding horses at the park. It was noted that they cannot be on the trails.
Discussion ensued regarding whether the ordinance needs to be re-addressed and/
or revised considering the Master Plan for the Parks work is commencing soon.
If it is needed, it will be deliberated first by the Planning Commission with
any recommendations being then sent to the Township Board.
Reports – Departments and Committees
Supervisor’s Report – Supervisor Poth updated the Board on the status of the
Safe Routes to School grant, as well as the Red Cedar Bend Apartment proposed
development. In addition, he reported on his efforts towards acquiring security
at the Park House at the Community Park. He also addressed the recent
abstention review sent from Clerk Cleveland.
NIESA – Trustee Duffy reported on the recent NIESA meeting on June 12th. He
noted that the Webberville DDA Agreement was addressed, and payment was made
per their agreement. Director Yantz found a vehicle to purchase for the
department and a new academy is being hosted by NIESA with other communities
participating. They recently offered CPR at the Williamston Farmer’s Market.
The Board commented that they would like to see NIESA provide CPR training for
staff and/or residents at the Township, as well as help them secure AED’s. It
was confirmed that Trustee Brinker can substitute for Trustee Duffy to attend
the NIESA meeting, if needed. 
Parks Committee – Trustee Steinberg updated the Board on Park Committee’s
Harvest Festival efforts. He expressed a desire to secure an addendum of
liability insurance for some vendors at the Harvest Festival. Supervisor Poth
noted how important this committee’s assistance will be with the upcoming
Harvest Festival. He requested an updated Parks Committee list and asked Board
Chair Steinberg for notification of upcoming meetings with agendas so that
planning needs and updates can be shared more readily, helping to ensure a
successful Harvest Festival.
Elections/Clerk – Clerk Cleveland updated the Board on a current accessibility
grant being offered to members of the Michigan Association of Municipal Clerks
(MAMC). The Clerk recently hosted a representative from the Bureau of Elections
(BOE) for an election accessibility walk-thru to evaluate the needs of election
precincts at the Township and St. Katherine’s. Clerk Cleveland plans on
applying for a grant to assist in updating the accessibility needs noted in the
BOE evaluation.
Cemetery – Treasurer VanErp noted that this committee will be meeting the week
of July 14 th .
Roads – Supervisor Poth will be convening the Transportation (Roads) Committee
the week of July 14 th to begin planning for road work in 2026.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:14 PM
None
Closed at 8:14 PM
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Creagh moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Trustee Brinker.
Meeting adjourned at 8:15 PM.
Minutes approved by:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-12342.jpg]
July 30, 2025
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
July 30, 2025
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 6:33
p.m. on July 30, 2025.
Supervisor Poth called the meeting to order and Trustee Brinker led the Pledge
of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Poth, Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker, Trustee Creagh,
and Trustee Steinberg.
Approval of Agenda
Motion by Trustee Brinker, second by Trustee Creagh to approve the agenda.
Discussion: None.
Motion passed.
Public Comment for agenda items
Opened at 6:35 PM
None.
Closed at 6:35 PM
Consent Agenda
Trustee Steinberg moved to approve the consent agenda, as presented, consisting
of:
∙   Approve the minutes of the July 9, 2025 Board Meeting.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 32354-32359, for a
total of $4,649.59, Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 32367-32368, for a
total of $237.79, and Accounts Payable Paid #3, check numbers 32369-32372, for
a total of $342.17.
∙   Police Funds Accounts Payable Paid, check number 1151, for a total of
$2,695.59.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 323360-32366,
for a total of $7,181.01, and General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #2
32373-32375, for a total of $7,681.04.
∙   PC draft minutes
Discussion: Treasurer VanErp noted a correction on page 2 of the minutes. It
should read Michigan Class instead of Master Class. Trustee Creagh corrected
the motion to adjourn the meeting noting it should read Trustee Duffy. 
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Steinberg, and
Supervisor Poth.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Planning Commission Report - Chair Eidt shared a summary of the Planning
Commission’s (PC) July 24th meeting. He noted that an application for parcel
boundary change submitted by Carol and Randy Reagan, at 1201 Germany Rd., was
considered and denied. It did not comply with the current zoning in the area.
It was suggested that a zoning request to change the current zoning to rural
estate, with possible modified setbacks, may be a better option for the Reagans
to pursue. A draft of the Master Plan was presented to the PC, who then
referred on to the Township Board. A Community Park Master Plan Workshop
immediately followed the meeting where many diverse ideas for the future of the
park were shared.
Cemetery Report – Township Sexton Mac Donnelly updated the Board on a recent
request for a temporary variance to place a memorial marker for someone buried
in the Green Burial section whose site is not near a pathway. This request
requires Board approval. Currently, the ordinance states that only pathway
adjacent spaces may have memorials. The Shepherd’s Wall was intended to provide
an optional acknowledgement for non-pathway burial sites. However, it was
recently determined that the stones on the current wall are not large enough
for carving. A new alternative will need to be developed and considered. The
timeline for this has not yet been determined. Discussion ensued around this
precedent setting request, the size stone that could be considered, if this
marker would provide maintenance obstacles for cemetery staff, and the length
of time it would be allowed placed on site. Sexton Donnelly noted that this
variance would be short term, and the stone marker would be removed once the
new memorial wall was constructed. Additional projects established by the
Cemetery Committee were also presented including a new gate at the entrance of
the Green Burial section, designing a new Shepherd’s Wall for memorializing
those in the Green Burial site, completing the landscaping plan, bringing in an
arborist to evaluate the trees in the cemetery, and paving the cemetery
driveways.
ACTION ITEMS
Green Burial Marker Request
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board approve interim 6in. X
6in. flush memorial stones in the Green Burial section for non-pathway spaces
until the Shepherd’s Memorial Wall is constructed at which time all temporary
stones will be removed.
Second by: Trustee Creagh
Discussion: Pricing for stones and engraving of Memorial Wall was discussed.
Motion Passed.
Recycling
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the  
Williamstown Township Board discontinue monthly recycling at the Township Hall
after December 2025 or as soon as any agreements with Granger will allow,
subject to notification in the newsletter, website, and building site signage.
Second by: Trustee Brinker
Discussion: The Board noted their appreciation for the monthly recycling data.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Brinker, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Poth, and
Treasurer VanErp,
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Donation and Sponsor Policy
Treasurer VanErp moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Donation and
Sponsor Policy.
Seconded by: Trustee Creagh
Discussion:  Treasurer VanErp noted that this draft policy had been reviewed by
Planning Consultant Chris Doozan. Discussion ensued regarding the language used
in the policy and if it was more applicable to a larger municipality. The Board
reviewed each section of the policy and made recommendations, revisions, and
edits. A clean copy with the final revisions was requested for the next Board
meeting.
Treasurer VanErp withdrew her motion.
Second: Trustee Creagh
Motion Passed.
Discussion Items
Cemetery – The Board expressed their appreciation for Sexton Donnelly’s
efforts, work and knowledge regarding the cemeteries. Discussion ensued around
the current state of the paved driveways in Summit Cemetery, potential cost
considerations, community awareness of the Green Burial option, and how
information on this type of burial is shared. Mr. Donnelly would like to share
the informational page he has created on Green Burial with the Board.
Code Enforcement Report - Supervisor Poth reviewed the data in the new report
provided by Mr. Ken Skunda, Williamstown Township Code Enforcer. The Board
found the information useful and recommended utilizing the themes of frequent
ordinance complaints as topics in upcoming newsletters in the “Did you know?”
section.
Rental Housing Ordinances – Supervisor Poth provided an overview of Mr. Chris
Doozan’s letter regarding this topic. The Board discussed and agreed to send it
to the Planning Commission for consideration.
Reports – Departments and Committees
Supervisor’s Report – Supervisor Poth updated the Board on the status of Safe
Routes To School and upcoming meetings regarding this initiative, as well as
the legal guidance received regarding adopting the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code
to enforce the Township Truck Route. He noted the Code will not need to be
adopted, but that signage will be needed. In addition, he noted that he and
Treasurer VanErp recently met with the proposed Red Cedar Bend Apartment
developers. They provided a draft of both the PILOT and ordinance for this
property development. These are being reviewed by Township legal counsel. The
Board inquired about the two remaining conditions. Supervisor Poth noted the
sidewalk questions have been clarified, but invasive species cannot be
addressed unless building commences.
NIESA – No report.
Parks Committee – Trustee Steinberg reported on the Township Park’s Master Plan
Community Meeting. Treasurer VanErp inquired about the committee’s next meeting
to help with Harvest Festival.
Elections/Clerk – No report.
Cemetery – No Report.
Roads – Supervisor Poth reported that the Road Committee had their first
meeting. They will be reconvening in August to determine plans for 2026. He
noted two neighborhoods expressing interest in Special Assessment for their
neighborhood road. Trustee Creagh noted the condition of the roads where the
recent pipeline construction has crossed. He suggested a letter be sent to
Consumer’s Energy requesting that roads be restored to their original condition
prior to construction.
Trustee Creagh noted that he will be unable to attend the August 27 th Planning
Commission meeting. Jim Brinker can attend for him.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:25 PM
Kevin Mark – Township Resident and Planning Commission Vice-Chair - addressed
the Board on the recent Park Master Plan community meeting. He questioned how
many of the participants were residents. He expressed his support for utilizing
the Park House site for future restrooms. He also suggested providing a verbal
reminder, in addition to signage, for the upcoming changes to Township
recycling.
Closed at 8:28PM
Next Meeting: Wednesday, August 13, 2025
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Creagh moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Trustee Brinker.
Meeting adjourned at 8:30 PM.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-12395.jpg]
 
August 13, 2025
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 6:33
p.m. on August 13, 2025.
Supervisor Poth called the meeting to order and Treasurer VanErp led the Pledge
of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Poth, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker,
Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, and Trustee Steinberg.
Approval of Agenda
Motion by Trustee Steinberg, second by Trustee Brinker to approve the agenda.
Discussion: None.
Motion passed.
Public Comment for agenda items
Opened at 6:33 PM
None.
Closed at 6:34 PM
Consent Agenda
Steinberg moved to approve the consent agenda, as presented, consisting of:
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 32376-32378, for a
total of $1,285.44, Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 32383-32388, for a
total of $18,960.35, and Accounts Payable Paid #3, check numbers 32392, for a
total of $685.86.
∙   Police Funds Accounts Payable Paid, check number 1152, for a total of
$5,000.00.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 32379-32382,
for a total of $327.30, and General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #2
32389-32391, for a total of $10,290.12.
∙   GF Payroll Paid, check numbers 51379-51382, for a total of $2,651.01
(Physical Check amount), Direct Deposit DD1235-DD1272, for a total of
$26,956.03.
∙   Remittance Report 51374-51378, for a total of $3,907.50
∙   EFT Report 869-875, for a total of $16,604.08.
∙   Revenue/Expenditure Report for July 2025
∙   GL Activity Report
∙   Balance Sheet
∙   Building Reports
∙   Police Reports
∙   Treasurer’s Report – July
Second by: Trustee Creagh
Discussion: Clerk Cleveland noted that the Minutes from the July 30, 2025
meeting will be approved separately and will be discussed in the Action Items
of the meeting. Treasurer VanErp addressed the two lines that were highlighted
in the Treasurer’s Report
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee
Steinberg, Supervisor Poth, and Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Capital Area District Library (CADL) Williamston Update – Ms. Jenny Marr,
Director of CADL, updated the Board on the 2024 Annual Report including data on
overall circulation, levels of participation by township residents, as well as
residents’ return on investment in millage dollars due to the support of the
CADL operating millage. She also noted that they are currently completing their
Strategic Planning process.
Ms. Julie Chrisinske, head librarian of the Williamston Branch of the CADL,
shared 2025 highlights specific to their location including the programming and
outreach they continue to provide across all age levels. She provided a flyer
of upcoming events. 
ACTION ITEMS
Red Cedar Bend Apartments
Treasurer VanErp moved the Williamstown Township Board Approve the Red Cedar
Bend Apartments Planned Development without the PILOT program.
Second by: Trustee Creagh
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Brinker, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg,
Supervisor Poth, Clerk Cleveland, and Treasurer VanErp,
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Donation and Sponsor Policy
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Donation and
Sponsor Policy as amended.
Second by: Treasurer VanErp
Discussion: The Board discussed various section edits in the updated draft.
Motion Passed.
Draft Master Plan
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board allow distribution of
the draft Master Plan to contiguous communities.
Seconded by: Trustee Duffy
Discussion: The Board discussed the distribution plan, as well as the review
process and timeline.
Motion Passed.
Draft Master Plan – Resolution
Clerk Cleveland moved the Williamstown Township Board approve Resolution #138
to reserve the right to approve or reject the Williamstown Township Master
Plan.
Seconded by: Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: None
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Poth, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp,
Trustee Brinker, and Trustee Creagh, and Trustee Duffy.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Park User Fee Schedule
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board adopt the Park User Fee
Schedule as amended.
Seconded by: Trustee Brinker
Discussion: The Board reviewed sections of the Michigan Natural Resources Trust
Fund Land Acquisition Project Agreement as it relates to the proposed fee
changes. It was determined that a letter should be sent to the DNR stating the
fees will be increased. Discussion ensued on document definitions, fees,
scheduling preferences, application processes, and proposed additions like try-
outs as part of the list of activities. Document revisions were made
accordingly.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Supervisor Poth, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker,
Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, and Trustee Steinberg.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Minutes from the July 30, 2025 Board Meeting
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the amended
minutes of the July 30, 2025 Board Meeting.
Seconded by: Clerk Cleveland
Discussion: Clerk Cleveland explained that since Treasurer VanErp had withdrawn
her motion, there didn’t need to be a motion to table the Donation and
Sponsorship Policy. The minutes will reflect this determination.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee
Steinberg, Supervisor Poth, and Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Discussion Items
Code Enforcement Report – The Board discussed the formats the Code Enforcement
Reports could be produced in BS&A. Moving forward, the data will come in two
reports.
Deer Management Budget – Supervisor Poth invited Trustee Creagh to provide
insights into the possible costs associated with Deer Management to assist in
informing if developing a budget is essential. The Board expressed their
support for the Deer Management Committee developing potential budget needs
Reports – Departments and Committees
Supervisor’s Report – Supervisor Poth updated the Board on the new meeting
location for Township committee and subcommittee meetings. Moving forward,
meetings will be held in the Township Hall Community Room to ensure access for
both members and the public. He provided a Capital Improvement Plan update with
a target date of December for review by the Board.
A request from a resident seeking to discharge model rockets in the Township
Park was recently submitted to Supervisor Poth. He will be bringing this
request to the Board in September. It was suggested that he also contact NIESA
seeking their perspective on this inquiry.
He reviewed guidance for tabling and postponing actions in Board Meetings and
informed the Board that Williamston Middle School is seeking access to the
Community Park for an upcoming Cross Country Meet. Discussion ensued on past
considerations and preparations for school sanctioned events. 
NIESA – Trustee Duffy updated the Board on details from NEISA’s recent meeting
including their discussion of the Webberville DDA and who should sign minutes
in the absence of the Secretary. He inquired if there had been follow-up from
Chief Yantz regarding acquiring an AED and securing CPR Training at the
Township. Supervisor Poth confirmed there was.
Parks Committee – Trustee Steinberg noted that the Parks Committee will be
meeting on August 14 th to discuss plans for moving forward as a group,
identify ways to support the Master Plan, and generate commitments to the
annual Harvest Festival.
Elections/Clerk – Clerk Cleveland reported that there will not be a November
Election.
Cemetery – No Report.
Roads – Supervisor Poth provided updates on recent and upcoming road closures
due to the bridge construction on Grand River, as well as pipeline installation
road repairs that are happening in the Township.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:40 PM
Byron Aldrink - Township Resident and Business Owners of the Williamston Inn –
addressed the Board on the the Grand River Road closure it’s impact to the
walk-in traffic for his business. He also expressed his experiences with DTE,
the inconsistent power issues, and frequency of power loss. He hopes
Williamston City and Township can coordinate their efforts with DTE to seek
resolution to the power problems.
Frans Wilbrink – Township Resident - addressed the decision to end recycling,
the vote on the Donation and Sponsor Policy, and the length of time the Board
took to work on the draft Fee Schedule for the parks.
Closed at 8:48 PM
Next Meeting: Wednesday, September 10, 2025
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Treasurer VanErp.
Meeting adjourned at 8:48 PM.
Minutes approved by:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-12449.jpg]
 
September 10, 2025
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
September 10, 2025
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 6:30
p.m. on September 10, 2025.
Supervisor Poth called the meeting to order and Treasurer VanErp led the Pledge
of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Poth, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker,
Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, and Trustee Steinberg.
Approval of Agenda
Motion by Trustee Brinker, second by Trustee Creagh to approve the agenda.
Discussion: None.
Motion passed.
Public Comment for agenda items
Opened at 6:31 PM
None.
Closed at 6:31 PM
Consent Agenda
Trustee Steinberg moved to approve the consent agenda, as presented, consisting
of:
∙   Approve the minutes of the August 13, 2025 Board Meeting.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 32393-32400, for a
total of $3,032.10, Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 32414-32419, for a
total of $4,466.36.
∙   Police Funds Accounts Payable Paid #1, check number 1153, for a total of
$1,918.04. Police Funds Accounts Payable Paid #2, check number 1154, for a
total of $500.00.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 32401-32405,
for a total of $9,752.72, General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #2 32406-
32413, for a total of $8,342.54, and General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval
#3 32421-32428 for a total of $6,823.49.
∙   GF Payroll Paid, check numbers 51383 and 51387-51388, for a total of
$1,787.41 (Physical Check amount), Direct Deposit DD1273-DD1306, for a total of
$28,593.90.
∙   Remittance Report 51385-51386, for a total of $1,459.88.
∙   EFT Report 876-877, for a total of $4,555.97.
∙   Revenue/Expenditure Report for August 2025
∙   GL Activity Report
∙   Balance Sheet
∙   Building Reports
∙   Police Reports
∙   PC Draft Minutes
∙   Treasurer’s Report – August
∙   State Shared Revenue
Second by: Trustee Brinker
Discussion: Treasurer VanErp noted that State Shared Revenue Report would also
be discussed later in the meeting.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee
Steinberg, Supervisor Poth, and Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Senior Center Update – Julie Rudd, Director of the Williamston Senior Center,
presented progress updates and future goals and action for the Williamston
Senior Center over the past year.
Planning Commission Report - Chair Eidt shared a summary of the Planning
Commission’s (PC) August 27 th meeting. He noted that the Commission reviewed
and discussed the three options from the Community Park Master Plan Workshop
held on July 15, 2025. Each option was reviewed and discussed. In an effort to
meet the needs of the Township, amendments were made to the Planning Commission
Meeting schedule to, at least temporarily, transition to monthly meetings. In
addition, meeting dates were changed to November 18th and December 16 th at 6:
30pm to accommodate the holidays.
Boy Scout Project Completion Update – Scout Max Annis provided written
materials, maps, and photos to assist in updating the Board on the progress
made on this his Invasives Control Project for the Scouting America
Distinguished Conservation Service Award. He had last visited the Board in
April. The Board reviewed his proposal, offered suggestions, and encouraged him
to be present at the upcoming Harvest Festival to share details about his
project with the broader community. His plan was approved by Supervisor Poth.
ACTION ITEMS
Hobby Rocket Special Use Permit
Trustee Duffy moved the Williamstown Township Board approve a Park Special Use
Permit to Trevor Stratton, to launch hobby rockets at the Williamstown Township
Park. This Special Use Permit will expire July 28, 2026 and the Board will
waive the damage deposit.
Second by: Jim Brinker
Discussion: The Board questioned Mr. Stratton on the details of his hobby
including where the launches would occur, take-off flames, remaining embers
after lift-off, rocket height, and how he mitigates fire risks. Amendments to
the motion were added to include the location of the park, an expiration date,
and the waiving of the damage deposit.
Motion Passed.
Truck Route Ordinance Amendment
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Truck Route
Ordinance amendments excluding Williamston Rd north of Haslett Rd and all of
Sherwood Rd.
Second by: Treasurer VanErp
Discussion: Supervisor Poth reviewed the steps involved in updating the
ordinance and the process for signage on the roads.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Poth, Clerk
Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp, and Trustee Brinker.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Private Road Ordinance
Clerk Cleveland moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Private Road
Ordinance.
Seconded by: Trustee Creagh
Discussion: The Board discussed the process of creating a private road.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Poth, Clerk Cleveland,
Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker, and Trustee Creagh
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Park User Fee Schedule Amendments
Trustee Duffy moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Park Use Fee
Schedule Amendments, as amended.
Seconded by: Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: The Board reviewed the final draft. Fees for cross-country meets
were addressed.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Poth, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp,
Trustee Brinker, and Trustee Creagh, and Trustee Duffy.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Park Tree Planting Grant
Trustee Brinker moved the Williamstown Township Board approve submitting the
Park Tree Planting Grant to the DNR with a matching dollar amount not to exceed
$15,000.00.
Seconded by: Treasurer VanErp
Discussion: The Board discussed the grant that Janet Eyster is seeking. It is
due September 20 th .
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Supervisor Poth, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker,
Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, and Trustee Steinberg.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Asphalt & Sealing Quotes
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board approve contracting with
Hayhoe Asphalt for the repair and sealing project quoted for the Williamstown
Township Hall parking lot. The total cost of the project shall not exceed
$13,000.00.
Seconded by: Trustee Brinker
Discussion: The Board reviewed each proposal, the materials each vendor was
planning to use for each location, the asphalt thickness suggested, as well as
compared costs for each project. It was determined that more information was
needed to decide about the best materials and road thickness needed at Summit
Cemetery. In the meantime, the Board chose to move forward with the repair and
sealing project at the Township Hall.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker, Trustee Creagh,
Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, and Supervisor Poth.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Discussion Items
City of Williamston Joint Meeting – Supervisor Poth reported that Williamston
City has approached the Township about a meeting. There is no proposed date at
this time. The Board proposed four dates in October for the City to consider.
Personnel Policy & Handbook – Clerk Cleveland noted that the last handbook was
approved in 2013 and that it needs updating. Revisions will be made based on
requested feedback and a new draft presented to the Board, possibly in October.
Reports – Departments and Committees
Supervisor’s Report – Supervisor Poth updated the Board on:
∙   Township resident accessibility for curbside recycling. The furthest
northeast portion of township does not have access; however, Granger is looking
to provide service. Waste Management has not responded to inquiries for
service.
∙   The Township Historical Committee will be hosting its annual Ice Cream
Social on Sunday, September 14th at the Historic Branch School. It will include
a plaque dedication to Tom Johnson (posthumously) for his dedication to and
work on the school’s restoration.
∙   The impacts of the current state budget with regard to State Shared
Revenue.
∙   The status of the Park Master Plan and the recommendations chosen at the
Planning Commission.
∙   The Capital Improvement Planning Committee’s work to streamline the process
and plan to better fit our smaller municipality.
NIESA – Trustee Duffy updated the Board on details from NIESA’s August 14 th
Regular Board Meeting.
Parks Committee – Trustee Steinberg noted that progress on the Harvest Festival
plans. Signage placement for the trees in the forest will be decided in the
next few weeks.
Elections/Clerk – Clerk Cleveland reported there are no elections for the
remainder of this year. The Bureau of Elections held their first state-wide
conference Elections Administrators in Lansing in early September. It was noted
at the conference that funding for election equipment in 2027 may need to be
allocated at the local level.
Cemetery – No Report. The committee will be meeting next week at Summit
Cemetery.
Roads – Supervisor Poth noted that Barry Road repairs and maintenance is almost
complete. Although there are no updates on the bridge construction, South
Meridian is now open, with North Meridian to close later this month.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 9:07 PM
None.
Closed at 9:07 PM
Next Meeting: Wednesday, October 8, 2025
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Trustee Creagh
Meeting adjourned at 9:08 PM.
Minutes approved by:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-12504.jpg]
October 8, 2025
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
October 8, 2025
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 6:30
p.m. on October 8, 2025.
Supervisor Poth called the meeting to order and led the Pledge of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Poth, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker,
Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, and Trustee Steinberg.
Approval of Agenda
Motion by Trustee Creagh, second by Trustee Brinker to approve the agenda.
Discussion: None.
Motion passed.
Public Comment for agenda items
Opened at 6:31 PM
None.
Closed at 6:31 PM
Consent Agenda
Trustee Steinberg moved to approve the consent agenda, as presented, consisting
of:
∙   Approve the minutes of the September 10, 2025 Board Meeting.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 32429-32441, for a
total of $6,625.03, Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 32448-32453, for a
total of $13,923.40, and Accounts Payable Paid #3, check numbers 32461-32464,
for a total of $1,452.49.
∙   Police Funds Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 1155-1156, for a total
of $49,795.25.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 32442-32447,
for a total of $2,038.36 and General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #2,
check numbers 32454-32460, for a total of $5,371.77.
∙   GF Payroll Paid, check numbers 51392-51394, for a total of $2,169.37
(Physical Check amount), Direct Deposit DD1307-DD1336, for a total of
$25,389.28.
∙   Remittance Report, check numbers 51389-51391, for a total of $2592.00.
∙   EFT Report, EFTs 878-881, for a total of $8,961.79.
∙   Revenue/Expenditure Report for September 2025
∙   GL Activity Report
∙   Balance Sheet as of September 2025
∙   Building Reports
∙   Police Reports
∙   PC Draft Minutes
∙   Treasurer’s Report – September
Second by: Trustee Creagh
Discussion: 
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee
Steinberg, Supervisor Poth, and Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Brenda Seelman, Clark Schaefer Hackett CPAs and Advisors – Audit Presentation –
Ms. Seelman presented a summary of the recent Williamstown Township Audit for
the fiscal year ending March 31, 2025. She noted that the Township received an
unmodified clean opinion for 2024-2025. Highlights of the report included the
Township’s current revenue and expenditures, as well as changes in the fund
balance that resulted in an overall increase. Her summary included information
on internal controls and an overview of recommendations that were made and/or
implemented.
Meridian Township Police Report - Chief Grillo reviewed quarterly Township
public safety data including calls for service, traffic updates due to
construction and current detours, as well as upcoming areas of focus for the
department. He noted that with their improved staffing there is a related
increase in enforcement. A traffic team was recently formed to focus on
resident needs and observations. Chief Grillo reminded the Board to encourage
anyone who has suggestions for enforcement areas to visit the Police Department
page on Meridian Township’s website and complete a Traffic Concern Form. In
addition, with deer on the move, he said the department is seeing an uptick in
car/deer accidents and reminds residents to drive cautiously.
Planning Commission Report – Secretary Tocarchick shared a summary of the
Planning Commission’s (PC) September 24th meeting. She noted that the
Commission made the Parks and Recreation Master Plan Draft available for public
review and comment. A proposed Amendment to the Zoning Ordinance regarding
Recreational Vehicle Parking was discussed. It was determined that more
information was needed. Discussions will resume at the October meeting. A lot
split application for property 33-03-03-36-201-040 was approved. Amendments
were made to the Planning Meeting Schedule, the draft of the Capital
Improvement Plan was reviewed, and the commission was updated on recent
legislation. 
ACTION ITEMS
Cemetery Driveway Maintenance
Treasurer VanErp moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the bid from
Hayhoe Asphalt to patch and seal the Summit Cemetery driveways for an amount
not to exceed $18,000.
Second by: Trustee Brinker
Discussion: Supervisor Poth summarized the perspective and recommendations the
Township Transportation Committee shared regarding maintenance of the paved
surfaces at the cemetery.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Brinker, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg,
Supervisor Poth, Clerk Cleveland, and Treasurer VanErp.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Joint Meeting with the City
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board meet with the City of
Williamston and others at the Williamston Middle School on October 15 th , 2025
at 6:00 pm
Second by: Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: The Board confirmed the stakeholders who would be participating and
when the agenda would be shared.
Motion Passed.
Discussion Items
Wamhoff Special Use Permit Update – Supervisor Poth reviewed the timeline set
forth in July when the Special Use Permit (SUP) was issued. Mr. Wamhoff and the
new owner of the home, located next to the seasonal display barn, sent a formal
communication to the Township regarding the construction of a fence between the
two properties. The new neighbor indicated that a fence is no longer necessary,
nor do the trucks need to be moved to create a barrier during the holiday
events. In addition, it was requested that this stipulation be removed from the
SUP. The Board discussed the intent of the original motion and the request
presented in the letter. They agreed it was acceptable to suspend the specific
fence and truck requirements so long as Mr. Wamhoff and the new neighbor’s
association remain harmonious. Should future issues arise, the Board may
require reverting back to the initial SUP criteria.
Reports – Departments and Committees
Supervisor’s Report – Supervisor Poth updated the Board on:
∙   a letter received from Perry Township on September 30th indicating they are
amending their Master Plan that was adopted in 2023.
∙   the 10% decrease in the State Shared Revenue for the next fiscal year, as
determined by the recent budget adopted by the State. The new projections will
come in by the end of the month.
∙   changes at the county level regarding Special Assessment Districts and road
engineering services. This service will no longer be offered by the Ingham
County Road Department. Townships in our county would have to hire engineering
firms to do this work.
∙   his plan to discuss the recent road work done on Barry Road with the Ingham
County Road Department. After reviewing the finished paving and shoulder work
with the Township Road Committee, questions were generated regarding the
quality of the workmanship, experience of the crew, and the materials used to
resurface the road.
NIESA – Trustee Duffy updated the Board on details from NIESA’s September 11 th
Regular Board Meeting.
Parks Committee – Trustee Steinberg updated the Board on the status of the
grant that was being pursued for additional trees at the park. Due to the
current financial status at the state level, the grant is no longer offered. He
also noted the success of the recent annual Harvest Festival that occurred on
September 4 th at the Community Park. Over 500 people attended. He expressed
his appreciation for the efforts of Kerri Danstrom in ensuring this was a
successful event.
Elections/Clerk – Clerk Cleveland updated the Board on a recent email she sent
to the Capital Improvement Plan Committee regarding election equipment that
will need to be purchased in 2026.
Cemetery – Treasurer VanErp reported that the Cemetery Board met at Summitt
Cemetery for their most recent meeting. Tim Green, member of the Historical
Committee, attended to discuss the proposed QR project to capture the rich
history at the cemeteries. The Cemetery Board supported these efforts and
suggested the committee start at Foote Ceremony. Other items discussed included
the plans for the Green Burial Gate and the Memorial Wall.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:51 PM
Kevin Mark – Township Resident and Planning Commission Vice-Chair – confirmed
details with the Board on the next Capital Improvement Plan meeting.
Closed at 7:53 PM
Next Meeting: Wednesday, October 29, 2025
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Trustee Brinker
Meeting adjourned at 7:55 PM.
Minutes approved by:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-12560.jpg]
October 29, 2025
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
October 29, 2025
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 6:30
p.m. on October 29, 2025.
Supervisor Poth called the meeting to order and Clerk Cleveland led the Pledge
of Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Poth, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker,
Trustee Creagh, and Trustee Steinberg.
Approval of Agenda
Motion by Trustee Creagh, second by Trustee Steinberg to approve the agenda.
Discussion: None.
Motion passed.
Public Comment for agenda items
Opened at 6:31 PM
None.
Closed at 6:32 PM
Consent Agenda
Trustee Brinker moved to approve the consent agenda, as presented, consisting
of:
∙   Approve the minutes of the October 8, 2025 Board Meeting.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 32465-32467, for a
total of $1,167.03, Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 32476-32479, for a
total of $1,730.51, and Accounts Payable Paid #3, check numbers 32480-32484,
for a total of $3,409.69.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 32468-32475,
for a total of $10,653.02 and General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #2,
check numbers 32485-32490, for a total of $5,003.55.
Second by: Treasurer VanErp
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Steinberg,
Supervisor Poth, and Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Roderick McNeill – Ingham County Health Department Sanitary Code Update – Mr.
McNeill presented information to the Board regarding proposed amendments and
updates to the Ingham County Sanitary Code, specifically Chapter 2. The changes
primarily focus on design and installation, certifications, site suitability,
and new technologies used in septic system installation. He anticipates the new
code to be adopted at the county level in January of 2026 with implementation
beginning in June. Questions and discussion ensued regarding the information
presented.
Planning Commission Report – Chair Eidt shared a summary of the Planning
Commission’s (PC) October 22nd meeting. He noted that the Commission received
and reviewed comments from the PC on the Draft Parks and Recreation Master Plan
and the upcoming timeline, discussed proposed amendments to the Recreational
Vehicle Parking Ordinance, and reviewed the Capital Improvement Plan (CIP) with
a resolution of acceptance to send to the Board. Chair Eidt shared that
interest has been expressed in reviewing all township zoning ordinances. The
options and plans for completing this work have yet to be determined.
ACTION ITEMS
Police Assesment Roll
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Police
Assessment Roll.
Second by: Trustee Brinker
Discussion: Treasurer VanErp reviewed the updated assessment roll that included
new builds and recent lot splits. 
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Brinker, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Poth,
Clerk Cleveland, and Treasurer VanErp.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Building Permit Fees – Construction Code Audit
Treasurer VanErp moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Building
Permit Fees as presented.
Second by: Clerk Cleveland
Discussion: Treasurer VanErp noted that increasing the Building Permit Fees has
been a recommendation from auditors for the past several years in their review
of the Township construction code revenues and expenditures. The Board
discussed last time fees were raised (2017), the current permit process for
various construction projects, as well as the Township’s standards of
promptness and accountability of services to residents.
Motion Passed.
Discussion Items
Newsletter Ad Policy – Supervisor Poth sought Board perspective and discussion
on the value, if any, of adding business advertisement to the quarterly
newsletter.
Joint Meeting with the City of Williamston – The Board revisited the topics
discussed and highlights from the recent Joint Meeting with the City of
Williamston. Supervisor Poth sought feedback from the Board regarding their
experience and take aways from the session.
Reports – Departments and Committees
Supervisor’s Report – Supervisor Poth updated the Board on:
∙   the potential revenue loss from the recent decrease in State Shared Revenue
and to expect budget impacts at the Township level
∙   his recent review of the Perry Master Plan
∙   an upcoming meeting with Meridan Township regarding increased interest in
developing fields for the game of cricket
∙   current spots on the Red Cedar River for debris clearing
∙   the status of Summit Cemetery paving and what can occur this fall and what
will be completed in the spring
∙   his communications with Brian Wamhoff regarding the Special Use Permit.
∙   the Public Hearing and Adoption date (Dec. 10) for the Parks Master and the
Capital Improvement Plans and the target date of January for the Township
Master Plan
NIESA – No Report.
Parks Committee – Trustee Steinberg noted that invasive species were marked
with pink ribbons as part of a current project by Eagle Scout, Max Annis. Those
species have been removed. Trustee Creagh inquired about the status of restroom
development at the park and noted the importance of establishing a plan for
these soon so that grant funding could be explored.
Elections/Clerk – No report.
Cemetery – No report.
Roads – Supervisor Poth updated the Board on current road projects and
assessments.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:00 PM
Kevin Mark – Township Resident and Planning Commission Vice-Chair – shared his
experience and perspective at the recent Joint Meeting with the City. He noted
the need to continue to meet with them regarding joint interests like Safe
Routes to School, local parks, and the 425 Agreement.
Closed at 8:05 PM
Next Meeting: Wednesday, November 12th
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Creagh moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Trustee Steinberg
Meeting adjourned at 8:05 PM.
Minutes approved by:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-12617.jpg]
November 12, 2025
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
November 12, 2025
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 6:32
p.m. on November 12, 2025.
Supervisor Poth called the meeting to order and Trustee Duffy led the Pledge of
Allegiance.
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Poth, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker,
Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, and Trustee Steinberg.
Approval of Agenda
Motion by Trustee Creagh, second by Trustee Steinberg to approve the agenda.
Discussion: None.
Motion passed.
Public Comment for agenda items
Opened at 6:33 PM
None.
Closed at 6:33 PM
Consent Agenda
Trustee Brinker moved to approve the consent agenda, as presented, consisting
of:
∙   Approve the minutes of the October 29, 2025 Board Meeting.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 32491-32492, for a
total of $1,768.55, Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 32503-32508, for a
total of $2,854.38.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 32493-32502,
for a total of $3,676.37.
∙   GF Payroll Paid, check numbers 51398-51401, for a total of $2,652.56
(Physical Check amount), Direct Deposit DD1337-DD1372, for a total of
$30,192.46.
∙   Remittance Report, check numbers 51395-51397, for a total of $2,561.06.
∙   EFT Report, EFTs 882-886, for a total of $9,324.60.
∙   Revenue/Expenditure Report for October 2025
∙   GL Activity Report
∙   Balance Sheet as of October 2025
∙   Building Reports
∙   Police Reports
∙   Treasurer’s Report – October
∙   State Shared Revenue
Second by: Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: None.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, Trustee
Steinberg, Supervisor Poth, and Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
ACTION ITEMS
Schedule Parks Master Plan Public Hearing
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board schedule a Public Hearing
for the Parks Master Plan during the next Board meeting on December 10, 2025.  
Second by: Treasurer VanErp
Discussion: The Board confirmed that updates and revisions are being made to
the current draft plan. Additionally, they requested that when the new draft
becomes available it be sent out in advance of the December meeting and posted
on the website for resident review.
Motion Passed.
Schedule CIP Public Hearing
Trustee Brinker moved the Williamstown Township Board schedule a Public Hearing
for the Parks Master Plan during the next Board meeting on December 10, 2025.
Second by: Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: Treasurer VanErp clarified that cemetery projects are funded by
both the city and township through a designated fund. This can be noted in the
Capital Improvement Plan (CIP) for any proposed cemetery project.
Motion Passed.
SAD Deadline Extension
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board extend the deadline for
the 2025 Windybrook and Pine Knoll neighborhoods SAD Petition return until 21
days after their last respective Neighborhood Information Meeting.
Second by: Trustee Creagh
Discussion: Supervisor Poth confirmed the neighborhoods that need this
extension and their status on the timeline of the Special Assessment District
process requirements.
Motion Passed
Discussion Items
26-27 Budget – Supervisor Poth is planning to have a preliminary draft budget
ready for Board review and feedback at the January meeting. He forecasted the
possibility of creating additional GL numbers to improve budget tracking, as
well as the challenges that the Board will be facing with the assumed reduction
in funds from the State Budget.
Strategic Planning Meeting for 2026 – Supervisor Poth sought feedback from the
Board on a date for Strategic Planning. The meeting will take place on January
7th at 5:30 pm.
Business License Ordinance – Supervisor Poth would like to review this
ordinance with the Board and determine if any revisions need to be considered.
He noted it is a costly endeavor each year to renew these licenses. The Board
discussed the value in hearing a historical perspective on the Business License
Ordinance creation in 2012 and what was to be accomplished with its
implementation. A concern expressed was limiting the Township’s ability to
respond to important matters without the ordinance. It was noted that there may
be other current Township Ordinances in place that could be used to resolve
issues that arise. It was also suggested that it may be beneficial to require
business owners to register with an initial license and then make it evergreen.
It was noted that any changes would require an amendment. The Board will work
to review this ordinance.
Art Tour – The Board reviewed the financial data from 2023 – 2025 for the Art
Tour. Discussion ensued regarding the original intent of the tour, if the
mission of purchasing additional playground equipment has been accomplished,
the value the tour adds to our community, the opportunity costs, ways to
increase revenue and reduce costs for the event, and if the Township is able to
support this endeavor in the same ways it has in the past. The Board directed
the Supervisor to draft a letter from the Board to the Art Tour Committee
regarding their concerns.
Reports – Departments and Committees
Supervisor’s Report – Supervisor Poth updated the Board on:
∙   the web-based program, “Engage Williamstown,” and the decision to not renew
the Township’s subscription
∙   Special Assessment District Policy and the need to re-evaluate it to
determine any updates or changes
∙   the Township’s water well that supports the geothermal heating system and
the recent standard maintenance that led to an issue they are working to
resolve
∙   replacement flagpole sizes and pricing
∙   the Woodhull Twp Master Plan and their public comment period which began on
November 12th and runs for 63 days.
NIESA – Trustee Duffy updated the Board on the October 9 th meeting that was
held at the Webberville station. He noted that two resolutions honoring
Andersons Inc and JFE AgSolutions were awarded for their help with department
training. NIESA accepted a Federal SAFER grant which will assist in funding
additional firefighters and paramedics for the next three years.
Parks Committee – Trustee Steinberg updated the Board and the recent
installation of the invasive species boot scraper at the Community Park.
Elections/Clerk – Clerk Cleveland reminded the Board of deadlines for materials
needed for monthly meetings.
Cemetery – Treasurer VanErp noted that the Cemetery Committee will be meeting
in December.
Roads – Supervisor Poth noted that the Road Committee is finalizing
recommendations for 2026.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 7:44 PM
Debbie Shipman – Township Resident – shared her disappointment for decision to
end monthly recycling. She spoke about the value she places on taking care of
the planet, resident’s reliance on having a local place to take their
recyclables, and the inconvenience that removing this service places on
residents. She noted that resident input in the form of meetings or surveys was
not sought. She asked the Board to consider reinstating the monthly recycling
program.
Closed at 7:47 PM
Next Meeting: Wednesday, December 10, 2025
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Trustee Creagh
Meeting adjourned at 7:48 PM.
Minutes approved by:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-12675.jpg]
 
December 10, 2025
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
December 10, 2025
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 6:30
p.m. on December 10, 2025.
Supervisor Poth called the meeting to order and Trustee Creagh led the Pledge
of Allegiance. 
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Poth, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker,
Trustee Creagh, and Trustee Steinberg.
Approval of Agenda
Motion by Trustee Creagh, second by Trustee Brinker to approve the agenda.
Discussion: None.
Motion passed.
Public Comment for agenda items
Opened at 6:32 PM
None.
Closed at 6:23 PM
Consent Agenda
Trustee Steinberg moved to approve the consent agenda, as presented, consisting
of:
∙   Approve the minutes of the November 12, 2025 Board Meeting.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 32509-32517, for a
total of $2,336.90, Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 32518-32522, for a
total of $654.62, Accounts Payable Paid #3, check numbers 32523-32525, for a
total of $2,021.99, Accounts Payable Paid #4, check numbers 32534-32538, for a
total of $2,260.18.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 32526-32533,
for a total of $3,274.20.
∙   GF Payroll Paid, check numbers 51404 and 51406-51407, for a total of
$1,717.04 (Physical Check amount), Direct Deposit DD1373-DD1400, for a total of
$24,845.62.
∙   Remittance Report, check numbers 51402-51405, for a total of $2,696.10.
∙   EFT Report, EFTs 887-890, for a total of $9,608.66.
∙   Revenue/Expenditure Report for November 2025
∙   GL Activity Report
∙   Balance Sheet as of November 2025
∙   Building Reports
∙   Police Reports
∙   PC Draft Minutes
∙   Treasurer’s Report – November
Second by: Trustee Brinker
Discussion: An omission and word error were corrected on page 2 of the November
12, 2025 Board Meeting minutes.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Steinberg,
Supervisor Poth, and Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Public Hearing for Parks and Recreation Master Plan
Trustee Brinker moved to open the public hearing for the Parks and Recreation
Master Plan.
Seconded by: Trustee Steinberg
Motion carried.
Opened at 6:34 p.m.
Public Comment: None.
Trustee Creagh moved to close the public hearing.
Seconded by: Trustee Brinker
Motion carried.
Public Hearing closed at 6:34 p.m.
Public Hearing for Capital Improvement Plan 2026-2031
Trustee Steinberg moved to open the public hearing for the Capital Improvement
Plan.
Seconded by: Trustee Brinker
Motion carried.
Opened at 6:35 p.m.
Public Comment: None.
Trustee Brinker moved to close the public hearing.
Seconded by: Trustee Creagh
Motion carried.
Public Hearing closed at 6:37 p.m.
ACTION ITEMS
Farmland Preservation Application – Hamlin Farm
Trustee Creagh moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Farmland
Preservation Application submitted by Hamlin Farms.
Second by: Trustee Brinker
Discussion: In addition to the Township Board review of the application,
Planning Consultant Chris Doozan also reviewed it on behalf of the Planning
Commission (PC) and determined there were no issues. It will be discussed at
next week’s PC meeting.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Supervisor Poth, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker,
Trustee Creagh, and Trustee Steinberg.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Parks and Recreation Master Plan
Trustee Brinker moved the Williamstown Township Board adopt the Parks and
Recreation Master Plan with changes, approving Resolution #105a-2025.
Second by: Trustee Steinberg
Discussion: The Board discussed the timeline presented in the Parks and
Recreation Action Program, as well as funding. Suggested revisions and
corrections include:
∙   Page 2 – the chronological list of major initiatives, the 2022 section has
a word change – planning to planting (of 520 saplings)
∙   Page 8 – the first paragraph in the Parks and Recreation Administration
section should read as follows:
o   Parks and recreation administration in Williamstown Township is headed by
residents and voters and an elected Board of Trustees and Supervisor.
Williamstown Township has a 7-member elected board, composed of the Supervisor,
Clerk, Treasurer, and four trustees. The Township Supervisor is responsible for
parks and recreation administration. The Supervisor is assisted with these
duties by Township staff.
∙   Page 9 – delete the Figure 1: Administrative Structure and renumber the
pages accordingly
∙   Page 26 – Goal 2 - e. Objective 5, word change Explore to Continue
(reservation fees)
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker, Trustee Creagh,
Trustee Steinberg, and Supervisor Poth.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Capital Improvement Plan (CIP) 2026-2031
Clerk Cleveland moved the Williamstown Township Board adopt the CIP with the
following amendments: remove Summit Cemetery Paving Project and add Cemetery
Funding Source to the Green Burial Expansion Project.
Second by: Treasurer VanErp
Discussion: The Board discussed the continued inclusion of the Safe Routes to
School (SRTS) due to the projected costs. It was determined that the CIP is a
guide for planning purposes and that it is noted in the footnotes that the SRTS
Project request is “pending additional information” which includes costs. The
Board acknowledged the time involved and commended the efforts of the CIP
Committee and PC members regarding the plan. Their collective work is
appreciated and valued.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Steinberg,
Supervisor Poth, and Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
PC Reappointment
Trustee Brinker moved the Williamstown Township Board reappoint Donna
Tocarchick to the Planning Commission, with term ending September 2028.
Second by: Trustee Creagh
Discussion: The Board noted Secretary Tocarchick’s value and commitment to the
Planning Commission.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Brinker, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Poth,
Clerk Cleveland, and Treasurer VanErp.
Nays: None
Motion Passed
Cemetery Gate
Treasurer VanErp moved the Williamstown Township Board to postpone the decision
on the Cemetery Gate Bids until the Cemetery Committee can decide on the
viability of a possible gate donation to the Green Burial Section of the
cemetery and share their determination with the Board.
Second by: Trustee Brinker
Discussion: The Board noted that a resident offered to donate a gate to the
Green Burial Section. They felt as though this should be considered before
deciding on the bids presented.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Creagh, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Poth, Clerk Cleveland,
Treasurer VanErp, and Trustee Brinker.
Nays: None
Motion Passed
Discussion Items
Local Road Policy – Supervisor Poth addressed the need to update the Township’s
current road policy considering the recent county level changes which directly
impact Township decisions. The Board discussed the six discussion points and/or
questions that Supervisor Poth shared. He noted he is also seeking legal
guidance and perspective on how other township’s road policies have evolved in
light of less financial and engineering support from the counties. The Board
discussed the value of also seeking input from MTA, the Township Planning
Consultant, as well as Ingham County Road Department.
Hall Rental Fee Schedule Changes – Supervisor Poth summarized the proposed
changes to the fee structure.
Art Tour Letter – The Board reviewed and discussed the draft letter to be sent
to Art Tour Committee members.
Policy 12 Transfer – Treasurer VanErp revisited the current value of the 101
account and how much was over the minimum fund balance as noted in Policy 12.
The transfer was not completed in 2024, which accounts for the larger amount
this fiscal year.
Reports – Departments and Committees
Supervisor’s Report – Supervisor Poth updated the Board on:
∙   the need for the Planning Commission to begin to work on researching and
developing an ordinance for Data Centers.
∙   his recent meeting with the Williamston City Manager, Superintendent of
Williamston Schools, Mannik Smith, and the Township Planning Assistant
regarding Safe Routes to School.
∙   recent communications from residents regarding recycling. Treasure VanErp
updated the Board on her recent conversation with Granger regarding providing a
free mini cart for people who sign up for services. Granger was not receptive.
Supervisor Poth noted that although recycling, as it currently operates, will
end after December, he is open to alternative possibilities.
∙   the Perry Master Plan
∙   recent legislative changes regarding renewable energy and possible changes
at the federal level.
∙   Gwen Chirico–Brandon’s recent resignation from the Planning Commission and
her step back from Historical Committee. The Board extended their appreciation
for her service and wished her well.
∙   Grand River Bridge Construction, as it nears completion.
NIESA – No report.
Parks Committee – No report.
Elections/Clerk – Clerk Cleveland noted that a repair on a Voter Assist
Terminal was recently completed and returned to the Township. As of now,
elections for 2026 include an August State Primary and a November Election; May
is currently unknown.
Cemetery – Treasurer VanErp noted that the Cemetery Committee met on December 3
rd and discussed the plans for the gate to the Green Burial Section.
Roads – No report.
Branch School – Supervisor Poth updated the Board on the recent Christmas Open
House. It was well attended. The school is now closed for the winter. The bee
situation will be addressed again in the spring. 
Deer Management Subcommittee – Trustee Creagh noted that the subcommittee met
on December 9 th . They reviewed the survey data and plan to meet January 12 to
begin developing a framework to address the prevalent issues noted by
residents.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:15 PM
Jerry Eidt – Resident, Chair of PC, Member of BOR and ZBA – addressed the Board
regarding the process involved in documents such as the Capital Improvement
Plan. He credits the outcomes to good communication and direction from the
Board. He expressed appreciation the Board’s revisions and perspective when the
drafts are submitted for review.
Closed at 8:16 PM
Next Meeting: Wednesday, January 14, 2025
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Creagh moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Trustee Brinker
Meeting adjourned at 8:17 PM.
Minutes approved by:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-12734.jpg]
2026 Meeting Minutes
January 7, 2026 Strategic Planning Session
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
January 7, 2026 Strategic Planning Session
Call to Order
Supervisor Poth called the meeting to order at 6:02 pm.
Supervisor Poth welcomed participants, made opening comments, and provided an
overview of the format of the evening’s meeting.
Present:
Township Board: Supervisor Poth (Facilitator), Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer
VanErp, Trustee Brinker, Trustee Creagh, Trustee Duffy, and Trustee Steinberg.
Township Staff: Julie Bellinger, Mac Donnelly, Jeanne Hicks-Caselli, Sheryl
Monette, Dan Rhines, and Mark Stevenson
McKenna/Township Planning: Chris Doozan, Planning Consultant
Planning Commission Members: Kevin Mark, Toby Weston, Aaron Porter, Jim Flore,
and Donna Tocarchick
Historical Committee Members: Tim Green
Public Comment
Opened at 6:05
Joe Strachota, resident, expressed concerns about the proposed placements for
the ITC high voltage electric transmission line in the township, as well as the
need to create data center regulations ahead of any expressed interest by
developers.
Closed at 6:08
Master Plans - Planning Consultant Chris Doozan presented an overview of the
current Master Plan draft and the Parks and Recreation approved Master Plan,
highlighted information, as well as determinations, included in both the
Township and Parks Master Plans. Supervisor Poth noted the potential use of the
Park House for both storage and location for future restrooms.
Cemetery - Treasurer VanErp reported on the committee’s continued focus of
completing components of the Green Burial Section of Summit Cemetery including
exploration of options for an improved and larger memorial wall with
appropriate stones that can accommodate the memorial information of the
deceased (the current Shepherd’s wall cannot accommodate memorial etching),
additional landscape plans, and an entrance gate. It was noted that maintenance
on the black top cemetery road commenced in late fall of 2025 and will be
completed in the spring of 2026. A pricing structure/business model to help
offset the funding of the new memorial wall was suggested and discussed.
Historic Branch School – Historical Committee member and co-chair, Tim Green,
noted the goal of the committee is the preservation and maintenance of Branch
School and its contents. 2026 budget items that have been prioritized include
addressing the continued bee issues around the exterior of the school, sealing
and siding repairs where the hives are consistently found, maintenance of the
bell tower, preservation of the McGuffy Reader charts, continued efforts in
seeking State Historic designation, and partnering with the Cemetery Committee
on QR coding of historical elements within Foote and Summit Cemeteries.
Supervisor Poth would like to explore ways to regulate the heat in the building
in a more efficient manner.
Township Roads - Supervisor Poth noted that designated road maintenance for
2026 will be determined soon. Currently there are two neighborhoods exploring
the Special Assessment District option for road surfacing. Road funding at the
state level and engineering changes at the county level have required the
Township to revise and update the policy to reflect the impact of these shifts.
This is currently in progress.
Parks Committee - Trustee Mark Steinberg reiterated the opportunities,
projects, and plans referenced in the Parks & Recreation Master Plan. He noted
the current priorities include operational restrooms, restoration and
maintenance of the soccer fields, repairs and maintenance of the pavilion, a
reliable and robust water source for the projects that require this resource,
and continued partnership with neighboring communities for the Red Cedar Water
Trail efforts.
Participant Reports - Trustee Keith Creagh noted the upcoming focus of the
Planning Commission including their review and possible updating of Township
Ordinances with maintaining open spaces, rural character, and farmland
standards being the guiding priority. In addition, they will be strategically
examining the 425 Agreements the Township has with the City of Williamston. He
also commented on the recent work of the Deer Management Subcommittee and the
possible funding needed for components such as creating a database, resident
outreach, educational resources, and farmer/hunter/food bank coordination.
Public Comment
Opened at 8:10
None.
Closed at 8:10
NOTE:  No Board action was taken on any item at this meeting; the meeting’s
purpose was to help plan the prioritization of the numerous projects identified
in the Master Plan and Parks & Recreation Master Plan process.
Adjournment
The strategic planning session was adjourned at 8:11 p.m.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c46207fea548eeb72aa2fc59a76440556f76c8a6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-12792.jpg]
January 14, 2026
Williamstown Township
Township Board Meeting Minutes
January 14, 2026
Call to Order
The Williamstown Township Board of Trustees held their regular meeting at 6:30
p.m. on January 14, 2026.
Supervisor Poth called the meeting to order and Clerk Cleveland led the Pledge
of Allegiance. 
Roll Call
Present: Supervisor Poth, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker,
Trustee Duffy, and Trustee Steinberg.
Approval of Agenda
Motion by Trustee Brinker, second by Trustee Steinberg to approve the agenda.
Discussion: None.
Motion passed.
Presentation
ITC Oneida-Sabine Lake Project – Ben Tirrell, Regional Manager – Mr. Tirrell
presented information about ITC Holdings Corporation and their work in
electricity transmission, as well as connecting energy resources in Michigan’s
Lower Peninsula. He provided an overview of their current initiative: the ITC
Oneida – Sabine Lake Project. This transmission project would require
construction of a station in Livingston County (Sabine Lake) followed by a 50-
mile line connecting the Oneida Station to the Sabine Lake Station. He noted
that the process of route determination for the high voltage powerlines is
complex requiring input from many stakeholders and consideration of multiple
factors. As a result, ITC will be hosting community listening sessions across
Mid-Michigan from January 26 th through February 5 th . Locally, a session will
be held a Brookshire Golf Club on Tuesday, February 3 rd from 12pm – 7pm.
Ultimately, all the information and resident feedback will be considered by the
Michigan Public Service Commission who has the authority to make the final
determination of the powerline route. The Board asked questions and sought
information about:
∙   the timeline of the project
∙   the overall need for this initiative
∙   the themes of concern expressed to ITC by Mid-Michigan residents
potentially impacted by the project
∙   resources and materials used to construct the project
∙   easement and set back requirements due to the size of the foundations and
poles
∙   clarity on the easement agreements for and tax responsibilities of property
owners
∙   how the projects benefit the area and citizens of Williamstown Township
∙   the possible use of existing corridors for the new route
∙   how updates on the project will be issued
∙   the role of DTE and Consumers Energy, their stake in the process, and how
their customers benefit
Public Comment for agenda or non-agenda items
Opened at 7:01PM
Deborah Barone – Township Resident – expressed concern regarding the health
hazards from the high voltage wires and questioned if there was consideration
or plans for adjacent property owner compensation. She also requested the
following concerns/topics to be addressed when the Planning Commission begins
their ordinance work on data centers: water usage, power usage, impacts to
residents, and noise generation.
Monica Schafer – Ingham County Commissioner and Township Resident – expressed
gratitude to the Board for hosting the ITC Regional Manager. She also noted
that if residents had any questions or concerns regarding the recent staffing
changes at the Ingham County Road Department to reach out to her.
Joe Strachota – Township Resident – questioned ITC’s communication process. He
stated he was not notified as a property owner whose property is impacted by
one of the proposed routes. He questioned the information presented by ITC and
the viability of Sherwood Rd as a route.
Nathaniel Goodman – Non-Resident – expressed health concerns about the proposed
ITC Project as well as data centers. He also questioned the proposed routes
under consideration for the powerlines.
Closed at 7:15 PM
Consent Agenda
Trustee Brinker moved to approve the consent agenda, as presented, consisting
of:
∙   Approve the minutes of the December 10, 2025 Board Meeting.
∙   Approve the minutes of the January 7, 2026 Strategic Planning Meeting.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable Paid #1, check numbers 32539-32549, for a
total of $6,877.51 and Accounts Payable Paid #2, check numbers 32564-32573, for
a total of $5,984.92.
∙   Police Funds Accounts Payable Paid #1, check number 1157, for a total of
$50,385.64.
∙   General Fund Accounts Payable for Approval #1, check numbers 32550-32563,
for a total of $12,628.83 and Approval #2, check numbers 32574-32575, for a
total of $282.82.
∙   GF Payroll Paid, check numbers 51410 and 51413-51415, for a total of
$958.52 (Physical Check amount), Direct Deposit DD1401-DD1431, for a total of
$24,446.81.
∙   Remittance Report, check numbers 51409-51409 and 51411-51412, for a total
of $2,580.62.
∙   EFT Report, EFTs 891-894, for a total of $10,583.70.
∙   Revenue/Expenditure Report for December 2025
∙   GL Activity Report
∙   Balance Sheet through December 2025
∙   Building Reports
∙   Police Reports
∙   PC Draft Minutes
∙   Treasurer’s Report – December
∙   SSR Report
Second by: Treasurer VanErp
Discussion: 
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg,
Supervisor Poth, and Clerk Cleveland.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Police Report – Chief Grillo provided a summary of Meridian Township Police
Department’s 2025 goals and achievements. He shared the aspirations for 2026.
Planning Commission – Chair Jerry Eidt shared a summary of recent Planning
Commission (PC) Meetings. He noted that Parks and Recreation Master Plan was
reviewed and minor corrections to the document were made. The draft of this
plan was approved and sent on to the Board for a Public Hearing. In December,
the resignation of Gwen Chirico-Brandon was accepted and the open seat posted.
A Public Hearing for the Amendments to Section 4.01, subsection (F)(1)(c) was
held. The updated draft of the Master Plan was reviewed and a Public Hearing
scheduled for the January 28 th PC Meeting. An Application for a Farmland
Development Rights Agreement (formerly PA 116) for R & D Hamlin LLC was
reviewed. A Slate of Officers election was held and the existing officers will
continue through October 2026. The PC Bylaws were reviewed and updated.
Discussion was held on regulation language for data centers as a topic to
address in 2026.
ACTION ITEMS
2026 Property Tax Poverty Exemptions
Treasurer VanErp moved the Williamstown Township Board adopt the 2026 Property
Tax Exemption Resolution, #97-2026.
Second by: Trustee Brinker
Discussion: The Board discussed the total petitions received this year as
compared with previous years. There has been no increase. The process for
determining the regulations was reviewed.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Brinker, Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Poth, Clerk
Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp,
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Hall Rental Agreement and Fees
Clerk Cleveland moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the changes to
the Township Hall Rental Agreement with the added amendment that any excess use
of medical supplies, as a result of Renter's use, will be deducted from their
deposit. The Renter agrees that Williamstown Township shall determine the cost
of any supplies and agrees to be bound by Williamstown Township's
determination.
Second by: Trustee Brinker
Discussion: The Board discussed adding amended language to address the addition
of medical supplies that were recently installed at the Township Hall. Renters
will have access to these resources should an emergency dictate. Language was
added to the motion by Trustee Brinker.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Poth, Clerk Cleveland,
Treasurer VanErp, and Trustee Brinker.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
Sewer Line Access Agreement with City of Williamston
Trustee Duffy moved the Williamstown Township Board approve the Sanitary Sewer
Utility Franchise Agreement between the Township and the City of Williamston.
Second by: Trustee Brinker
Discussion: Supervisor Poth confirmed that agreement ensures there is no
expense to the Township for this sewer services, nor does it impact any of the
Township property. Both Williamston City and Township attorneys have reviewed
the agreement. It was approved by the Williamston City Council on Tuesday,
January 13 th .
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Duffy, Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Poth, Clerk Cleveland,
Treasurer VanErp, and Trustee Brinker.
Nays: None
Motion Passed.
RV, Boat, and Trailer Parking Ordinance Amendments
Trustee Brinker moved the Williamstown Township Board adopt the changes
suggested in the letter from Planning Consultant, Chris Doozan.
Second by: Trustee Duffy
Discussion: It was clarified that this amendment is for platted subdivisions.
Clerk Cleveland noted that this particular amendment was presented in a
different format than how the Board typically receives Ordinance Amendments.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Steinberg, Supervisor Poth, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp,
Trustee Brinker, and Trustee Duffy.
Nays: None
Motion Passed
Data Center Moratorium
Trustee Duffy moved the Williamstown Township Board approve a 12-month
moratorium on Data Centers in Williamstown Township.
Second by: Clerk Cleveland
Discussion: Supervisor Poth noted that as the Data Center Ordinance work
commences at the Planning Commission, the Township sought legal counsel on
creating a 12-month moratorium. This will allow time for proper research and
resident input.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Supervisor Poth, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker,
Trustee Duffy, and Trustee Steinberg. 
Nays: None
Motion Passed
River Trail Resolution
Trustee Steinberg moved the Williamstown Township Board adopt the resolution
supporting the State designation of the Middle Grand River Water Trail.
Second by: Supervisor Poth
Discussion: The Board expressed their support of this recognition and
acknowledged the efforts of those who work so diligently for the development
and improvements of the Red Cedar River and the Middle Grand River Water
Trails.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes:, Clerk Cleveland, Treasurer VanErp, Trustee Brinker, Trustee Duffy,
Trustee Steinberg, and
Supervisor Poth.
Nays: None
Motion Passed
Discussion Items
26-27 Budget Preview – Supervisor Poth noted that budget preparations for
fiscal year 2026-2027 are underway. He reminded the Board that State changes in
funding are resulting in a likely revenue loss for the Township. The best
estimate for the upcoming year is approximately $33,000 in lost revenue.
Discussion ensued on possible ways to make up for the expected loss of funding.
Some of the budget items that Supervisor Poth will be examining more closely
ahead of his recommendations include recent audit fees, utility usage, the
increase in police hours from 40 to 60 hours and the Police Assessment funds,
improved tracking of resources that come from sports field and pavilion usage,
and how best to plan for the funding the restrooms at the Community Park.
Reports – Departments and Committees
Supervisor’s Report – No Report
NIESA – Trustee Duffy reported on the last three NIESA meetings. Highlights
included recognition of confined space training and staff who received this
specialized instruction. This was recently put to good use with a rescue of a
farmer who fell into a grain elevator. New officers will be elected in
February, and one Member at Large position is open for interested Township
residents. Chairperson Dorothy Hart has informed the NIESA Board that she will
retire at the end of her term as the Chairperson.
Parks Committee – Trustee Steinberg reported on the recent Strategic Planning
session, specifically the expressed priorities of the restrooms, pavilion
restoration, and sports field maintenance. He noted that detailed planning
needs to begin. The Sunrise Rotary is looking to host a bluebird nesting box
program and is interested in using the Township Hall as the site for the
program.
Elections/Clerk – Clerk Cleveland noted that there will be three elections in
2026. May 5 th will be a special election for Ingham ISD (and perhaps other
millages/proposals). There will be no Early Voting for this election, and both
the precincts will vote at the Township Hall. The August and November Elections
will have Early Voting. Clerk Cleveland will be communicating with residents
who expressed interest in working as Election Inspectors.
Cemetery – No report.
Roads – Supervisor Poth noted that the Road Committee met on Monday, January 12
th and identified roads to resurface or chip seal. The county planning meeting
will be occurring soon. There are two neighborhoods considering a Special
Assessment however, the process has been delayed with the recent changes at the
Ingham County Road Department.
Branch School – No report.
Deer Management Subcommittee – Trustee Brinker reported on the recent meeting
held on Monday, January 12 th . He referenced the draft outline of next steps
that will be needed to move forward. The Board discussed the need for a
timeline for the anticipated goal for implementation and an estimate of the
hours that the committee predicts will be needed to carry out the plan. PC
Chair Jerry Eidt (subcommittee member) noted the need to put the plans into a
formal document or ordinance. It was discussed that Planning Consultant Chris
Doozan may be able assist with this. With more communities implementing
programs like this, there are examples to reference. The next meeting will be
February 5 th at 6:00pm.
Public comment for agenda and non-agenda items
Opened at 8:32 PM
Joe Strachota – Township Resident – expressed his concern for the proposed ITC
route on Sherwood Road. He also shared several data center concerns that he
would like the Planning Commission to consider/research when developing the
ordinance.
Sara Jacobs – Township Resident – expressed her concern for the proposed ITC
route on Sherwood Road. She recently purchased her property on Sherwood before
this information from ITC was disseminated and is concerned that the route
renders her land as unusable and stated her plans to build on her property
would be greatly impacted.
Kevin Mark – Planning Commission Vice-Chair and Township Resident – shared
concerns about the Township’s investment options in the current economy, the
condition of the CATA bus stop located near the Community Park, and funding of
the park sports fields. He expressed his support for the Meridian Township
Police and confirmed the rate could be increased back to $120/year, if needed.
Closed at 8:41 PM
Next Meeting: Wednesday, February 11, 2026
Adjournment and Review
Trustee Duffy moved to adjourn the meeting.
Seconded by Treasurer VanErp
Meeting adjourned at 8:42 PM.
Minutes approved by:
 
____________________________________________ ______________
Julie Bellinger, Recording Secretary Date
____________________________________________ _______________
Robin A. Cleveland, Township Clerk Date
 
