TOWN OF PALM SHORES, FLORIDA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-7 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ordinance 2025-02, passed 3-25-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
(800) 445-5588 www.amlegal.com 
CHARTER
Section
   Preamble
   
1.01   Repeal of present charter
   
1.02   Creation of new charter
   
1.03   Town powers
   
1.04   Boundaries
   
1.05   Form of government
   
2.01   General powers and duties of the Town Council
   
2.02   Composition and qualifications
   
2.03   Forfeiture of office
   
2.04   Judge of qualifications
   
2.05   Vacancies on the Council
   
2.06   Term of office
   
2.07   Compensation
   
2.08   Mayor
   
2.09   Powers and duties of the Mayor
   
3.01   Legislative procedure
   
3.02   Meetings
   
3.03   Ordinances and resolutions
   
3.04   Ordinances by referendum vote
   
3.05   Emergency ordinances
   
3.06   Public notice
   
3.07   Codification and distribution of ordinances and related matter
   
3.08   Codes of technical regulations
   
4.01   Office of the Town Clerk
   
4.02   Duties
   
4.03   Appointment and removal
   
5.01   Departments, offices and agencies
   
5.02   Selection and removal of Town Manager
   
6.01   Fiscal year
   
6.02   Submission of budget and budget message
   
6.03   Budget
   
6.04   Administration of the budget
   
6.05   Prohibitions
   
7.01   Initiative ordinances; referendum; referendum elections
   
7.02   Repeal or amendment of ordinances adopted by electoral vote
   
7.03   Recall
   
8.01   Independent annual audit
   
8.02   Public monies
   
9.01   Franchises
   
10.01   Election procedures for Town Council
   
10.02   Election requirements; no run-off election except in the case of a tie
vote
   
10.03   Special elections
   
10.04   Electors
   
10.04   Election ordinances
   
10.05   Qualifying of candidates for office of Town Council
   
10.06   Oath of office
   
11.01   Effect of this Charter on existing law
   
11.02   Rights of officers and employees preserved
   
11.03   Title to property reserved
   
11.04   Continuity of officer, boards, councils or agencies
   
11.05   Validation of acts under previous Charter
   
11.06   Charter amendments and revisions
   
11.07   State and municipal laws
   
11.08   Schedule
   
11.09   Severability
   
11.10   Effective date
Editor’s note:
   This charter was adopted by Ordinance No. 2007-13 on August 2, 2007 and
approved by special election on September 25, 2007.
PREAMBLE
   We, the citizens of the town, in order to build a municipality which
enhances the ideals of community living, to secure the benefits of municipal
home rule and local self-government granted to us by the laws of this state,
and to promote our God given rights of life, liberty, and the pursuit of
happiness, do hereby adopt this as our charter for the Town of Palm Shores, in
the county of Brevard, State of Florida.
Sec. 1.01   REPEAL OF PRESENT CHARTER
   The existing Charter of the Town of Palm Shores, Brevard County, State of
Florida, is hereby abolished. The title, rights, and ownerships of property,
uncollected taxes, dues, claims, judgments, decrees, and choses in action, held
or owned by the Town of Palm Shores shall pass to and be vested in the
municipal corporation organized under this act to succeed the municipality
abolished. No obligation or contracts of the said municipality, shall be
impaired or voided by this act, but such debts and obligations shall pass to,
and be binding upon, the new municipality which is hereby organized and
created. All officers heretofore elected or appointed, and holding office under
the said municipality shall continue to hold their elected and confirmed
positions under the provisions of this act and all existing ordinances of the
said municipality, not in conflict with the provisions of this act, shall
continue in effect and unimpaired until repealed, amended, or modified by the
municipality which is hereby organized and created.
Sec. 1.02   CREATION OF NEW CHARTER
   The inhabitants of the Town of Palm Shores, Florida, shall continue to be a
body politic and corporate to be known and designated as the “Town of Palm
Shores, Florida” (hereinafter to be known as the “Town”); and as such shall
have perpetual succession, shall sue and be sued, plead and be impleaded, and
shall have the use of a common seal.
   The Town shall have all powers possible for a Town to have under the
Constitution and the laws of the State of Florida as fully and completely as if
specifically enumerated under this Charter, in addition to any powers
specifically so enumerated.
Sec. 1.03   TOWN POWERS
   The Town shall have all of the powers, functions and immunities granted to
municipal corporations by the Constitution and laws of the State of Florida,
including the Municipal Home Rule Act, as now or hereinafter existing, together
with the implied powers necessary to carry into execution all the powers
granted. The enumeration of particular powers by this Charter shall not be
deemed to be exclusive, and in addition to the powers enumerated herein or
implied hereby, or appropriate to the exercise of such powers, it is intended
that the Town shall have and exercise all powers not otherwise prohibited to
municipal corporations by the constitution and laws of this state.
Sec. 1.04   BOUNDARIES
   A description of the Town Boundaries shall be on file in the office of the
Town Clerk.
Sec. 1.05   FORM OF GOVERNMENT
   The form of government provided by this charter shall be known as the
“strong mayor government”. Pursuant to its provisions and subject only to the
limitations imposed by the Constitution, general and special acts and laws of
the state of Florida and by this Charter, all legislative powers of the Town
shall be vested in an elected council, hereinafter referred to as the
“Council”. It shall enact ordinances, adopt resolutions, adopt budgets, and
determine policies. The Mayor shall execute the laws and administer the
government of the Town. All powers of the Town shall be exercised in the manner
prescribed by this charter. If the manner is not prescribed, then the powers
shall be exercised in such manner as may be prescribed by ordinances.
Sec. 2.01   GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE TOWN COUNCIL
   All powers of the Town shall be vested in an elected Council, except as
otherwise provided by law or by this Charter. The Council shall provide for the
exercise by the Town of its municipal powers and for the performance of all
duties and obligations imposed on the Town by law.
Sec. 2.02   COMPOSITION AND QUALIFICATIONS
   The Council shall consist of four (4) members at large and a Mayor elected
by the qualified voters of the Town as hereinafter provided. Members of the
Town Council shall have been residents of the Town for at least one (1) year
prior to the date of qualification for office, and shall have the
qualifications of a Town Elector.
(Amended by Ord. 2017-08, passed 8-22-2017)
Sec. 2.03   FORFEITURE OF OFFICE
   (1)   A councilmember shall forfeit his office if, at any time during such
councilmember’s term of office, such councilmember:
      (a)   Is convicted of a felony or is found guilty by a judge or jury or
pleads guilty or nolo contendere to any felony or a crime involving moral
turpitude whether or not adjudication is withheld; or
      (b)   Fails to attend four consecutive regular Town council meetings;
except where such absences result from a major illness of the councilmember, in
which case, absences at six consecutive regular Town council meetings shall be
required; or
      (c)   Fails to attend eight regular Town council meetings during any
consecutive twelve month period; or
      (d)   Lacks any qualification for the office prescribed by this charter
or by law.
   (2)   The Town council shall declare that a councilmember has forfeited his
office through the following procedure:
      (a)   The Town council shall adopt by affirmative vote of three (3) of
its members a preliminary resolution specifically setting forth the reason(s)
for forfeiture. Such preliminary resolution shall provide for the time, place,
and date of a public hearing to be held to consider a final resolution of
forfeiture.
      (b)   The public hearing shall be scheduled for a date at least seven (7)
days, but no more than thirty (30) days, after the adoption of the preliminary
resolution. Prior to the adoption of a final resolution of forfeiture, the
councilmember who is the subject of the preliminary resolution shall be
afforded the opportunity, at such public hearing, to respond to the reason(s)
for forfeiture stated in the preliminary resolution. An affirmative vote of
three (3) council members shall be required for adoption of the final
resolution of forfeiture.
   (3)   The availability of the aforesaid procedure shall not limit the right
of any citizen, including a councilmember, to seek a judicial determination
that a councilmember has forfeited his office.
   (4)   The council may adopt a final resolution of forfeiture which may be
made effective immediately by affirmative vote of four (4) members of the
council at any time after five (5) days from the date on which a copy of the
preliminary resolution was delivered to the subject council member, if the
subject member has not requested a public hearing. If the subject member has
requested a public hearing, the council may adopt a final resolution at any
time after the public hearing. The member who is subject to forfeiture of
office under the terms of the final resolution shall not be entitled to vote on
that resolution. A copy of the final resolution shall be promptly delivered to
the subject council member.
   (5)   On the effective date of the final resolution the seat of the subject
person shall be deemed vacant and the said seat shall be subsequently filled in
accordance with Section 10 of this charter.
Sec. 2.04   JUDGE OF QUALIFICATIONS
   The Town Council shall be the judge of the election and qualification of its
members and of the grounds for forfeiture of their offices, and for those
purposes shall have the power to subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, and
require the production of evidence. A member of the Town Council charged with
conduct constituting grounds for forfeiture of the office held by such member
shall be entitled to a public hearing on demand, and notice of such hearing
shall be published at least one week in advance of the hearing. Decisions made
by the Town Council under this section shall be subject to review by the
courts.
Sec. 2.05   VACANCIES ON THE COUNCIL
   A vacancy shall occur upon the death, resignation, removal from office
(other than by recall) as authorized by law, or forfeiture of office of a
Council member. A vacancy of the council shall be filled in one (1) of the
following ways:
   (1)   If there are less than six (6) months remaining in the unexpired term
or if there are less than six (6) months before the next regular Town election,
the council, by a majority vote of the remaining members, shall choose a
successor to serve until a newly elected council member is qualified.
Notwithstanding any quorum requirements established herein, if at any time the
membership of the council is reduced to less than a quorum, the remaining
members may, by majority vote, appoint additional members under either
[subsections] (1) or (2) [herein]. If one (1) year remains in the term of the
vacated seat, at the time of the next regular election, that seat shall be
filled by election for the remaining one (1) year;
   (2)   If there are more than six (6) months remaining in the unexpired term
and no regular Town election is scheduled within six (6) months, the council
shall fill the vacancy on an interim basis as provided in [subsection] (1), and
shall schedule a special election to be held no sooner than sixty (60) days,
nor more than ninety (90) days following the occurrence of the vacancy for the
remainder of the initial term.
   In the event the office of Mayor is vacated, the Vice-Mayor assumes the
position until a special election for the office of Mayor can be scheduled
which election shall be held no sooner than sixty (60) days, nor more than
ninety (90) days following the vacancy. During the period of time that the Vice
Mayor is acting as Mayor, the Council will appoint a council member to fill the
office of Councilman held by the Vice-Mayor. Once the position of Mayor is
filled pursuant to the Special Election provided for herein, the Vice Mayor
will reassume his duties as Vice Mayor and Councilman for the duration of his
term of election.
   If the Council shall fail to fill a vacancy on the Council within thirty
(30) days after it occurs, or whenever two (2) or more vacancies shall occur at
the same time, the Mayor shall immediately call a special election to fill the
vacancy or vacancies. Those elected at the special election will serve a term
equal in time to what would have otherwise been the time remaining in the term
of the Councilor-at-Large whose office has become vacant. Among the successful
candidates those receiving the largest number of votes shall be declared
elected for the longest terms.
Sec. 2.06   TERM OF OFFICE
   Council members shall take office at the first regular meeting following
every municipal election, or following a run-off election, if one is required.
They shall hold office for a term of two (2) years, unless removed for cause or
until their successors are elected and qualified. The Mayor shall hold office
for a term of four (4) years.
Sec. 2.07   COMPENSATION
   The compensation of Council members or of the Mayor, together with the
manner of payment, shall be established by the budgetary process according to
Florida Statute. The budget establishing the annual compensation of the Mayor
and the council members shall be undertaken prior to September 30th as required
by law. The Council and Mayor may provide that members shall receive their
actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties and
shall be reimbursed at the current government rate.
Sec. 2.08   MAYOR 
   The mayor shall qualify and run for office for a term of four (4) years as
hereinafter provided. He shall be a voting member of the council, the presiding
officer of the council, the chief executive officer and the titular and
administrative head of the Town. The mayor is recognized as head of the Town
government for administrative and ceremonial purposes, for the purposes of
service of civil process, and for purposes of military law. The mayor shall
execute all instruments to which the Town is a party unless otherwise provided
by this Charter or by law. The council shall elect from its membership a Vice
Mayor who shall serve as Mayor in the absence of the Mayor.
Sec. 2.09   POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE MAYOR
   The Mayor shall:
   (1)   Appoint, and when deemed necessary for the good of the Town, suspend
or remove Town employees or appointive administrative officers provided for by
this charter, except as otherwise provided by law, this charter, or personnel
rules adopted pursuant to this charter. The mayor may authorize any
administrative officer who is subject to the Mayor’s direction and supervision
to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that officer’s
department, office, or agency.
   (2)   Direct and supervise the administration of the Town Clerk, all
departments, offices and agencies of the Town, except as otherwise provided by
this charter or by law.
   (3)   Ensure that all laws, provisions of this charter and acts of the
council, subject to enforcement by the Mayor or by officers subject to the
Mayor’s direction and supervision, are faithfully executed.
   (4)   Prepare and submit the annual budget, budget message, and capital
program to the council in a form provided by ordinance.
   (5)   Submit to the council and make available to the public a complete
report on the finances and administrative activities of the Town as of the end
of each fiscal year.
   (6)   Make such other reports as the council may require concerning the
operations of Town departments, offices and agencies.
   (7)   Make recommendations to the Town council concerning the general
operations of the Town.
   (8)   Keep the council fully advised as to the financial condition and
future needs of the Town and make such recommendations to the council
concerning the affairs of the Town as deemed desirable.
   (9)   Execute contracts on behalf of the Town pursuant to the provisions of
appropriation ordinances or resolutions.
   (10)   Perform such other duties as are specified in this charter or may be
required by the council.
Sec. 3.01   LEGISLATIVE PROCEDURE
   Three (3) members of the Council shall constitute a quorum, but a smaller
number may adjourn from day to day. No action of the Council, except raising a
quorum, shall be valid or binding unless adopted by the affirmative vote of at
least three (3) members of the Council. The Council shall adopt Roberts Rules
of Order for Parliamentary Procedure and shall provide for the keeping of a
journal of its proceedings. The journal shall be a public record and shall be
open to public inspection. The Council may prescribe for expulsion of
disorderly persons from its meetings.
Sec. 3.02   MEETINGS
   (1)   Generally.  Meetings shall be open to the public. Minutes of each
council meeting shall be kept as public documents.
   (2)   Regular meetings. The council shall meet regularly at such times and
places as may be prescribed by ordinance, but in no event less than once each
month. All regular meetings shall be held at a specific time and place within
the Town limits.
   (3)   Special meetings. Special meetings, limited to the subjects specified
in the call, may be convened by the mayor, or three (3) council members. At
least twenty-four (24) hours notice shall be provided to each council member. A
notice stating the time, place, and subject matter of said meeting shall be
posted at the Town hall. The council shall prescribe the means of serving or
furnishing such notice to its members.
   (4)   Emergency meetings. Emergency meetings may be convened by the mayor or
three council members. Maximum reasonable notice shall be given to each council
member. The first order of business shall be the determination, by a vote of at
least one council member present, that an emergency situation involving health,
safety, or public welfare warranting council actions exists. Only matters
relating to the emergency may be considered at such meeting. Emergency meetings
may be called with six (6) hours notice.
Sec. 3.03   ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS
   Every proposed ordinance or resolution shall be introduced in the final
written or printed form required for adoption. The enacting clause of
ordinances shall recite: “Be it enacted by the Town of Palm Shores, Florida.”
No ordinance shall be passed until it has been read at two (2) Council
meetings, not less than one (1) week apart, except that a second reading, other
than by title, may be dispensed with upon the unanimous affirmative vote of the
Council members present.
   A proposed ordinance may be amended at either meeting. However, no ordinance
shall be amended at the second or later reading so as to change its intent
without a further complete reading of the affected portion at least one (1)
week later. The Council shall provide for public hearings or for the
publication of notice concerning the subject matter of any proposed ordinance
or amendment. Ordinances and resolutions shall become effective upon passage
unless otherwise specified herein. Every ordinance and resolution shall, upon
final passage, be authenticated by the presiding officer and the Town Clerk,
and shall be published as the Council shall prescribe. Applicable ordinances
shall be recorded with the Clerk of Courts.
Sec. 3.04   ORDINANCES BY REFERENDUM VOTE
   The Council may submit any proposed ordinance to a referendum vote of the
qualified voters without filing a petition request.
Sec. 3.05   EMERGENCY ORDINANCES
   Notwithstanding the provisions of the foregoing sections, the Council may
enact emergency ordinances to meet serious public emergencies affecting the
welfare of the Town or its inhabitants. An emergency ordinance shall be
introduced in the form and manner prescribed for ordinances generally, except
that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance. It may be
adopted with or without amendment at the meeting at which it is introduced.
Emergency ordinances shall expire thirty (30) days after enactment unless
sooner specified therein.
Sec. 3.06   PUBLIC NOTICE
   Public notices shall be posted and/or published as prescribed by the
appropriate Town ordinance.
Sec. 3.07   CODIFICATION AND DISTRIBUTION OF ORDINANCES AND RELATED MATTER
   Within two (2) years after the effective date of this Charter, and at least
once every ten (10) years thereafter, the Town Council shall provide for the
preparation of a general codification of all Town ordinances, resolutions
having the force of law, and such codes of technical regulations and other
rules or regulations as the council may specify. The council may include in the
general codification the Town Charter, Charter amendments, and relevant state
constitutional and statutory provisions. Upon compilation the general
codification shall be known and cited as the Town Code of Palm Shores, Florida.
Copies of the Code shall be furnished to Town officers, and shall be made
available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price fixed by the
council.
Sec. 3.08   CODES OF TECHNICAL REGULATIONS
   The council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by
reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. Adopting ordinances shall be
enacted as herein provided for ordinances generally. Any adopted code of
technical regulations shall be made available to the public as the council
shall provide.
Sec. 4.01   OFFICE OF THE TOWN CLERK
   This office shall be headed by a Town Clerk appointed by the Mayor to serve
the Council. The salary of the Town Clerk shall be fixed by the Mayor. The Town
Clerk shall be under the administrative direction and control of the Mayor.
Sec. 4.02   DUTIES
   The Town Clerk shall give notice of the meetings of the Town council; shall
keep the minutes of its proceedings; shall be custodian of the Town’s seal;
shall authenticate by his signature and shall record in full in books kept for
that purpose all ordinances and resolutions passed by the Town council; shall
perform such other duties as may be assigned by the Mayor. He shall have the
power to administer oaths. Furthermore, the Clerk shall be: Clerk of the
Council and shall keep the Council journal; custodian of ordinances,
resolutions, and such other official records as the Council may prescribe;
attestor to contracts, bonds, and other instruments as may be prescribed by
law; chief registration and elections officer of the Town; and responsible for
other duties so prescribed by the Town Council.
Sec. 4.03   APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL
   The Town Clerk shall be appointed and removed by the Mayor and shall serve
at the pleasure of the Mayor.
Sec. 5.01   DEPARTMENTS, OFFICES AND AGENCIES
   (1)   Creation of Departments. The Town Council upon recommendation of the
Mayor may establish Town Departments, Offices or Agencies in addition to those
created by this charter and may prescribe the functions of all departments,
offices and agencies, except that no function assigned by the charter to a
particular department, office or agency may be discontinued or, unless this
charter specifically so provides, assigned to any other.
   (2)   Direction by Mayor.  All departments, offices and agencies under the
direction and supervision of the Mayor shall be administered by an officer
appointed by and subject to the direction and supervision of the Mayor. The
Mayor may appoint one person as the head of Town Departments.
Sec. 5.02   SELECTION AND REMOVAL OF TOWN MANAGER
   Upon a motion made by the Mayor, the Town Council will consider appointing a
Town Manager. The Mayor shall have the discretion to delegate all or part of
her duties to the Town Manager. The Mayor or the Town Council can remove the
Town Manager. Any decision by the Mayor to remove the Town Manager must be
ratified by the Town Council.
Sec. 6.01   FISCAL YEAR
   The fiscal year of the Town shall begin on the first day of October and end
the last day of September, or as prescribed by state law.
Sec. 6.02   SUBMISSION OF BUDGET AND BUDGET MESSAGE
   As prescribed by Town council on an annual basis, the Mayor shall submit to
the Town Council a fund balance budget for the ensuing fiscal year and an
accompanying budget message.
Sec. 6.03   BUDGET
   The budget shall provide a financial plan of Town funds and activities for
the ensuing fiscal year and, except as required by law or this charter, shall
be in such form as the Mayor deems desirable or the Town Council may require.
The budget shall show in detail the estimated income, and the proposed
expenditures, including debt service, for the ensuing fiscal year, and other
information and supporting schedules as the council may deem necessary.
Sec. 6.04   ADMINISTRATION OF THE BUDGET
   The Town council shall provide by ordinance the procedures for administering
the budget.
Sec. 6.05   PROHIBITIONS
   No officer or department shall, during any budget year, expend or contract
to expend any money or incur any liability, or enter into any contract which by
its terms involves the expenditure of money for any purpose, in excess of the
amounts appropriated for that general classification of expenditure pursuant to
budget appropriations.
Sec. 7.01   INITIATIVE ORDINANCES; REFERENDUM; REFERENDUM ELECTIONS.
   (1)   Any proposed ordinance, including ordinances for repeal of existing
ordinances, may be submitted to the Town Council by a petition, signed by at
least fifteen (15%) percent of the total number of registered voters in the
Town. All petitions circulated with respect to any proposed ordinance shall be
uniform in character and shall contain the proposed ordinance in full. Such
petitions shall have printed or written thereon the name of five (5) electors
who shall be officially regarded as filing the petition, and who shall
constitute a committee of the petitioners for purposes hereinafter named. Each
signer of the petition shall sign his name in ink and shall place on the
petition opposite his name, the date of his signature. The signatures to any
such petition need not be appended to one (1) paper, but to each such paper
shall be attached an affidavit by the circulator thereof, stating the number of
signers to such part of the petition and that each signature appended to the
paper is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be, and
that it was made in the presence of the affiant on the date indicated.
   (2)   All papers comprising an initiative petition shall be assembled and
filed with the Town clerk as one instrument within forty-five (45) days of the
date of the first signature thereon. The Town clerk shall thereupon submit such
instrument to the Town Council at its next regular meeting, and provisions
shall be made by the Town Clerk for public hearings upon the proposed
ordinance. Notice of such proposed ordinance and the public hearings thereon
shall be provided as required by general law.
   (3)   The Town council shall at once proceed to consider such petition, and
shall take final action thereon within forty-five (45) days after the date of
submission. The Town council of five (5) electors who shall be officially
regarded as filing the petition, and who shall constitute a committee of the
petitioners for purposes hereinafter named. Each signer of the petition shall
sign his name in ink and shall place on the petition opposite his name, the
date of his signature. The signatures to any such petition need not be appended
to one (1) paper, but to each such paper shall be attached an affidavit by the
Circulator thereof, stating the number of signers to such part of the petition
and that each signature appended to the paper is the genuine signature of the
person whose name it purports to be, and that it was made in the presence of
the affiant on the date indicated.
   If the Town council rejects any of the provisions of the proposed ordinance,
as set forth in the petition, the Town Clerk shall at once cause notice of the
filing of such petition and the refusal of the Town Council to pass said
ordinance to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town of
Palm Shores, and the Town Council shall at once proceed to submit the passage
of the ordinance to the vote of the qualified electors of the Town. If a
regular or special election is to be held in the Town, not earlier than thirty
(30) days, nor later than sixty (60) days, the ordinance shall be submitted to
the voters at such election; otherwise an election shall be called for
submission within sixty (60) days after the refusal of the Town Council to pass
said ordinance. At least ten (10) days before such election, the Town Clerk
shall cause the text of the ordinance to be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Town.
   (4)   Referendum elections on initiative ordinances shall be provided for
and in the same manner as other elections of the Town. The ballot for such
initiative ordinance shall be in substantially the following form:
   “FOR THE ORDINANCE     __________
   AGAINST THE ORDINANCE __________”
Sec. 7.02   REPEAL OR AMENDMENT OF ORDINANCES ADOPTED BY ELECTORAL VOTE
   No ordinance adopted by an electoral vote shall be repealed or amended
except by an electoral vote. An ordinance to repeal or amend any such ordinance
may, by resolution of the Council, be submitted to an electoral vote at any
regular election, providing public notice of the intention is given by the
Council not more than sixty (60) nor less than thirty (30) days prior to such
election.
Sec. 7.03   RECALL
   Recall of council members shall be done in accordance with the general law
of the State of Florida.
Sec. 8.01   INDEPENDENT ANNUAL AUDIT
   Prior to the end of each fiscal year, the Town Council shall designate a
certified public accountant to make an independent audit of accounts and all
other financial transactions of the Town government existing at the end of the
fiscal year. Reports of audit shall be made directly to the council.
Accountants selected to make such audits shall have no personal interest,
direct or indirect, in the fiscal affairs of the Town government or of any of
its officers. They shall not maintain any accounts or records of the Town
business. The auditors shall post-audit the books and documents kept by the
Town and all separate or subordinate accounts kept by any other office, agency
or department of the Town government.
Sec. 8.02   PUBLIC MONIES
   All public monies shall be deposited in the name of the Town of Palm Shores
in a bank or banks designated by the Council. All public monies shall be
disbursed only by check to be signed by at least one (1) authorized Town
Council Member and the Mayor.
   Any person performing the duties, in which he collects, receives, or handles
any public monies must qualify under a blanket bond.
Sec. 9.01    FRANCHISES
   (1)   The Town shall have the power to grant a franchise to any private or
public enterprise for the use of streets and other public places in the
furnishing of any public utility or other service to the Town and to its
inhabitants. All franchises and any renewals, extensions and amendments thereto
shall be granted only by ordinance. No such franchise shall be granted for a
term exceeding thirty (30) years.
   (2)   The Town shall have the right to enter into a franchise agreement with
another government entity, whereby the Town contracts to provide water, sewer,
or other public utility service to such other government entity. All such
franchise agreements and any renewals, extensions and amendments thereto shall
be granted only by ordinance.
Sec. 10.01   ELECTION PROCEDURES FOR TOWN COUNCIL
   Elections for Town Council shall be for a specifically numbered or
designated seat, designated as Mayor, seat 1, seat 2, seat 3, and seat 4. All
candidates for Town Council shall qualify for a single specific seat. For each
such seat, the names of the candidates shall be shown and listed on the
election ballot in alphabetical order of their surnames. Each elector shall
vote for not more than one candidate for each of the seats on the council to be
filled at that election.
Sec. 10.02   ELECTION REQUIREMENTS; NO RUN-OFF ELECTION EXCEPT IN THE CASE OF A
TIE VOTE
   The candidate obtaining the highest number of votes in a regular municipal
election or a special election held pursuant to this Charter shall be deemed to
have been elected. In the event of a tie vote, a special runoff election shall
be held as soon as practical, but in no event more than 15 days after the date
of the initial election.
Sec. 10.03   SPECIAL ELECTIONS
   In the event, a special election is required to fill a council seat pursuant
to the provisions of this Charter, the Town Clerk shall schedule a special
election to be held as soon as practical, unless a regular municipal election
is scheduled to be held within 100 days of the creation of such vacancy, in
which case the special election shall be held on the same day as the regular
municipal election.
Sec. 10.04   ELECTORS
   Any person who is a registered Town of Palm Shores voter, and who resides in
the Town of Palm Shores, shall be an elector of the Town.
Sec. 10.04   ELECTION ORDINANCES
   Regulations for the conduct and supervision of local elections shall be
established by ordinance.
Sec. 10.05   QUALIFYING OF CANDIDATES FOR OFFICE OF TOWN COUNCIL
   Any elector of the Town of Palm Shores, having the qualifications herein
provided for Town Council members, and desiring to be a candidate for election
as a Town Council member, shall file with the Town Clerk a qualifying statement
in substantially the following form.
      “I am a candidate for a seat on the Town Council in the election of
                         and I agree to serve if I am elected. I am a qualified
voter in the State of Florida and I have resided in the Town of Palm Shores, or
in an area which has been annexed by the Town of Palm Shores, for at least one
(1) year immediately preceding my qualifications herein.”
      Table Inset has been removed in accordance with Florida Statutes 99.092
and 99.095.
      The Town Clerk shall have qualifying forms available for completion by
any candidate who may request such a form. Such qualifying statements shall be
filed in accordance with time periods set forth in the statutes of the State of
Florida, any applicable regulations, and established from time to time in the
Town Code of Ordinances. A qualifying fee of $50.00 shall be paid upon
qualification.
Sec. 10.06   OATH OF OFFICE
   Every councilmember shall, before entering upon the duties of his office,
take and subscribe to the following oath or affirmation, to be filed and kept
in the office of the Town Clerk:
      “I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend the
Constitution of the United States and of the State of Florida, that I will
observe the provisions of the Charter and ordinances of the Town of Palm
Shores, and that I will faithfully perform and discharge the duties of a Town
Councilmember (or Mayor) of the Town of Palm Shores”.
Sec. 11.01   EFFECT OF THIS CHARTER ON EXISTING LAW
   All laws and parts of laws relating to or affecting the Town in force when
this Charter shall take effect are hereby repealed and superseded to the extent
that the same are inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter; insofar as
the provisions of this Charter are the same in terms or in substance and effect
as provisions of law in force when this Charter shall take effect, relating to
or affecting the Town, the provisions of this Charter are intended to be not a
new enactment but a continuation of such provisions of law and this Charter
shall be so construed and applied.
Sec. 11.02   RIGHTS OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES PRESERVED
   Nothing in this Charter, except as specifically provided, shall affect or
impair the rights or privileges of officers or employees of the Town or of any
office, department, board, Council or agency existing at the time when this
Charter shall take effect, and not inconsistent with the provisions of this
Charter, in relation to the personnel, appointment, ranks, grades, tenure of
office, promotion, removal, pension and retirement rights, civil rights, or any
other rights or privileges of officers or employees of said Town or any office,
department, board, Council or agency thereof.
Sec. 11.03   TITLE TO PROPERTY RESERVED
   The title, rights and ownership of property, uncollected taxes, special
assessments, dues, claims, judgments, decrees and choses in action, held or
owned by the Town of Palm Shores under any previous Charter, shall pass to, and
be vested in the municipal corporation organized under this Charter.
Sec. 11.04   CONTINUITY OF OFFICER, BOARDS, COUNCILS OR AGENCIES
   Any office, department, board, Council or agency provided for in this
Charter with powers and duties the same or substantially the same as those of
an office, department, board, Council or agency heretofore existing shall be
deemed to be a continuation of such office, department, board, Council or
agency by which the same were heretofore exercised, and shall have power to
continue any business, proceeding or other matter within the scope.
Sec. 11.05   VALIDATION OF ACTS UNDER PREVIOUS CHARTER
   All official acts, ordinances and resolutions passed by any previous Town
Council, including all resolutions by which certain unincorporated areas were
annexed by the Town, thereby enlarging the corporate limits of the Town, done
and adopted prior to the passage of this amended Charter are hereby approved
and ratified.
Sec. 11.06   CHARTER AMENDMENTS AND REVISIONS
   This Charter and any portion thereof may be amended or revised, in whole or
in part, at any time by a resolution passed by the affirmative vote of a
majority of the membership of the Town Council and ratified by a majority of
the votes cast by the qualified electors of the Town at a general or special
election held for that purpose, after being advertised once each week for four
(4) consecutive weeks within thirty (30) days previous thereto. At such
election each such amendment or revision shall be identified on the ballot.
Amendments shall be voted on separately, and revisions of one or more articles
may be voted on separately or may be considered together as the council shall
prescribe. To the extent that any such amendment or revision shall require
state legislative action, the referendum may be held prior to or after such
state legislative action.
Sec. 11.07   STATE AND MUNICIPAL LAWS
   All laws of the State of Florida relating to the operation of a municipality
shall be fully effective, control and supersede all ordinances and resolutions
in conflict therewith. Where state law allows such may be enhanced from time to
time as deemed necessary by ordinance. All Town ordinances, resolutions, orders
and regulations which are in force when this charter becomes fully effective
are repealed to the extent that they are inconsistent or interfere with the
effective operation of this charter or of ordinances or resolutions adopted
pursuant thereto.
Sec. 11.08   SCHEDULE
   (1)   First Election. At the time of its adoption, this charter shall be in
effect to the extent necessary in order that the first election of members of
the Town Council may be conducted in accordance with the provisions of this
charter. The first election shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first
Monday in November of 2007. Council Seats number 1, 3, and 5 will be up for
election which includes the election for Mayor. In 2008, Council Seats number 2
and 4 will be up for election. The Town Clerk shall prepare for adoption by the
Town council temporary regulations applicable only to the first election and
designed to insure its proper conduct and to prevent fraud and provide for
recount of ballots in cases of doubt or fraud.
   (2)   Time of Taking Full Effect. The charter shall be in full effect for
all purposes on and after the date and time of the first meeting of the newly
elected Town Council.
   (3)   Organizational Meeting. On the first Monday of December following the
first election of Town Council members under this charter, the newly elected
members of the Town Council shall meet at 7:00 p.m. in the Town Hall. At that
Organizational Meeting, the Town Council shall appoint by vote, a Vice Mayor.
Sec. 11.09   SEVERABILITY
   If any article, section or portion of article or section of this act shall
be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not
affect the remainder of this act nor the context in which such article, section
or portion of an article or section so held invalid may appear, except to the
extent that an entire article or part of an article or section or part of a
section may be inseparably connected in meaning and effect with that portion of
the act to which the holding shall directly apply.
Sec. 11.10   EFFECTIVE DATE
   This act, except as herein otherwise provided, shall take effect immediately
upon becoming a law.
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS; GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   How code designated and cited
   
10.02   Definitions and rules of construction
   
10.03   Catchlines of sections
   
10.04   History notes
   
10.05   References to chapters or sections
   
10.06   References and editor’s notes
   
10.07   Provisions considered as continuation of existing ordinances
   
10.08   Code does not affect prior offenses, rights and the like
   
10.09   Effect of repeal of ordinances
   
10.10   Certain ordinances not affected by code
   
10.11   Amendments to code
   
10.12   Supplementation of code
   
10.13   Altering code
   
10.14   Severability of parts of code
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 HOW CODE DESIGNATED AND CITED.
   The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall
constitute and be designated the Code of Ordinances, Town of Palm Shores,
Florida, and may be so cited.
(2000 Code, § 1-1)
§ 10.02 DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   In the construction of this code and of all ordinances, the following
definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless the context
clearly indicates otherwise.
   CHARTER. The Charter of the Town of Palm Shores, Florida, printed at the
beginning of this code.
   CODE. Whenever the term CODE is used without further qualification, it shall
mean the Code of Ordinances, Town of Palm Shores, Florida, as designated in §
10.01.
   COMPUTATION OF TIME. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to
be done a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the day on
which notice is given or an act is done shall not be counted in computing the
time, but the day on which the proceeding is to be had shall be counted.
   CORPORATE LIMITS. Whenever in this code an act is prohibited, declared
unlawful, required to be performed, directly or by implication, the references
shall imply “within the corporate limits of the Town of Palm Shores.”
   COUNTY. The County of Brevard.
   DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of
a department or some other town officer or employee to do some act or perform
some duty, it shall be construed to authorize the head of the department or
other officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to
perform the required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision
or section specify otherwise.
   F.S. The latest edition or supplement of the Florida Statutes.
   GENDER. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be
applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations, as well as to
males.
   JOINT AUTHORITY. Words purporting to give authority to three or more
officers or other persons shall be construed as giving authority to a majority
of the officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared.
   MONTH. A calendar month.
   NUMBER. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied
to several persons and things, as well as to one person or thing.
   OATH. Construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath; and in those cases, the terms SWEAR
and SWORN shall be equivalent to the terms AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
   OFFICER, EMPLOYEE, DEPARTMENT, BOARD, COMMISSION or OTHER AGENCY. Whenever
any officer, employee, department, board, commission or other agency is
referred to by title only, the reference shall be construed as if followed by
the words “of the Town of Palm Shores, Florida.”
   OWNER. Applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the
entirety, of the whole or of a part of a building or land.
   PERSON. Shall include and be applied to associations, clubs, societies,
firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate, as well as to
individuals.
   STATE. The State of Florida.
   TENSE. Words used in the present or past tense include the future, as well
as the present and past.
   TOWN. The term TOWN shall be construed as if the words “of Palm Shores,
Florida” followed it and shall extend to and include its several officers,
agents and employees.
   TOWN COUNCIL or COUNCIL. The Town Council of the Town of Palm Shores,
Florida.
(2000 Code, § 1-2)
Statutory reference:
   Boundaries of Brevard County, see F.S. § 7.05
   Computation of time, see Florida Rules of Civil Procedure, Rule 1.090(a)
   Definitions of terms, see F.S. § 1.01
§ 10.03 CATCHLINES OF SECTIONS.
   The catchlines of the several sections of this code printed in boldface type
are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and
shall not be deemed or taken to be the titles of the sections nor as any part
of the sections nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when
any of the sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
(2000 Code, § 1-3)
§ 10.04 HISTORY NOTES.
   The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections of this code are
not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to indicate the
source of matter contained in the section.
(2000 Code, § 1-4)
§ 10.05 REFERENCES TO CHAPTERS OR SECTIONS.
   All references to chapters or sections are to the chapters and sections of
this code, unless otherwise specified.
(2000 Code, § 1-5)
§ 10.06 REFERENCES AND EDITOR’S NOTES.
   References and editor’s notes following certain sections are inserted as an
aid and guide to the reader and are not controlling or meant to have any legal
effect.
(2000 Code, § 1-6)
§ 10.07 PROVISIONS CONSIDERED AS CONTINUATION OF EXISTING ORDINANCES.
   The provisions appearing in this code so far as they are the same as the
ordinances in effect at the time of adoption of this code shall be considered
as a continuation thereof and not new enactments.
(2000 Code, § 1-7)
§ 10.08 CODE DOES NOT AFFECT PRIOR OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND THE LIKE.
   Nothing in this code or the ordinance adopting this code shall affect any
offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any
contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this
code.
(2000 Code, § 1-8)
§ 10.09 EFFECT OF REPEAL OF ORDINANCES.
   (A)   The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force
before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect.
   (B)   The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty
incurred before the repeal took effect or any suit, prosecution or proceeding
pending at the time of the repeal for an offense committed or cause of action
arising under the ordinance repealed.
(2000 Code, § 1-9)
Statutory reference:
   No bill of attainder, ex post facto law or any law impairing the obligation
of contracts, shall ever be passed, see Florida Constitution, Art. I, § 10
§ 10.10 CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT AFFECTED BY CODE.
   (A)   Nothing in this code or the ordinance adopting this code shall be
construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following
when not inconsistent with this code:
      (1)   Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture
incurred before the effective date of this code;
      (2)   Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment
of money for the town or authorizing the issue of any bonds of the town or any
evidence of the town’s indebtedness or any contract, right, agreement, lease,
deed or other instrument or obligation assumed by the town;
      (3)   Any administrative ordinances or resolutions of the town not in
conflict or inconsistent with this code;
      (4)   Any right or franchise granted by any ordinance;
      (5)   Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing,
locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing, vacating and the
like, any street or public way in the town;
      (6)   Any appropriation ordinance or budget ordinance;
      (7)   Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes, charges, rates or fees;
      (8)   Any ordinances prescribing through streets, parking and traffic
regulations, speed limits, one-way traffic, limitations on load of vehicles or
loading zones;
      (9)   Any rezoning ordinance or amendment to the zoning map;
      (10)   Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of
any street in the town;
      (11)   Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes
therefor;
      (12)   Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in
the town;
      (13)   Any ordinance annexing territory or excluding territory or any
ordinance extending the boundaries of the town;
      (14)   Any ordinance establishing positions, classifying positions,
setting salaries of town officers and employees or any personnel regulations;
      (15)   Any temporary or special ordinances;
      (16)   Any ordinance calling elections or prescribing the manner of
conducting the election in accordance with state law;
      (17)   Any ordinance regarding storm drainage; and
      (18)   Any ordinance or code provision regarding impact fees.
   (B)   All ordinances are recognized as continuing in full force and effect
to the same extent as if set out at length in this code and are on file in the
Town Clerk’s office.
(2000 Code, § 1-10)
§ 10.11 AMENDMENTS TO CODE.
   (A)   All ordinances passed subsequent to this code that amend, repeal or in
any way affect this code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering
system of this code and printed for inclusion in the code; or in the case of
repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part of chapter, section or
subsection, by subsequent ordinances, the repealed portions may be excluded
from the code by omission from affected reprinted pages; and the subsequent
ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be
prima facie evidence of the subsequent ordinances until the time that this code
and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code of
ordinances by the Town Council.
   (B)   Amendments to any of the provisions of this code should be made by
amending the provisions by specific reference to the section of this code in
substantially the following language: “That section ________ of the Code of
Ordinances, Town of Palm Shores, Florida, is hereby amended to read as follows:
. . . .” The new provisions may then be set out in full as desired.
   (C)   If a new section not existing in the code is to be added, the
following language may be used: “That the Code of Ordinances, Town of Palm
Shores, Florida, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter)
to be numbered as follows ________, which the section shall read as follows: .
. . .” The new section may then be set out in full as desired.
   (D)   When the Town Council desires to enact an ordinance of a general and
permanent nature on a subject not existing in the code, which the Council
desires to incorporate into the code, a section in substantially the following
language may be made a part of the ordinance: “Section ________. It is the
intention of the Town Council and it is hereby ordained that the provisions of
this ordinance shall become and be made a part of the Code of Ordinances, Town
of Palm Shores, Florida, and the sections of this ordinance may be renumbered
to accomplish such intention.”
   (E)   All sections, articles, chapters or provisions of this code desired to
be repealed should be specifically repealed by section number or chapter
number, as the case may be.
(2000 Code, § 1-11)
Statutory reference:
   Minimum procedural requirements for adoption of ordinances and resolutions,
see F.S. § 166.041
§ 10.12 SUPPLEMENTATION OF CODE.
   (A)   By contract or by town personnel, supplements to this code shall be
prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the town. A supplement
to the code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of
ordinances passed by the Town Council or adopted by initiative and referendum
during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made in the code
and shall also include all amendments to the Charter during the period. The
pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the
code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or
partially obsolete; and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have
been inserted, the code will be current through the date of the adoption of the
latest ordinance included in the supplement.
   (B)   In preparing a supplement to this code, all portions of the code that
have been repealed shall be excluded from the code by their omission from
reprinted pages.
   (C)   When preparing a supplement to this code, the codifier, meaning the
person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement, may make
formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included
in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a
unified code. For example, the codifier may:
      (1)   Organize the ordinance material into appropriate divisions;
      (2)   Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections
and other subdivisions of the code printed in the supplement and make changes
in catchlines, headings and titles;
      (3)   Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be
inserted in the code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change
existing section or other division numbers;
      (4)   Change the words “this ordinance” or words of the same meaning to
“this chapter,” “this article,” “this division” and the like, as the case may
be, or to “sections ________ through ________.” The inserted section numbers
will indicate the sections of the code which embody the substantive sections of
the ordinance incorporated into the code; and
      (5)   Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the
original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the code, but in no case
shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance
material included in the supplement or already embodied in the code.
(2000 Code, § 1-12)
§ 10.13 ALTERING CODE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person in the town to change or amend, by
additions or deletions, any part or portion of this code or to insert or delete
pages or portions of pages or to alter or tamper with the code in any manner
whatsoever that will cause the law of the town to be misrepresented by the
alteration or tampering. Any person violating this section shall be punished as
provided in §
10.99.
(2000 Code, § 1-13)
Statutory reference:
   Falsifying public records, penalty, see F.S. § 839.13
§ 10.14 SEVERABILITY OF PARTS OF CODE.
   The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this code are
severable; and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this
code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of the
court of competent jurisdiction, the unconstitutionality shall not affect any
of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this
code.
(2000 Code, § 1-14)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   General penalty.
      (1)   The violation of or failure to comply with any provision of this
code shall constitute an offense against the town, and where no specific
penalty is provided, shall subject the offender, upon conviction, to a fine not
to exceed $500 or imprisonment for a period of not to exceed 60 days or by both
a fine and imprisonment.
      (2)   Any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of
the provisions of this code or any ordinance of the town shall be deemed a
public nuisance and shall be subject to abatement by the town.
      (3)   Every act, action or thing done in violation of the provisions of
this code or ordinances of the town shall be construed, deemed and taken as a
separate and distinct violation of the provisions of this code; and in every
event a violation of this code or any of the provisions of this code shall
continue, each day of the continuance shall be deemed, construed and taken as a
separate and distinct violation of the provisions of this code that the
condition so allowed to continue shall violate.
(2000 Code, § 1-15)
   (B)   Schedule of civil penalties.
 Violation Civil Penalty
                                                                                   Civil Penalty
     Violation                                                                     First     Repeat
                                                                                   Violation Violation
(1)  Falsely hold himself, herself or a business organization out as a licensee,   $150      $300
     certificate holder or registrant
(2)  Falsely impersonate a certificate holder or registrant                        $150      $300
(3)  Falsely present himself or herself as a certified or registered contractor    $200      $400
     under another person’s certificate or registration
(4)  Give false or forged evidence to the contractor’s licensing board or a membe$150      $300
     thereof for the purpose of obtaining a certificate or registration
(5)  Use or attempt to use a certificate or registration which has been suspended  $200      $400
     or revoked
(6)  Engage in the business or act in the capacity of a contractor without being   $250      $ 500
     duly registered or certified
     Advertise himself, herself or a business organization as available to engage
(7)  in the business or act in the capacity of a contractor without being duly     $250      $500
     registered or certified
     Operate a business organization engaged in contracting after 60 days
(8)  following the termination of its only qualifying agent without designating    $250      $500
     another primary qualifying agent
(9)  Proceeding on any job without first obtaining applicable local building       $150      $300
     permits and inspections
(10) Act as a subcontractor without being certified or registered                  $250      $500
     Act in the capacity of a contractor or advertise himself, herself or a
(11) business organization as available to engage in the business or act in the    $100      $200
     capacity of a contractor without a business license tax
     Conceal or cause to be concealed or assist in concealing, from the primary
(12) qualifying agent, any material activities or information about the            $100      $200
     contracting firm
(13) Exclude or facilitate the exclusion of any aspect of the contracting firm’s $100      $200
     financial or other business activities from the primary qualifying agent
(14) Knowingly cause any part of the contracting firm’s activities, financial or $100      $200
     otherwise, to be conducted without the primary qualifying agent’s supervision
(15) Assist or participate with any qualifying agent in the violation of any       $100      $200
     provision of Ch. 31
(16) Commencement and/or performance of any work for which a building permit is    $75       $150
     required without the building permit being current
 
(Ord. 2006-11, Att. A, passed 8-22-2006)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   TOWN COUNCIL
      
31.   OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
      
32.   ELECTIONS
      
33.   FINANCE
      
34.   TAXATION
CHAPTER 30: TOWN COUNCIL
Section
   
30.01   Oath of office
   
30.02   Qualification of members; rules
   
30.03   Meetings
   
30.04   Quorum; voting
   
30.05   Adoption of ordinances, resolutions
   
30.06   Conducting of elections
§ 30.01 OATH OF OFFICE.
   (A)   Each person appointed or elected as a member of the Town Council,
before entering upon the discharge of the duties of the office, shall take and
subscribe the following oath as set forth in the Town
Charter, Sec. 10.06.
   (B)   This oath shall be spread upon the minutes of the Town Council.
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 59-1708, Art. III, § 8) (2000 Code, § 2-31)
Statutory reference:
   Oath required, see F.S. § 876.05
§ 30.02 QUALIFICATION OF MEMBERS; RULES.
   (A)   The Town Council shall be the judge of the election and qualification
of its members.
   (B)   The Town Council shall have power to determine and establish the rules
governing its own proceedings and to determine the time and place for holding
its meetings and the notice, if any, of special and emergency meetings. Council
rules, polices and procedures may be adopted by resolution of the Town Council
and amended or revised in the same way.
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 59-1708, Art. III, § 16) (2000 Code, § 2-32) (Ord. 2013-07,
passed 9-24-2013)
Statutory reference:
   Recall of elected officials, see F.S. § 100.361
§ 30.03 MEETINGS.
   Special and emergency meetings shall be held when called by the Mayor, or by
any two members of the Town Council. All meetings of the Council shall be open
to the public, and the rules of the Council shall provide that the citizens of
the town shall have a reasonable opportunity to be heard at the meetings in
regard to any matter pertaining to the town. The Mayor, or in his or her
absence, the Vice-Mayor, shall preside at all meetings of the Council; and the
Town Clerk shall be present at all meetings of the Council. Notice of special
and emergency meetings of the Council shall be given personally by the Town
Clerk to each member by telephone and, if available, by e-mail. In the event
that notice by telephone or e-mail cannot be made or affected, the Clerk shall
cause the notice to be delivered to each such member’s place of residence.
Public notice of such meetings shall be at least posted at City Hall and posted
on the city’s web site. In the case of a special meeting, public notice of the
meeting shall be posted at least 24 hours prior to the scheduled meeting.
Public notice of an emergency meeting shall be made as soon as possible before
the meeting.
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 59-1708, Art. III, § 16) (2000 Code, § 2-33) (Ord. 2013-07,
passed 9-24-2013)
Statutory reference:
   Open Meetings Act, see F.S. § 286.011
§ 30.04 QUORUM; VOTING.
   (A)   A majority of the members of the Town Council shall constitute a
quorum to do business, but a less number may adjourn from time to time and
compel the attendance of absent members in a manner and under penalties as may
be prescribed by ordinance.
   (B)   The affirmative vote of a majority of the members present at any
meeting shall be necessary to adopt any ordinance, resolution, order or vote.
   (C)   No member shall be excused from voting except on matters involving the
consideration of his or her official conduct or when his or her financial
interests are involved, in which case the affirmative vote of a majority of the
members voting shall be necessary for the adoption of any ordinance,
resolution, order or vote.
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 59-1708, Art. III, § 17) (2000 Code, § 2-34)
Statutory reference:
   Uniform minimum mandatory procedure for adoption of ordinances, see F.S. §
166.041
§ 30.05 ADOPTION OF ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS.
   (A)   The enacting clause of all ordinances shall be: “Be It Ordained by the
Town Council of Palm Shores, Florida.”
   (B)   No ordinance shall be adopted until second reading of the ordinance,
except an emergency ordinance may be adopted upon one reading.
   (C)   Ordinances may be read by title only. Except as may be provided for in
§
30.05 the procedures set forth in F.S. § 166.041 concerning the adoption of
ordinances and resolutions shall govern.
   (D)   Every ordinance, upon its adoption, shall be signed by the Mayor and
by the Town Clerk; and when so signed, it shall become effective then, unless
otherwise provided in the ordinance.
   (E)   Before introduction, all ordinances and resolutions shall be reduced
to writing. Resolutions shall be signed by the Mayor and by the Town Clerk.
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 59-1708, Art. III, §§ 17, 18) (2000 Code, § 2-35) (Ord.
2013-07, passed 9-24-2013)
Statutory reference:
   Uniform minimum mandatory procedure for adoption of ordinances and
resolutions, see F.S. § 166.041
§ 30.06 CONDUCTING OF ELECTIONS.
   The Town Council shall, by ordinance, provide for and regulate the conduct
of elections.
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 59-1708, Art. III, § 19) (2000 Code, § 2-36)
Charter reference:
   Date of election, see Art. III, § 6
   Election by group, see Art. III, § 7
   Qualifications for candidates, see Art. III, § 2
Statutory reference:
   Florida Election Code, see F.S. Ch. 97
CHAPTER 31: OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
Section
General Provisions
   
31.01   Bond
   
31.02   Oath of office
   
31.03   Return of property upon leaving office
Town Clerk
   
31.15   Duties, generally
   
31.16   Custody of town records, books, documents
Code Enforcement Special Magistrate
   
31.30   Duties, generally
   
31.31   Appointment
   
31.32   Notice requirements
   
31.33   Definitions
   
31.34   Authority and intent
   
31.35   Special Magistrate creation and organization
   
31.36   Enforcement procedures and notices
   
31.37   Conduct of hearing and appeal
   
31.38   Powers of the Special Magistrate with respect to hearings
Town Manager
   
31.50   Office of Town Manager
 
   
31.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.01 BOND.
   The Town Council shall have the power to require the Town Clerk and other
officers, including its own members, before any of them enters upon the duties
of his or her office, within the time as it may prescribe, to enter into a good
and sufficient bond conditioned as it may require for the faithful performance
of his or her duties, and it may from time to time require further or
additional bonds. The Town Council may declare the office vacant for failure of
the officer to execute the bond.
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 59-1708, Art. III, § 15) (2000 Code, § 2-66)
§ 31.02 OATH OF OFFICE.
   Every appointive officer of the town shall take and subscribe, before an
officer duly qualified to administer oaths, an oath or affirmation faithfully
and impartially to execute the duties of his or her office according to the
best of his or her ability and understanding, which may be filed with the Town
Clerk.
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 59-1708, Art. III, § 11) (2000 Code, § 2-67)
Statutory reference:
   Oath required, see F.S. § 876.05
§ 31.03 RETURN OF PROPERTY UPON LEAVING OFFICE.
   It shall be the duty of every officer of the town, within ten days after the
expiration of his or her term of office or of his or her removal therefrom, to
deliver to his or her successor in office, or to the person as the Town Council
may designate, all books, records, papers, vouchers and property of every kind
in his or her possession or control belonging to the town.
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 59-1708, Art. III, § 13) (2000 Code, § 2-68)
TOWN CLERK
§ 31.15 DUTIES, GENERALLY.
   (A)   The Town Clerk shall keep a record of the proceedings of the Town
Council in a minute book to be provided and kept for that purpose. The Town
Clerk shall preserve and maintain in an ordinance book all ordinances to be
provided and kept for that purpose. He or she shall preserve and maintain in a
resolution book all resolutions to be provided and kept for that purpose. The
ordinance book and resolution book shall be deemed to be public records, and
each ordinance and resolution recorded shall be signed by the Mayor and by the
Town Clerk.
   (B)   Copies from the minute book, ordinance book or resolution book, duly
certified by the Town Clerk under the corporate seal of the town, shall be
received in evidence in all courts and places as proof.
   (C)   The Town Clerk shall certify and keep a record of all permits issued
by the town or pursuant to its authority.
   (D)   Section
4.02 of the Town Charter provides, in part that the duties of the Town Clerk
shall include “other duties so prescribed by the Town Council.” Consistent with
Sec.
4.02 of the Town Charter the Town Council hereby provides that the office of
the Town Clerk may also perform those duties of the Town Manager, as provided
in §
31.50(C), (D) and (E) of the town code, if so determined by the Town Council by
resolution to assign such duties to the office of the Town Clerk. The Town
Clerk shall perform such duties in an ex officio capacity. The Town Council may
at any time withdraw such additional duties from the Town Clerk and hire a
separate Town Manager pursuant to the provisions of Sec.
5.02 of the Town Charter and §
31.50 of the town code.
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 59-1708, Art. III, § 16) (2000 Code, § 2-91) (Ord. 2023-02,
passed 4-25-2023)
§ 31.16 CUSTODY OF TOWN RECORDS, BOOKS, DOCUMENTS.
   The Town Clerk shall be the registration officer and shall, in addition to
the duties which are or may be required by him or her by this section or by any
law of the state or by any ordinance of the town, have the custody of all the
general records, books and documents of the town, and shall perform further
duties as are imposed upon the Town Clerk by the Town Council by resolution,
ordinance or otherwise.
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 59-1708, Art. IV, § 4) (2000 Code, § 2-92)
CODE ENFORCEMENT SPECIAL MAGISTRATE
§ 31.30 DUTIES, GENERALLY.
   The position of Code Enforcement Special Magistrate is responsible for
hearing matters brought before him or her concerning compliance with existing
codes, ordinances, statutes, and enforcing other municipal codes and ordinances
as may have been or may be adopted by the Town Council from time to time. Work
is performed under the general direction of the Town Mayor.
(Ord. 2000-07, passed 6-27-2000; Ord. 2013-07, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 31.31 APPOINTMENT.
   The Mayor hire a person, who must be an attorney licensed to practice in the
State of Florida and in good standing with the Florida Bar to serve as Special
Magistrate. Such person shall be treated as an independent contractor.
(Ord. 2000-07, passed 6-27-2000; Ord. 2013-07, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 31.32 NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.
   The Code Enforcement Officer shall follow rules of procedure outlined by the
Mayor or as proscribed by state law, both of which may be amended from time to
time.
(Ord. 2000-07, passed 6-27-2000; Ord. 2013-07, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 31.33 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CODE INSPECTOR or CODE OFFICER. Any designated employee or agent of the town
whose duty it is to enforce the codes and ordinances enacted by the town.
   ENFORCEMENT BOARD. The Code Enforcement Board of the town. Pursuant to F.S.
§ 162.03(2), the Special Magistrate shall have the same status as the
Enforcement Board.
   LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any person who is elected, appointed or employed
full time by any municipality or the state or any political subdivision
thereof; who is vested with authority to bear arms and made arrests; and whose
primary responsibility is the prevention and detection of crime or the
enforcement of the penal, criminal, traffic or highway laws of the state.
   PERSON. Any natural person, individual, public or private corporation, firm,
association, joint venture, partnership, municipality, government agency,
public subdivision, pubic officer or any other entity whatsoever, or any
combination of such, jointly or severally.
   REPEAT VIOLATION. A violation of a provision of a code or ordinance by a
person the Special Magistrate has previously found to have violated or who has
admitted violating the same provision within five years prior to the current
violation, notwithstanding the violations occur at different locations.
   SPECIAL MAGISTRATE. A person authorized to hold hearings and assess fines
against violators of the town codes and ordinances in accordance with F.S. Ch.
162.
   TOWN. The Town of Palm Shores.
   TOWN ATTORNEY. The legal counselor for the town, duly appointed as Town
Attorney.
(Ord. 2006-11, passed 8-22-2006; Ord. 2013-07, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 31.34 AUTHORITY AND INTENT.
   (A)   This subchapter is adopted by the Town Council, upon authorization to
create a Code Enforcement procedures pursuant to the authority granted
municipalities in F.S. § 162.
   (B)   It is the intent of this subchapter to promote, protect and improve
the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the town, give Special
Magistrates authority to hold hearings and assess fines against violations of
the town codes and ordinances providing an equitable, expeditious, effective
and inexpensive method of enforcing the codes and ordinances in force in the
town, where a pending or repeat violation continues to exist.
(Ord. 2006-11, passed 8-22-2006; Ord. 2013-07, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 31.35 SPECIAL MAGISTRATE CREATION AND ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   Creation. There is hereby created a Code Enforcement Special
Magistrate of the town under authority of F.S. § 162. The Special Magistrate
shall have the authority to hold hearings and enforce the codes and ordinances
of the town as provided in this subchapter when violations of the codes are not
corrected following initial action by the Code Inspector.
   (B)   Appointment of the Special Magistrate. The Mayor shall select from a
list of qualified candidates the best person to hold office and present the
person(s) as the Code Enforcement Special Magistrate of the town for approval
by the Town Council.
   (C)   Removal from office. The Special Magistrate may be suspended and
removed from office by the Town Mayor without cause, unless otherwise agreed by
written contract.
   (D)   Rules of procedures and compensation. The Special Magistrate may
establish rules for the conduct of hearings as deemed necessary; provided,
however, that no rules of procedure may conflict with this subchapter or F.S. §
162. The Special Magistrate shall be compensated as determined by the town.
(Ord. 2006-11, passed 8-22-2006; Ord. 2013-07, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 31.36 ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES AND NOTICES.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Code Inspector to initiate enforcement
proceedings of the various codes and ordinances of the town. At no time may
Special Magistrate initiate enforcement proceedings.
   (B)   Except as provided in divisions (C) and (D) below, if the violation of
the codes is found, the Code Inspector shall notify the violator and give him
or her a reasonable time to correct the violation. Should the violation
continue beyond the time specified for correction, the Code Inspector shall at
his or her discretion issue a citation or notify the Special Magistrate and
request a hearing. If requested the Special Magistrate shall schedule a
hearing, and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed to or served upon
the violator as provided in this chapter and F.S. § 162.12. At the option of
the Special Magistrate, notice may additionally be served by publication or
postings as provided by law in accordance with F.S. § 162.12. If the violation
is corrected and then reoccurs or if the violation is not corrected by the time
specified for correction by the Code Inspector, the case may be presented to
the Special Magistrate even if the violation has been corrected prior to the
hearing, and the notice shall so state.
   (C)   If a repeat violation is found, the Code Inspector shall notify the
violator but is not required to give the violator a reasonable time to correct
the violation. The Code Inspector, upon notifying the violator of a repeat
violation shall notify the Special Magistrate and request a hearing. The
Special Magistrate shall provide notice as prescribed by this chapter and F.S.
§ 162.12. The case may be presented to the Special Magistrate even if the
repeat violation has been corrected, the Special Magistrate retains the right
to schedule a hearing to determine the cost and impose a payment of reasonable
enforcement fees upon repeat violator. The repeat violator may choose to waive
his or her right to this hearing and pay the cost as determined by the Special
Magistrate.
   (D)   If the Code Inspector has reason to believe that a violation presents
a serious threat to the public health, safety and welfare or if the violation
is irreparable or irreversible in nature, the Code Inspector shall make a
reasonable effort to notify the violator and may immediately notify the Mayor
and Special Magistrate and request a hearing.
   (E)   If the owner of the property which is subject to an enforcement
proceeding before the Special Magistrate or a court transfers ownership of the
property between the time the initial pleading was served and the time of
hearing, the owner shall:
      (1)   Disclose in writing, the existence and nature of proceedings to the
prospective transferee;
      (2)   Deliver to prospective transferee a copy of the pleading notices
and other materials relating to the code enforcement proceedings received by
the transferor;
      (3)   Disclose, in writing, to the prospective transferee, that the new
owner will be responsible for compliance with the applicable code and with
orders issued in the code enforcement proceeding; and
      (4)   File a notice with the code enforcement official of the transfer of
property, with the identity and address of the new owner, copies of the
disclosures made to the new owner, within five days after date of the transfer.
A failure to make the disclosure described in divisions (E)(1) through (E)(3)
above creates a rebuttal assumption of fraud. If the property is transferred
before a hearing, the proceedings shall not be dismissed, but the new owner
shall be provided a reasonable period of time to correct violation before the
hearing is held.
(Ord. 2006-11, passed 8-22-2006; Ord. 2013-07, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 31.37 CONDUCT OF HEARING AND APPEAL.
   (A)   Administrative procedures.  Upon request of the Code Inspector, or at
other time as may be necessary, the Special Magistrate may call a hearing. The
Special Magistrate shall cause the minutes to be kept of all hearings by the
Special Magistrate, and all hearings and records of the Special Magistrate
shall be open to the public. The Town Council shall provide clerical and
administrative personnel as may be reasonably required by the Special
Magistrate for the proper performance of designated duties. The Special
Magistrate may, at any hearing, set future hearing dates and may postpone or
continue any matter before him or her to a future date.
   (B)   Representation. Each case before the Special Magistrate shall be
presented either by the Town Attorney, by the Code Inspector or by the Mayor or
his or her designee. If the town prevails in prosecuting a case it shall be
entitled to recover all costs incurred in prosecuting the case before the
Special Magistrate and the costs may be included in the lien authorized by F.S.
§ 162.07(2). Any person accused of a violation may be represented by counsel at
the hearing.
   (C)   Order of procedure and rules of evidence. At any given hearing, the
Special Magistrate shall first take testimony and receive evidence from the
town, and the town shall have the burden of proving the existence of the
alleged violation by the preponderance of the evidence. If the evidence
presented by the town established a prima facie case, the Special Magistrate
shall then proceed to receive evidence and testimony from the alleged violator.
Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but fundamental procedural due
process shall be observed and shall govern the proceedings. All testimony shall
be under oath and recorded.
   (D)   Findings and orders. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Special
Magistrate shall make a finding of fact, based on the evidence of record, and
conclusions of law, and shall issue an order affording relief as may be
consistent with the powers granted herein. The findings and order shall be
presented in written form and shall be served personally or by certified mail/
return receipt requested upon the violator. The order may include a notice that
the order must be complied with by a specific date and that a fine may be
imposed if the order is not complied with by a specific date and that a fine
may be imposed if the order is not complied with by the date as provided in §
31.36 and F.S. § 162.09(1), the order may specify the amount of the fine to be
imposed and the date on which the fine will commence if the violation is not
corrected. The cost of repairs may be included along with the fine if the order
is not complied with by the date. A certified copy of the order may be recorded
in the public records of the county and shall constitute notice to all
subsequent purchases, successors in interest or as assigns, if the violation
concerns with to real property and the findings therein shall be binding upon
the violator and if the violation concerns real property, any subsequent
purchases, successors in interest or assigns. If an order is recorded in the
public records pursuant to this division and the order is compiled with by the
date specified in the order, the Special Magistrate shall issue an order
acknowledging compliance that shall be recorded in the pubic records. A hearing
is not required to issue an order acknowledging compliance provided by the
general laws of the state applicable to code enforcement.
   (E)   Appealing a final administrative order. An aggrieved party, including
the Town Council may appeal a final administrative order of the Special
Magistrate to the circuit court. The appeal shall not be a hearing de novo but
shall be limited to appellate review of the record created before the Special
Magistrate. An appeal shall be filed within 30 days of the execution of the
order to be appealed.
(Ord. 2006-11, passed 8-22-2006; Ord. 2013-07, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 31.38 POWERS OF THE SPECIAL MAGISTRATE WITH RESPECT TO HEARINGS.
   With respect to any hearing the Special Magistrate shall have the following
powers:
   (A)   Adopt rules for the conduct of the hearing;
   (B)   Subpoena alleged violators and witnesses to the hearing, pursuant to
F.S. § 162.08;
   (C)   Subpoena evidence to its hearing;
   (D)   Take testimony under oath; and
   (E)   Issue orders having the force of law to command whatever steps are
necessary to bring a violation into compliance.
(Ord. 2006-11, passed 8-22-2006; Ord. 2013-07, passed 9-24-2013)
TOWN MANAGER
§ 31.50 OFFICE OF TOWN MANAGER.
   The Town Council hereby creates the office of the Town Manager. Such
position may be filled by the hiring of a separate Town Manager or by having
the Town Manager duties assigned to the office of the Town Clerk as provided
for in §
31.15(D).
   (A)   The Town Council may appoint a Town Manager hereunder for a definite
term and shall establish his or her compensation of employment by a written
contract that may be renewed every three years by the Mayor with the approval
of the Town Council. Satisfactory completion of a probationary period of six
months is required. The attendance at evening meetings of the Town Council and
all other boards and committees of the town is a required part of this job. The
Town Manager need not be a resident of Palm Shores, Brevard County.
   (B)   The Town Manager’s term of employment, if appointed hereunder, shall
be established by a written contract.
   (C)   The Town Manager shall designate by letter filed with the Town Mayor,
an acting Town Manager to perform his or her duties during any temporary
absence or disability. If the Town Manager fails to make such a designation,
the Mayor may appoint an acting Town Manager. The acting Town Manager shall be
selected from among current town employees/staff.
   (D)   The Town Manager whether appointed hereunder or pursuant to §
31.15(D), shall be responsible for all the administration of town affairs
placed in his or her charge by this section or the Town Charter. The Town
Manager shall have the following responsibilities, powers and duties:
      (1)   Assist and consult the Mayor in hiring, suspending or removing any
town employees or officers.
      (2)   Assist and consult the Mayor fixing the compensation of town
officers and employees within the pay schedules established by the Town
Council.
      (3)   Direct and supervise the administration of all town departments,
offices, and agencies, except as otherwise provided by the Charter, ordinances
or by law.
      (4)   Attend meetings of Town Council, boards and committees and
participate in discussions, but with no right to vote.
      (5)   See that all laws, provisions of the Charter, ordinances and acts
of the Town Council subject to enforcement by him or her or by officers subject
to his or her direction and supervision, are faithfully executed.
      (6)   Assist and consult the Mayor in preparing and submitting the annual
budget, budget message, and capital program to the Council, together with such
other reports concerning town operations as the Mayor may require; and
administer the adopted budget, review of work programs and allotments, make
requests for appropriation transfer. He or she shall also perform all functions
as purchasing agent or appoint such agent.
      (7)   Assist and consult the Mayor in submitting complete reports on the
finances and administrative activities of the town.
      (8)   Keep the Council fully advised of the financial condition and
future needs of the town and make such recommendations, in consultation with
the Mayor, to the Council concerning the affairs of the town as he or she deems
desirable.
      (9)   Perform such other duties as may be required consistent with the
Town Charter.
      (10)   In accordance with Sec.
5.02 of the Town Charter the Mayor may delegate all or part of the mayoral
duties provided for in Sec.
2.09 to the Town Manager. Such duties may include the following:
         (a)   Appoint, and when deemed necessary for the good of the town,
suspend or remove town employees or appointive administrative officers provided
for by the Charter, except as otherwise provided by law, the Charter, or
personnel rules adopted pursuant to the Charter. The Mayor may authorize any
administrative officer who is subject to the Mayor’s direction and supervision
to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that officer’s
department, office, or agency.
         (b)   Direct and supervise the administration of the Town Clerk, all
departments, offices and agencies of the town, except as otherwise provided by
the Charter or by law.
         (c)   Ensure that all laws, provisions of the Charter and acts of the
Council, subject to enforcement are faithfully executed.
         (d)   Prepare and submit the annual budget, budget message, and
capital program to the Council in a form provided by ordinance.
         (e)   Submit to the Council and make available to the public a
complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the town as of
the end of each fiscal year.
         (f)   Make such other reports as the Council may require concerning
the operations of town departments, offices and agencies.
         (g)   Make recommendations to the Town Council concerning the general
operations of the town.
         (h)   Keep the Council fully advised as to the financial condition and
future needs of the town and make such recommendations to the Council
concerning the affairs of the town as deemed desirable.
         (i)   Execute contracts on behalf of the town pursuant to the
provisions of appropriation ordinances or resolutions.
   (E)   The Town Council shall have the power to review any action of the Town
Manager, and may direct the Town Manager in any of his or her actions, except
with regard to those duties which may be assigned to the Town Manager by the
Mayor in accordance with Sec.
5.02 of the Town Charter.
   (F)   Except in the instance where the Town Clerk performs the duties of the
Town Manager under §
31.15(D), the Mayor shall enter into a written contract with the Town Manager
so long as said contract is not in conflict with the ordinances or Town
Charter.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 4-25-2023)
§ 31.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for
which no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions
of §
10.99.
   (B)   Code Enforcement Special Magistrate.
      (1)   Administrative fines; cost of repairs; liens.
         (a)   Generally. The Special Magistrate, may either in the initial
order or upon notification by code enforcement officer that an order has not
been compiled with or finding that a repeat violation has been committed, order
the violator to pay a fine in an amount specified in this section for each day
the violation continues past the date set by the Special Magistrate for
compliance or in the case of a repeat violation, for each day the repeat
violation continues, beginning with the date the repeat violation is found to
have occurred by the Code Inspector. In addition, if the Special Magistrate
finds that the violation is a violation described in §
31.36(D), the Special Magistrate shall notify the town of the findings. The
town shall then have the right and power to make all reasonable repairs which
are required to bring the property into compliance and charge the violator with
the reasonable cost of the repairs along with the fine imposed pursuant to this
section. Making the repairs does not create a continuing obligation on the part
of the town to make further repairs or to maintain the property and does not
create any liability against the town for any damages to the property if the
repairs were completed in good faith. If a finding of a violation or repeat
violation has been made as provided by this part, a hearing shall not be
necessary for issuance of the order imposing the fine. If, after due notice and
hearing, the Special Magistrate finds a violation to be irreparable or
irreversible in nature, he or she may order the violator to pay a fine as
specified in division (B)(1)(b) below.
         (b)   Fines.
            1.   A fine imposed pursuant to §§
31.30 through
31.38 shall not exceed $250 per day for a first violation and shall not exceed
$500 per day for a repeat violation, and in addition, may include all cost of
repairs pursuant to this section. However, if the Special Magistrate finds the
violation to be irreparable or irreversible in nature, it may impose a fine not
to exceed $5,000 per violation.
            2.   In determining the amount of the fine, if any, the Special
Magistrate shall consider the following factors:
               a.   The gravity of the violation;
               b.   Any actions taken by the violator to correct the violation;
or
               c.   Any previous violations committed by the violator
         (c)   Reduction of fines. The Special Magistrate may reduce a fine
imposed pursuant to this section. If a violator desires to request
reconsideration of a fine, the following procedures must be followed:
            1.   Any order issued to the violator must be complied with;
            2.   A written request must be made to the Code Inspector for an
inspection for compliance with the order issued; and
            3.   After the Code Inspector has certified in writing that the
prior order of the Special Magistrate has been complied with, the violator
must, within 20 days of the certification by the Code Inspector, request in
writing to the Code Inspector, reconsideration of the fine by the Special
Magistrate.
         (d)   Recording of order. A certified copy of an order imposing a
fine, or a fine plus repair cost may be recorded in the public records and
thereafter shall constitute a lien against the land on which the violation
exists and upon any other real or personal property owned by the violator. Upon
petition to the circuit court, the order shall be enforceable in the same
manner as a court judgment by the sheriffs of this state, including execution
and levy against the personal property of the violator, but the order shall not
be deemed to be a court judgment except for enforcement purposes. A fine
imposed pursuant to this part shall continue to accrue until the violator comes
into compliance or until judgment is rendered in suit to foreclose on a lien
filed pursuant to this section, whichever occurs first. A lien arising from a
fine imposed pursuant to this section runs in favor of the town, and the town
may execute a satisfaction or release of lien entered pursuant to this section.
After three months from the filing of any lien which remains unpaid, the
Special Magistrate may authorize the Town Attorney to foreclose on the lien. No
lien created pursuant to the provisions of this part may be foreclosed on real
property which is a homestead.
      (2)   Remedies.
         (a)   Remedies for enforcement may include the establishment of a Code
Enforcement Board or prosecution in a court of competent jurisdiction.
         (b)   The town may levy fines, liens, injunctive relief and other
civil penalties, as provided for in the Florida Statutes. At a minimum, the
town elects to use the following standards, from F.S. Ch. 162.21 for penalties:
            1.   A violation of a code or an ordinance is a civil infraction;
            2.   A maximum civil penalty not to exceed $500;
            3.   A civil penalty of less than the maximum civil penalty if the
person who has committed the civil infraction does not contest the citation;
            4.   For the issuance of a citation by a code enforcement officer
who has reasonable cause to believe that a person has committed an act in
violation of a code or an ordinance;
            5.   For the contesting of a citation in county court;
            6.   The procedures and provisions as are necessary to provide for
the enforcement of a code or an ordinance under the provisions of this section;
and
            7.   Any person who willfully refuses to sign and accept a citation
issued by a code enforcement officer shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the
second degree, punishable as provided in F.S. § 775.082 or § 775.083
(Ord. 2000-07, passed 6-27-2000; Ord. 2006-11, passed 8-22-2006; Ord. 2013-07,
passed 9-24-2013)
CHAPTER 32: ELECTIONS
Section
   
32.01   Qualifying for elective office
   
32.02   Applicability of state laws
   
32.03   Candidate qualifications period
§ 32.01 QUALIFYING FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE.
   In addition to the requirements in the Charter, in order to qualify as a
candidate for an elective office, a person shall be a resident of the town for
at least one year prior to the date of paying his or her qualifying fee. The
qualifying fee is $50 and is to be paid to the Town Clerk.
(2000 Code, § 26-1) (Ord. 61-01, passed - - ; Ord. 2017-08, passed 8-22-2017)
Charter reference:
   Qualifications for office, qualifying fee set by ordinance, see Art. III, §
2
§ 32.02 APPLICABILITY OF STATE LAWS.
   The state laws governing election shall apply to all municipal elections in
the town insofar as they do not conflict with the Town Charter and the
provisions of this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 26-2) (Ord. 61-01, passed - -)
§ 32.03 CANDIDATE QUALIFICATIONS PERIOD.
   The Town Clerk shall have qualifying forms available for completion by any
candidate for Town Council who may request such a form. Such qualifying
statements shall not be filed sooner than 12:00 p.m. on the ninety-second day
or later than 12:00 p.m. on the eighty-fourth day prior to the town’s general
election.
(Ord. 2008-04, passed 2-26-2008; Ord. 2020-04, passed 3-24-2020; Ord. 2025-02,
passed 3-25-2025)
Cross-reference:
   Elections, see Charter
CHAPTER 33: FINANCE
Section
General Provisions
   
33.01   Per diem and traveling expenses for Council, employees and authorized
persons
Budget
   
33.15   Preparation and submission
   
33.16   Budget a public record
   
33.17   Budget message
   
33.18   Contents
   
33.19   Anticipated revenues
   
33.20   Surplus
   
33.21   Proposed expenditures; comparison with other years
   
33.22   Budget summary
   
33.23   Works, programs, allotments
   
33.24   Appropriations
   
33.25   Temporary borrowing
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 33.01 PER DIEM AND TRAVELING EXPENSES FOR COUNCIL, EMPLOYEES AND AUTHORIZED
PERSONS.
   (A)   Lodging. All travelers shall be reimbursed for actual lodging expenses
at the single occupancy rate to be substantiated by paid receipts.
   (B)   Meals. All travelers shall be reimbursed for actual expenses,
including tips, meals up to the following amounts:
 
Breakfast $10
Lunch     $15
Dinner    $25
 
   (C)   Total meal allowance. In the event of travel exceeding 24 hours and
requiring an overnight stay away from the town, the total meal subsistence for
a 24-hour period is authorized up to a maximum of $50 per day in lieu of
individual meal allowance rates.
   (D)   Transportation. The use of privately-owned vehicles for official
travel in lieu of public-owned vehicles or common carrier may be authorized by
the town if a public-owned vehicle is not available. Whenever travel is by
privately owned vehicles, the traveler shall be entitled to a mileage allowance
at a fixed rate not to exceed $0.55 per mile or the common carrier fare (coach
class) for travel, to be determined by the Town Manager.
(Ord. 2003-11, passed 8-26-2003)
BUDGET
§ 33.15 PREPARATION AND SUBMISSION.
   The Mayor, at least 60 days prior to the beginning of each budget year,
shall submit to the Town Council a budget and an explanatory budget message in
the form and with the contents provided in this subchapter. For that purpose,
at a date as the Mayor shall determine, the Mayor or an officer designated by
the Mayor shall obtain from the head of each office, department or agency,
estimates of revenue and expenditures of that office, department or agency,
detailed by organization units and character and object of expenditure, and
other supporting data as the Mayor may request, together with an estimate of
all capital projects pending or which the department head believes should be
undertaken within the budget year and as requested within succeeding years. In
preparing the budget, the Mayor may review the estimates, may hold hearings on
the budget and may revise the estimates, as he or she may deem advisable.
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 59-1708, Art. VII, § 2; Ch. 65-2067, § 1) (2000 Code, § 2-
146)
§ 33.16 BUDGET A PUBLIC RECORD.
   The budget and budget message and all supporting schedules shall be a public
record in the office of the Town Clerk, open to public inspection by anyone.
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 59-1708, Art. VII, § 2; Ch. 65-2067, § 1) (2000 Code, § 2-
147)
§ 33.17 BUDGET MESSAGE.
   (A)   Current operations. The budget message submitted by the Mayor to the
Town Council may be explanatory of the budget, shall contain an outline of the
proposed financial policies of the town for the budget year, and may describe
the important features of the budget plan. It may set forth the reasons for
salient changes from the previous year in cost and revenue items and shall
explain the major changes in financial policy.
   (B)   Capital improvements. As a part of the budget message with relation to
the proposed expenditures for down payments and other proposed expenditures for
capital projects stated in the budget, the Mayor may include a statement of
pending capital projects and proposed new capital projects, relating the
respective amounts proposed to be raised by appropriations in the budget and
the respective amounts, if any, proposed to be raised by the issuance of bonds
during the budget year.
   (C)   Capital program. The Mayor may also include in the message or attach
to the message a capital program of proposed capital projects for the
succeeding years as the Council may require.
   (D)   Supporting schedule. Attached to the budget message may be supporting
schedules, exhibits and other explanatory material, in respect to both current
operations and capital improvements, as the Mayor shall believe useful to the
Town Council.
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 59-1708, Art. VII, § 2; Ch. 65-2067, § 1) (2000 Code, § 2-
148)
§ 33.18 CONTENTS.
   The budget shall provide a complete financial plan for the budget year. It
shall contain at a minimum in tabular form detailed estimates of all
anticipated revenues applicable to proposed expenditures, all proposed
expenditures and other requirements in F.S. § 200.065.
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 59-1708, Art. VII, § 2; Ch. 65-2067, § 1) (2000 Code, § 2-
149)
§ 33.19 ANTICIPATED REVENUES.
   Anticipated revenues shall be properly classified as to source. In parallel
columns opposite the several items of anticipated revenues, there shall be
placed the amount of each item in the budget of the last completed fiscal year,
the amounts of the items actually received during the year, the amount of each
item in the budget of the current fiscal year and the amount actually received
to the time of preparing the budget plus receipts for the remainder of the
current fiscal year estimated as accurately as may be.
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 59-1708, Art. VII, § 2; Ch. 65-2067, § 1) (2000 Code, § 2-
150)
§ 33.20 SURPLUS.
   Surplus shall include:
   (A)   Revenue receipts made available by the lapsing of unencumbered
appropriation balances at the beginning of the budget year;
   (B)   Receipts from unanticipated miscellaneous revenues of the preceding
year;
   (C)   Receipts from unanticipated miscellaneous revenues of the preceding
fiscal year in excess of the estimates in the budget; and
   (D)   Receipts during the previous fiscal year from taxes or liens against
which a complete reserve has been established.
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 59-1708, Art. VII, § 2; Ch. 65-2067, § 1) (2000 Code, § 2-
151)
§ 33.21 PROPOSED EXPENDITURES; COMPARISON WITH OTHER YEARS.
   In parallel columns opposite the several items of proposed expenditures,
there shall be placed the amount of each item in the budget of the last
completed fiscal year, the amount of the item in the budget of the current
year, and the amount actually expended to the time of preparing the budget plus
the expenditures for the remainder of the current fiscal year estimated as
accurately as may be.
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 59-1708, Art. VII, § 2; Ch. 65-2067, § 1) (2000 Code, § 2-
152)
§ 33.22 BUDGET SUMMARY.
   At the head of the budget, there shall appear a summary of the budget, which
need not be itemized further than by principal sources of anticipated revenue,
stating separately the amount to be raised by property tax, and by departments
and kinds of expenditures, in a manner as to present to the public a simple and
clear summary of the detailed estimates of the budget.
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 59-1708, Art. VII, § 2; Ch. 65-2067, § 1) (2000 Code, § 2-
153)
§ 33.23 WORKS, PROGRAMS, ALLOTMENTS.
   (A)   Before the beginning of the budget year, the head of each office,
department or agency shall submit to the Mayor, if requested by him or her, a
work program for the year. The program shall show the requested allotments of
the appropriations for the office, department or agency, by monthly period, for
the entire budget year.
   (B)   The Mayor shall review the requested allotments in the light of the
work program of the office, department or agency concerned and may revise,
alter or change the allotments before approving the allotments. The aggregate
of the allotments shall not exceed the total appropriation available to the
office, department or agency for the budget year.
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 59-1708, Art. VII, § 2; Ch. 65-2067, § 1) (2000 Code, § 2-
154)
§ 33.24 APPROPRIATIONS.
   (A)   Transfers. At the request of the Mayor, by resolution, the Town
Council may at any time transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance or
portion of the balance between general classifications of expenditures within
an office, department or agency, or transfer any unencumbered appropriation
balance, or portion of the balance, from one office, department or agency to
another.
   (B)   Lapse at end of year. All appropriations shall lapse at the end of the
budget year to the extent that they shall not have been expended.
   (C)   Emergency appropriations. At any time in any budget year, the Mayor
may, pursuant to this section, make emergency appropriations to meet a pressing
need for public expenditure, for other than a regular recurring requirement, to
protect the public health, safety or welfare. The appropriation shall be by
ordinance adopted by the favorable votes of at least four-fifths of the members
of the Town Council.
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 59-1708, Art. VII, § 2; Ch. 65-2067, § 1) (2000 Code, § 2-
155)
§ 33.25 TEMPORARY BORROWING.
   When deemed necessary the Town Council may, by ordinance, authorize the
issuance of certificates of indebtedness or notes in anticipation of the
collection of taxes of all kinds or of special assessments. The obligations
shall be a first lien upon the proceeds of the taxes or assessments.
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 59-1708, Art. VII, § 2; Ch. 65-2067, § 1) (2000 Code, § 2-
156)
CHAPTER 34: TAXATION
Section
Utility Tax Code
   
34.01   Title; authority for regulation
   
34.02   Definitions
   
34.03   Public service tax on electricity, metered natural gas, metered or
bottled liquified petroleum gas and metered or bottled manufactured gas and
water service
   
34.04   Taxable telecommunications services; tax levied
   
34.05   Liability for failure to collect
   
34.06   Keeping of records
   
34.07   Exemption of records
   
34.08   Late return of tax payments by seller
Recreational Impact Fees
   
34.25   Fee required
   
34.26   Calculation of fees
   
34.27   Credit for private recreation areas
   
34.28   Calculation of credit for acceptable facilities
   
34.29   Credit for the dedication of lands for active recreation uses
   
34.30   Time of payment
   
34.31   Uses of fees paid
Public Facilities Impact Fee
   
34.45   Short title and intent
   
34.46   Fee required
   
34.47   Time of payment
   
34.48   Use of fees paid
   
34.49   Exemptions
   
34.50   Interpretation of public facilities impact fee code; appeals to
Building Board of Adjustment and Appeals
   
34.51   Review
 
   
34.99   Penalty
UTILITY TAX CODE
§ 34.01 TITLE; AUTHORITY FOR REGULATION.
   (A)   Title. This subchapter may be cited as the Town Utility Tax Code.
   (B)   Authority for regulation. This chapter is enacted under the home rules
powers of the town to promoted the public health, safety, welfare and economic
order of the community, by providing for a public service tax, also commonly
known as a utility tax. The tax is adopted pursuant to authority set forth in
Florida Constitution of 1968, Article VII, §§ 1(a) and 9(a), (no tax shall be
levied by a municipality, except as may be permitted by general law); F.S. §§
166.231, 166.233 and 166.234, (general law providing for the levy of a public
service tax), Florida Constitution of 1968, Article VIII, § 2, (municipal home
rule) and F.S. § 166.021 (implementation of municipal home rule), inter alia,
all as the same may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 2001-03, passed 8-26-2001)
§ 34.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FUEL ADJUSTMENT CHARGE. All increases in the cost of utility services to the
ultimate consumer resulting from an increase in the cost of fuel to the utility
subject to October 1, 1973.
   LOCAL TELEPHONE SERVICE. Access to a local telephone system, and the
privilege of telephonic-quality communication with substantially all persons
having telephone or radio telephone stations constituting a part of the local
telephone system, or any facility or service provided in connection with the
service. The term LOCAL TELEPHONE SERVICE does not include any service which is
a toll telephone service (as defined by F.S. § 203.012(7); private
communication service (as defined by F.S. § 203.012(4)); cellular mobile
telephone or telecommunication service (as defined by F.S. § 203.012(5));
specialized mobile radio; or pagers and paging service, including but not
limited to “beepers” and any other form of mobile and portable one-way or two-
way communication; or teletypewriter service (as defined by F.S. § 203.012(6)).
Further, the term LOCAL TELEPHONE SERVICE does not include any public telephone
charges collected on-site, access charges and any customer access line charges
paid to a local telephone company.
   PUBLIC SERVICE TAX. The tax authorized by F.S. §§ 166.231, 166.232, 166.233
and 166.234 on the purchase of:
      (1)   Electricity;
      (2)   Metered natural gas;
      (3)   Metered or bottled liquefied petroleum gas;
      (4)   Metered or bottled manufactured gas; and
      (5)   Telecommunications services, the purchases occurring within the
municipal limits of the town.
   PURCHASE OF ELECTRICITY. The purchase of electricity by the person who will
consume it within the town.
   PURCHASE. Every act or transaction whereby possession of, utilization of, or
control over electricity, metered natural gas, metered or bottled liquefied
petroleum gas, metered or bottled manufactured gas or telecommunications
services, which are subject to a public service tax, becomes vested in the
purchaser within the corporate limits of the town for which payment is made
pursuant to a duty and obligation thereof.
   SELLER. Any person rendering electricity, metered natural gas, metered or
bottled liquefied petroleum gas, metered or bottled manufactured gas or
telecommunications services, which are subject to a public service tax, to a
purchaser.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES. Local telephone service.
(Ord. 2001-03, passed 8-26-2001)
Statutory reference:
   Definitions, see F.S. § 203.012
   Municipalities; public service tax, see F.S. § 166.231
§ 34.03 PUBLIC SERVICE TAX ON ELECTRICITY, METERED NATURAL GAS, METERED OR
BOTTLED LIQUIFIED PETROLEUM GAS AND METERED OR BOTTLED MANUFACTURED GAS AND
WATER SERVICE.
   (A)   There is hereby levied by the town within the corporate limits of the
town on each sale of electricity, metered natural gas, metered or bottled
liquefied petroleum gas and metered or bottled manufactured gas and water
service, a public service tax on the charge made by the seller thereof, which
tax in every case shall be paid by the purchaser (for the use of the town) at
the time of paying the charge therefor. The tax shall be computed on the basis
of 10% of the total charge made by the seller to the purchaser for the service.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of every seller of electricity, metered natural
gas, metered or bottled liquefied petroleum gas or metered or bottled
manufactured gas, to collect from the purchaser for the use of the town, the
tax levied by this subchapter at the time of collecting the selling price for
each transaction. All taxes levied and collected during the preceding month
shall be reported and paid over on or before the fifteenth day of each calendar
month to the Town Manager.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any seller to collect the price of any
purchase of electricity, metered natural gas, metered or bottled liquefied
petroleum gas or metered or bottled manufactured gas, without at the same time,
collecting the tax levied by this subchapter in respect to the purchase(s)
unless the seller shall elect to assume and pay the tax without collecting the
tax from the purchaser.
(Ord. 2001-03, passed 8-26-2001; Ord. 2018-08, passed 9-25-2018) Penalty, see §
34.99
Statutory reference:
   Municipalities; public service tax, see F.S. § 166.231
§ 34.04 TAXABLE TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES; TAX LEVIED.
   (A)   There is hereby levied and imposed by the town, upon every purchase in
the town of taxable telecommunication services, a tax which shall be upon the
purchase within the town of local telephone services at a rate not to exceed
6.65% of the monthly recurring customer service charges.
   (B)   The seller shall be allowed 1% of the amount of the tax collected and
due to the town in the form of a deduction from the amount collected for
remittance. The deduction shall be allowed as compensation for the keeping of
records and for the collection of, and the remitting of, the tax.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of every seller of telecommunications service to
collect from the purchaser for the use of the town, the public service tax
levied by this section at the time of collecting the selling price for each
transaction. All taxes levied and collected during the preceding month shall be
paid over each calendar month to the Town Manager together with a return. The
form of the return shall be determined by the seller; provided, however, that
the return must identify the name and address of the seller, the period of the
return, the amount collected from the sale of taxable telecommunication
services, any collection allowance taken, the amount of the tax remitted with
the return, and the name and telephone number of the person authorized by the
seller to respond to inquiries from the town concerning the seller’s
administration of the tax. The date upon which the return is required to be
filed shall be as set forth in F.S. Ch. 212, as amended from time to time;
provided, that for reasonable cause shown together with the payment of interest
and penalties, as appropriate, the town may grant the seller an extension of
the due date upon written request by the seller.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any seller to collect the price of any
purchase of telecommunication services without at the same time, collecting the
tax levied by this subchapter in respect to the purchase(s), unless the seller
shall elect to assume and pay the tax without collecting the tax from the
purchaser.
(Ord. 2001-03, passed 8-26-2001) Penalty, see §
34.99
Statutory reference:
   Municipalities; public service tax, see F.S. § 166.231
§ 34.05 LIABILITY FOR FAILURE TO COLLECT.
   Any seller failing to collect the public service tax levied pursuant to this
subchapter at the time of collecting the price of any purchase where the seller
has not elected to assume and pay the tax shall be liable to the town for the
amount of the tax in like manner as if the tax had been actually paid to the
seller. The Mayor shall cause to be brought all suits and actions and to take
all proceedings in the name of the town as may be necessary for the recovery of
the tax. The seller, however, shall not be liable for the payment of the tax
upon uncollected charges.
(Ord. 2001-03, passed 8-26-2001)
Statutory reference:
   Municipalities; public service tax, see F.S. § 166.231
§ 34.06 KEEPING OF RECORDS.
   (A)   Every seller of electricity, metered natural gas, metered or bottled
liquefied petroleum gas, metered or bottled manufactured gas or
telecommunications services, shall keep complete records showing all purchases
within the town of the commodities or services, which records shall show the
price charged upon each purchase and the date thereof, all as set forth by F.S.
§ 166.234. The records shall be kept for inspection by the duly authorized
agents of the town during the seller’s normal business hours at the official
location of the seller’s books and records. The duly authorized agents of the
town shall have the right, power and authority to make the transcripts thereof
during the time they may desire. Records shall be retained by the seller for
the statutorily required period.
   (B)   Each meter or measured service of electricity, metered natural gas,
metered or bottled liquefied petroleum gas, metered or bottled manufactured gas
or telephone call, shall constitute a separate purchase.
(Ord. 2001-03, passed 8-26-2001) Penalty, see §
34.99
Statutory reference:
   Public service tax; administrative provisions; rights and remedies, see F.S.
§ 166.234
§ 34.07 EXEMPTION OF RECORDS.
   (A)   General. The United States of America, the state and all counties,
school boards, municipalities, political subdivisions and agencies, boards,
commissions and authorities thereof, and any recognized church in this state
for use exclusively for church purposes, are hereby exempted from payment of
the tax levied by this subchapter.
   (B)   Resale of telecommunication services. The purchase of local telephone
service or other telecommunication services for use in the conduct of a
telecommunication service for hire or otherwise for resale is exempt from the
tax levied by this subchapter.
   (C)   Fuel adjustment charge. The public service tax shall not be levied
against any fuel adjustment charge applicable to the purchase of electricity,
metered natural gas, metered or bottled liquefied petroleum gas or metered or
bottled manufactured gas, provided, that the charge shall be separately stated
on each bill issued by a seller to a purchaser.
   (D)   Telecommunication services; religious institution with a consumer
certificate of exemption. Any religious institution possessing a consumer
certificate of exemption issued pursuant to F.S. Ch. 212 is hereby exempted
from payment of the public service tax levied upon telecommunication services
by this subchapter.
   (E)   Method of asserting exemption. A purchaser who claims an exemption as
set forth in this section shall certify to the seller that the purchaser
qualifies for the exemption, which exemption may encompass all purchases after
a specified date or other multiple purchases. In the event of a claim of
exemption from the public service tax on telecommunications services,
presentation of a F.S. Ch. 212, consumer certification of exemption shall
satisfy the requirements of this division. Copies of the certifications and
consumer certifications of exemption shall be maintained by the seller and made
available upon request to the town.
(Ord. 2001-03, passed 8-26-2001) Penalty, see §
34.99
Statutory reference:
   Municipalities; public service tax, see F.S. § 166.231
§ 34.08 LATE RETURN OF TAX PAYMENTS BY SELLER.
   Interest and penalties may be charged by the town to the seller upon any
late payment of tax revenues or filing of a required return. No interest or
penalty shall be passed thru or passed along to consumer purchasers.
(Ord. 2001-03, passed 8-26-2001) Penalty, see §
34.99
RECREATIONAL IMPACT FEES
§ 34.25 FEE REQUIRED.
   The payment of a fee to the town to be used for the acquisition, expansion,
construction and provision of town recreational facilities shall be required in
the following circumstances:
   (A)   As a condition of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any
newly constructed single-family home. A new single-family home shall be one
which was constructed on a vacant lot or parcel or the reconstruction or
renovation of a building that was not previously occupied as a dwelling unit of
any kind;
   (B)   As a condition for the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for
duplex dwelling units, multi-family dwelling units, townhouse development,
planned residential development for mobile home parks or planned unit
developments where two or more residential dwelling units are to be constructed
on one lot, parcel or tract of property whether under a common ownership or
common beneficial interest or whether one building permit or more than one
building permit is applied; and
   (C)   When additional dwelling units are added to a lot, parcel, tract of
property, thereby increasing the total number of dwelling units to two or more,
the requirements and conditions of this subchapter shall be imposed for all
dwelling units.
(Ord. 2001-08, passed 11-27-2001) Penalty, see §
34.99
§ 34.26 CALCULATION OF FEES.
   (A)   The ultimate density of a proposed development shall bear directly
upon the fee required to be paid. That density shall be determined by
multiplying the maximum number of units shown on the proposed plat or site plan
times the population per unit. The population per unit shall be determined as
follows:
 
Type of Unit  Population per Unit
Single-family 2.4
Multi-family  2.0
 
   (B)   The fee to be paid shall be calculated by multiplying the sum of $120
by the total number of population in the proposed development or unit.
(Example: $120 X 2.4 X 1 unit= $288)
(Ord. 2001-08, passed 11-27-2001)
§ 34.27 CREDIT FOR PRIVATE RECREATION AREAS.
   (A)   When a subdivider or developer provides certain facilities and
improvements suitable for active recreation use of the residents of a proposed
development, the demand for certain local public recreational facilities is
reduced. Where a subdivider or developer provides improvements or facilities as
listed in §
34.28, the developer or subdivider shall receive a credit to be applied against
the cost of providing that particular facility.
   (B)   However, no credit shall be provided for an athletic center. The
credit shall be calculated as follows:
      (1)   The subdivider or developer shall provide the town with detailed
plans and specifications of the improvements and facilities to be constructed,
whereupon, the Town Council shall determine whether the proposed facilities
will reduce the need for additional public recreation facilities;
      (2)   The amount of credit per facility shall be calculated by use of the
following formula:
 
                                                                   amount of
Cost of facility per person (listed in §   persons    number of   dollars
34.043)                                   X per unit X units     = credited
                                                                   against
                                                                   impact fee
 
      (3)   The credit provided for herein shall only be given if the
subdivider or developer guarantees that:
         (a)   The improvements or facilities to be provided are listed in the
table in §
34.28(A) and are suitable for the active recreational use of the residents of
the proposed development; and
         (b)   By written agreement, recorded covenant or restriction, the
continued recreational use of the improvements or facilities is guaranteed.
      (4)   Recreation impact fees credited to a developer, for improvements
eligible for impact fee credits, shall be provided on a lot-by-lot basis. The
impact fee amount shall be reduced equally for each lot, or in the case of
multi-family residential projects each dwelling unit, within the development by
assessing the total impact fee per lot or unit minus the proportionate share of
the credit applied to each lot. Should a subdivider or developer desire, a
recreation impact fee payment agreement may be provided to ensure payment of
fees. The agreement shall be acceptable to the Town Attorney and Town Council
and shall be recorded with the final plat or prior to a certificate of
occupancy for multi-family developments.
(Ord. 2001-08, passed 11-27-2001)
§ 34.28 CALCULATION OF CREDIT FOR ACCEPTABLE FACILITIES.
   (A)   The following facilities shall be acceptable in calculating credit for
developers against the recreation impact fee:
Facility Amount of Credit
Facility                    Amount of Credit
Tennis court                $11.63
Baseball/softball fields    $18.12
Basketball courts           $0.96
Multi-purpose/soccer fields $4.50
Swimming pools              $7.98
Playgrounds                 $7.86
Shuffleboard courts         $0.62
Picnic areas                $0.68
Community building          $30.00
 
   (B)   Calculation of a credit toward the payment of the recreation impact
fee shall be the amount of credit per person times the persons per unit as
described in §
34.26 times the number of dwelling units. This amount may be subtracted from
the required fee if, in the opinion of the leisure services director, the
proposed facilities reduce the need for public facilities.
(Ord. 2001-08, passed 11-27-2001)
§ 34.29 CREDIT FOR THE DEDICATION OF LANDS FOR ACTIVE RECREATION USES.
   (A)   Upon the dedication of two or more acres of land to the town as
hereinafter set forth, a subdivider or developer shall receive a credit against
the fee otherwise required to be paid pursuant to this subchapter.
   (B)   The credit shall be applied as follows:
      (1)   (a)   The credit shall be calculated by the following formula:
 
Fair market value of land dedicated/fee required to be paid = % of credit
 
         (b)   The fee required to be paid pursuant to this subchapter shall be
reduced by the percentage of credit determined by the above formula. If the
percentage of credit is 100% or more, no fee shall be required to be paid.
      (2)   The credit shall become effective upon Town Council acceptance of
the dedication of the land. The land shall not be accepted by the Town Council
unless it finds the land to be suitable for active recreation purposes. In
determining the suitability of the land for active recreation purposes, the
Town Council may consider all factors and variables affecting the suitability,
including, but not limited to:
         (a)   Access from paved public streets;
         (b)   Size;
         (c)   Fair market value;
         (d)   Physical characteristics and qualities;
         (e)   Proximity of the land to other recreation facilities;
         (f)   Availability of town funds to construct active recreation
facilities on the land; and
         (g)   Conformance with the town’s comprehensive plan.
      (3)   The fair market value of the land to be dedicated shall be
established by a formal MAI appraisal which is acceptable to the town. The
appraisal shall be provided by the subdivider or developer at his or her
expense.
      (4)   The land shall be dedicated to the town in fee simple, and shall be
free of any liens or encumbrances.
      (5)   Reduction of impact fees for individual lots shall be provided as
described in §
34.27(B)(4).
(Ord. 2001-08, passed 11-27-2001)
§ 34.30 TIME OF PAYMENT.
   The fee required by this subchapter shall be paid at the time the
certificate of occupancy is issued for each dwelling unit.
(Ord. 2001-08, passed 11-27-2001)
§ 34.31 USES OF FEES PAID.
   The fees paid pursuant to this subchapter shall be segregated and held in
trust by the town in its Recreation Trust Fund. The town shall maintain records
of monies collected adequate to determine the amount contributed to the fund
from each particular development. The funds collected from any development
shall be used only to acquire, construct or provide recreational improvements
or facilities needed or anticipated to be needed by the residents of the
particular development. The town shall maintain records of all funds expended
and the purposes for which they were expended
(Ord. 2001-08, passed 11-27-2001)
PUBLIC FACILITIES IMPACT FEE
§ 34.45 SHORT TITLE AND INTENT.
   (A)   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the Public
Facilities Impact Fee Code.
   (B)   Implementing a regulatory plan that requires new development to pay a
public facilities impact fee that does not exceed a pro rata share of the
reasonably anticipated expansion of police substation facilities, and general
administrative facilities (the “public facilities”) needed to serve new growth
and development is a responsibility of the town in order to carry out the
future land use and capital improvement elements of the town’s comprehensive
plan, as amended and adopted pursuant to F.S. Ch. 163.3161 et seq., and is in
the best interest of the health, safety, economic order, aesthetics and welfare
of the citizens of the town and the region.
   (C)   The purpose of the Public Facilities Impact Fee Code is to enable the
town to allow growth and development to proceed in the town in compliance with
the comprehensive plan, and to regulate growth and development so as to require
growth and development to share in the burden of growth by paying its pro rata
share for the reasonably anticipated expansion costs of the major police
substation and general administrative facilities. The town through this code
seeks to provide an equitable, fair share basis for new and expanded public
facilities commensurate with the impacts and need generated by new development.
   (D)   It is not the purpose of this Public Facilities Impact Fee Code to
collect fees from growth and development in excess of the cost of the
reasonably anticipated improvements to the public facilities needed to serve
the new growth and development. The Town Council hereby finds that the public
facilities impact fee has been determined in a conservative and reasonable
manner.
(Ord. 2007-12, passed 7-24-2007)
§ 34.46 FEE REQUIRED.
   (A)   All new development or an expansion or enlargement of existing
development shall pay a public facilities impact fee to the town to be used to
provide additional capacity improvements needed for general administrative
facilities based on increased demand for services due to growth. The impact fee
shall be paid at the rate set forth below.
Land Use Category Unit of Measure Impact Fee per Unit
Land Use Category                Unit of Measure       Impact Fee per Unit
Residential
   Single-family              Per dwelling          $500
   Multi-family               Per unit              $400
Nonresidential
   General retail             Per 1,000 square feet $250
   Service stations/gas statioPer 1,000 square feet $250
   Eating and drinking        Per 1,000 square feet $250
   Office                     Per 1,000 square feet $250
   Financial/insurance        Per 1,000 square feet $250
   Hotel/motel                Per room              $35
   Motor vehicle sales        Per 1,000 square feet $250
   Industrial                 Per 1,000 square feet $250
   Warehousing                Per 1,000 square feet $250
   Institutional              Per 1,000 square feet $250
 
   (B)   In the event that an applicant contends that the land use for which
the building permit is proposed is not within the above categories or fits
within a different category from that determined by the Building Department,
the Building Official shall render a determination as to the appropriate land
use designation.
   (C)   In the event that the fee amount is calculated based on a use category
that requires assessment of the fee based on increments of square footage, the
Building Official shall calculate the fee based on the number of whole
increments of 1,000 square feet of gross floor area plus a pro rated amount for
the fractional portion of any square footage increment.
   (D)   The Building Official is hereby delegated the authority to compute the
impact fee due and payable pursuant to this section.
   (E)   Upon rendition of any determination made pursuant to this section, an
appeal may be made to the Building Board of Adjustment and Appeals pursuant to
section.
(Ord. 2007-12, passed 7-24-2007) Penalty, see §
34.99
§ 34.47 TIME OF PAYMENT.
   The fee required by this subchapter shall be paid at the time the
certificate of occupancy is issued.
(Ord. 2007-12, passed 7-24-2007) Penalty, see §
34.99
§ 34.48 USE OF FEES PAID.
   The fees paid pursuant to this subchapter shall be segregated and held in
trust by the town in its Public Facilities Impact Fee Fund. The town shall
maintain records of monies collected adequate to determine the amount
contributed to the fund from each particular development. The funds collected
shall be used only to acquire, construct or provide general administrative
facilities needed or anticipated as a result of the new development. The town
shall maintain records of all funds expended and the purposes for which they
were expended.
(Ord. 2007-12, passed 7-24-2007)
§ 34.49 EXEMPTIONS.
   Any building or structure owned by any federal, state, county or local
government entity and intended to be utilized for governmental purposes shall
be exempted from payments of impact fees pursuant to this Public Facilities
Impact Fee Code. Governmentally owned property leased for nongovernmental
purposes shall not be included within this exemption.
(Ord. 2007-12, passed 7-24-2007)
§ 34.50 INTERPRETATION OF PUBLIC FACILITIES IMPACT FEE CODE; APPEALS TO
BUILDING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT AND APPEALS.
   (A)   Interpretation of Public Facilities Impact Fee Code. All questions or
interpretation of this Public Facilities Impact Fee Code shall be first
presented to the Town Engineer. In interpreting this code, the Town Engineer
shall be first guided by the plain meaning of the words and terms in this code
and second by the intent expressed herein. The Town Engineer shall make
interpretations by interpreting the code as a whole and not by taking specific
words of clauses in isolation. Any interpretation shall be subject to rendition
in a written, dated form. Thereafter, the Building Board of Adjustments and
Appeals shall decide appeals from the Town Engineer’s interpretation where it
is alleged that there is error in any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by the Town Engineer in interpreting this code.
   (B)   Decision that may be appealed.
      (1)   Appeals to the Building Board of Adjustment and Appeals may be
taken by the Town Council, the Town Manager or any person aggrieved by any
decision of the following:
         (a)   Interpretation by the Town Engineer of the meaning of wording in
this Public Facilities Impact Fee Code;
         (b)   A determination by the Building Official as to the amount of
impact fee payable, the use category utilized for calculation of the fee
amount, or the amount of square footage calculated for fee assessment; or
         (c)   A determination by the Town Engineer as to any exemption from
the payment of fees payable pursuant to this public facilities impact fee code.
      (2)   A person aggrieved by a decision shall be any person with a claim
to a public facilities impact fee refund, or a property owner or developer or
other person subject to a public facilities impact fee which the person claims
was improperly calculated by the town; claiming a right to a public facilities
impact fee exemption which was disapproved by the town; or claiming an error or
improper determination in interpreting this public facilities impact fee code.
   (C)   Method of appeal. Appeals to the Building Board of Adjustment and
Appeals shall be made within a reasonable time not to exceed 30 days following
the date of rendition of the interpretation or other determination as set forth
in this subchapter by filing with the official making the determination, and
with the Secretary to the Building Board of Adjustment and Appeals, a notice of
appeal specifying the ground thereof. The official making the determination
shall within 15 days thereafter transmit to the Building Board of Adjustments
and Appeals all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed
was taken. The Secretary to the Building Board of Adjustment and Appeals after
receipt of the record shall fix a time for hearing of the appeal within 60 days
and give the public notice thereof at least 15 days in advance of the public
hearing as well as notice to the parties in interest. At the hearing, any party
may appear in person or by agent or attorney.
(Ord. 2007-12, passed 7-24-2007)
§ 34.51 REVIEW.
   This Public Facilities Impact Fee Code shall be reviewed by the Town Council
and the local planning agency every three years. The review shall consider
police and general administrative facility requirements, staffing levels and
actual construction and acquisition costs for work contracted for by the town
and Brevard County. The purpose of this review is to analyze the effects of
inflation on the actual costs of public facilities improvements and to ensure
that the fee charged new land development activity will not exceed its pro rata
share for the reasonably anticipated expansion costs of public facilities
improvements necessitated solely by its presence.
(Ord. 2007-12, passed 7-24-2007)
§ 34.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for
which no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions
of §
10.99.
   (B)   Utility Tax Code; §§
34.01 through
34.08.
      (1)   No penalty shall be assessed against a seller, unless the Mayor
determines the existence of willful neglect, willful negligence or fraud. The
determination may be appealed to the Town Council, if the appeal is filed
within 30 days of the date of the Mayor’s determination. Penalties may be
assessed at a rate of 5% per month of the delinquent tax, not to exceed a total
penalty of 25%, except that in no event shall the penalty for failure to file a
return be less $15. In the case of a fraudulent return or a willful intent to
evade payment of the tax, the seller making the fraudulent return or willfully
attempting to evade payment of the tax, shall be liable for a specific penalty
of 100% of the tax.
      (2)   Interest may be charged at a rate of 1% per month of the delinquent
tax from the date that the tax was due until paid.
      (3)   Interest and penalties shall be computed on the net tax due after
application of any overpayments, and shall be subject to compromise as provided
by law.
(Ord. 81-10, passed 8-11-1981; Ord. 2001-03, passed 8-26-2001)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   [Reserved]
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   [Reserved]
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   ENVIRONMENT
      
92.   WATERWAYS
      
93.   TELECOMMUNICATIONS
      
94.   FERTILIZER USE AND APPLICATION
      
95.   GARAGE SALES
      
96.   PUBLIC CAMPING, SLEEPING AND STORAGE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY ON PUBLIC
PROPERTY
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
   
90.01   County act adopted by reference
   
90.02   County control
   
90.03   Farm animals and fowl
§ 90.01 COUNTY ACT ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   County Ordinance 82-22, as amended, Animal Control Act, is adopted in its
entirety as if set forth in full in this chapter, to be effective within the
town limits.
(2000 Code, § 14-1) (Ord. 83-1, passed 4-26-1983)
§ 90.02 COUNTY CONTROL.
   The county and its duly authorized agents are appointed as the animal
control enforcement entity within the town.
(2000 Code, § 14-2) (Ord. 83-1, passed 4-26-1983)
§ 90.03 FARM ANIMALS AND FOWL.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor, breed or maintain
upon any premises not zoned for agricultural use any of the following: bees,
roosters or chickens, peafowl, turkeys, horses, pigeons, ponies, cattle, goats,
pigs or other fowl or livestock, hereinafter referred to as farm animals.
   (B)   Amortization period. The Town Council recognizes that there are
currently violations of the towns Land Usage Code in that certain farm animals
are located upon property in zoning districts which do not permit farms,
farming, and farm activities. To avoid any immediate undue expense for the
removal of such farm animals the town shall permit the owners of such property
or their tenants, to remove such farm animals by June 1, 2016, hereafter the
“amortization period”. No additional farm animals shall be allowed during the
amortization period; and no new farm animals be substituted for any farm animal
which shall be removed from such property during the amortization period for
whatever reason.
   (C)   Enforcement. Any person who violates the provisions of this section
may be brought before the Code Enforcement Special Magistrate; subject to an
injunction brought in the Circuit Court and any other remedy available to the
town to enforce it’s Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 2016-04, passed 4-26-2016)
CHAPTER 91: ENVIRONMENT
Section
Unsightly, Unsanitary Conditions
   
91.001   Nuisance declared; prohibited
   
91.002   Placement on property of another prohibited
Sanitation
   
91.015   Sanitary Code adopted
   
91.016   Cleaning and depositing of fish on public property prohibited
   
91.017   Discharge of certain water into public sewer system and streets
prohibited; enforcement
   
91.018   Sanitary nuisances
   
91.019   Lot clearance
   
91.020   Appeals
Mortgage Registration Code
   
91.035   Title and purpose
   
91.036   Definitions
   
91.037   Registration of abandoned, foreclosing properties; duty to provide
written notice of abandoned residential property
   
91.038   Maintenance requirements
   
91.039   Security requirements
   
91.040   Opposing, obstructing enforcement officer
   
91.041   Immunity of enforcement officer
   
91.042   Additional immunity
   
91.043   Supplemental provisions
   
91.044   Inspections
   
91.045   Town actions in the event of noncompliance
   
91.046   Lien for costs incurred by the town; foreclosure of lien
   
91.047   Appeal
Noise
   
91.060   Unlawful actions
   
91.061   Specific prohibitions
Junked, Wrecked and Abandoned Property
   
91.075   Definitions
   
91.076   Adoption of supplemental regulations
   
91.077   Interference with enforcement officer; good faith trespass
   
91.078   Right of convicted defendant to redeem property
   
91.079   Prohibitions
   
91.080   When property is deemed abandoned
   
91.081   Evidence of abandonment, junking and the like, of vehicles
   
91.082   Notice
   
91.083   Removal
   
91.084   Persons claiming abandoned property prior to sale
   
91.085   Abandoned property to be sold at auction; notice of auction
   
91.086   Certificate of title to property sold at auction
   
91.087   Disposition of proceeds of sale of abandoned property; recovery of
proceeds
   
91.088   Abandoned property on private property; storage of vehicles
   
91.089   Removal of abandoned, junked vehicles from private property
   
91.090   Dismantled or inoperable motor vehicle
 
   
91.999   Penalty
UNSIGHTLY, UNSANITARY CONDITIONS
§ 91.001 NUISANCE DECLARED; PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The existence, storage, placement, accumulation or abandonment of any
junk, scrap materials, unused or abandoned vehicles, vehicle or machinery
parts, or any other garbage, trash or filth that constitutes a fire hazard,
safety hazard, or unsanitary, dangerous, obnoxious or unsightly condition in
any yard, lot, land, building or premises in the town is declared to be a
nuisance.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any property owner or occupant of any
property or premises in the town to create, continue or permit the existence of
a nuisance as described in division (A) above of this section on his or her
property or premises in the town.
(2000 Code, § 30-1) (Ord. 87-01, passed 4-28-1987) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.002 PLACEMENT ON PROPERTY OF ANOTHER PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed on any
property or premises in the town without the consent of its owner or occupant
any of the materials named in §
91.001(A), whether or not the placement or accumulation constitutes a nuisance
as defined in §
91.001(A).
(2000 Code, § 30-2) (Ord. 87-01, passed 4-28-1987)
SANITATION
§ 91.015 SANITARY CODE ADOPTED.
   The State Sanitary Code set forth in F.S. § 381.031 is adopted as the
sanitary code of the town, and its provisions are incorporated by reference as
though fully set forth herein, subject to any more restrictive provisions of
this code.
(Ord. 2009-02, passed 7-28-2009)
§ 91.016 CLEANING AND DEPOSITING OF FISH ON PUBLIC PROPERTY PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to clean any fish, shell fish,
crustacean or other marine like or to leave fish, shrimp, oysters or any other
debris upon any public property in the town.
(Ord. 2009-02, passed 7-28-2009) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.017 DISCHARGE OF CERTAIN WATER INTO PUBLIC SEWER SYSTEM AND STREETS
PROHIBITED; ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any hazardous,
poisonous or explosive chemical or contaminated industrial process water into
the sanitary or storm sewers at any time. Also, subsurface water generated
during construction, especially during the excavation for swimming pools, must
first be pumped into a settling tank to allow sand and debris to be separated
by gravity before allowing the water to be discharged into the storm sewer
system. Subsequently, the sand and debris will be disposed of along with the
excavated material.
   (B)   Water discharged from any air conditioning is considered industrial
process water and is prohibited from being discharged into the sanitary sewer
system or any body of water.
   (C)   The Mayor shall have the power to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 2009-02, passed 7-28-2009) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.018 SANITARY NUISANCES.
   (1)   Definition. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      SANITARY NUISANCE. The commission of any act by any person or the
keeping, maintaining, propagation, existence or permitting of any thing by any
person by which the life or health of any person, or the health or lives of
persons, may be threatened or impaired, or by which or through which, directly
or indirectly, disease may be caused or the environment of any person rendered
unclean or unwholesome by the act of another or others. The Building Official
or Mayor shall have full power to determine and ascertain what shall constitute
a sanitary nuisance detrimental to the public health.
   (B)   Obnoxious and contaminating odors from businesses. When any business,
occupation or individual is engaged in an activity that generates smoke, gases,
fumes or obnoxious matter, it shall provide for the effective control,
dissipation and authorized disposal of the obnoxious matter or odor.
   (C)   Windblown refuse. It shall be unlawful and shall constitute a sanitary
nuisance for any owner or tenant of property to store or cause to be stored any
rubbish or unused material which would be blown about during heavy winds.
   (D)   Breeding places of mosquitoes. It shall be unlawful and shall
constitute a sanitary nuisance for any person to have, keep, maintain, cause or
permit within the town, any collection of standing or flowing water in which
mosquitoes are likely to breed.
   (E)   Abatement procedure. Abatement of those sanitary nuisances set forth
above shall be by procedure similar to that contained in the section below, §
91.019(C).
(Ord. 2009-02, passed 7-28-2009) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.019 LOT CLEARANCE.
   (A)   Definition. The following definition shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CLEARED AREA. An area free of trash and all undergrowth of the height and
density as not to be readily flammable. Undergrowth shall not include growing
trees, individually or in open groves, free of parasitical plants and
smothering vines.
   (B)   Duty of property owners not to permit accumulations of garbage and
weeds on land. Any person owning or controlling any lot or acreage within the
town is prohibited from permitting the accumulation of garbage or trash
thereon. Further, any person owning or controlling any lot or acreage on which
any structure is located is prohibited from permitting the growth or
accumulation of weeds, grass or underbrush thereon above the height of one
foot, except as specifically protected by state or federal law.
   (C)   Resolution prescribing land to be cleared; notice to property owner;
failure to comply with notice.
      (1)   The Mayor and Town Council may, when necessary for fire protection
or public health, safety and welfare or when upon receipt of a written
complaint by any person concerned, prescribe by resolution the land to be
cleared, and adhere to established procedure to investigate this matter for
notice, timely compliance and the setting of hearing dates.
      (2)   The Mayor may cause notice of the resolution required by this
section to be served in conformity with the procedures provided in F.S. §
162.12 on the owner or his or her agent.
      (3)   Failure to comply with the resolution within 30 days shall be
considered evidence of intention not to comply with the resolution, and the
Mayor, with the concurrence of the Town Council, may proceed to have the lot or
area cleared. When land is cleared by the town, a record of the costs of the
same shall be kept by the Town Clerk. A bill shall be mailed to the land owner
or his or her agent to his or her last known address. If the bill is not paid
within 30 days from the date the bill is sent, the Town Clerk shall certify the
fact to the Town Council together with a copy of the bill and a description of
the property.
      (4)   The cost of clearing land by the town shall be a lien upon the land
invoiced, and the lien shall be enforced by the Town Council in the manner
provided by state law. The Town Clerk shall keep a record of all liens obtained
by the town under the provisions of this division and shall file a notice of
the liens with the clerk of the circuit court. All liens shall bear interest at
the rate of 1% per month until redeemed by the owner.
      (5)   The provisions of this section shall not be construed to require
the town to do any remedial work on any private property within the town, nor
may the town be compelled to perform any remedial work provided for under this
section and the decision to perform such remedial work shall be within the sole
and exclusive discretion of the Town Council.
   (D)   Tree and shrub removal affecting public property or utilities serving
the public.
      (1)   No owner, occupant or lessee of private property, or his or her
agent, shall permit, allow or maintain any dead, diseased, decayed or damaged
trees, shrubs or branches or parts thereof which overhang or interfere with or
may, due to their condition, overhang, interfere with or collapse upon public
sidewalks, public property, public rights-of-way, public or private streets or
roadways or utilities serving the public. The owners, lessees or occupants of
private property also shall remove or trim trees or shrubs or parts thereof
which obstruct public view of traffic or public safety signs located within
public rights of-way. It shall be the responsibility of every property owner or
occupant to maintain trees or shrubs on their property in a safe and healthy
manner, properly trimmed and pruned so to avoid hazards to persons on public
property, to public property or to utilities serving the public.
      (2)   The Building Official or Mayor may seek entry to private property
in order to inspect trees and shrubs upon the property to determine compliance
with this division. The Building Official/Mayor shall first seek the property
owner’s/lessee’s permission to conduct an inspection. Should the property
owner/lessee object to the inspection, the Building Official/Mayor may seek,
from a court of competent jurisdiction, a warrant to inspect the premises in
accordance with this division and applicable state law. Should a condition of
extreme danger or imminent peril to public property, persons on public property
or to utilities serving the public be known to exist or readily apparent, the
warrant requirements of this section may be dispensed with, but only if there
is reasonable cause to believe that the delay involved in compliance with the
warrant requirement would pose an imminent peril or extreme danger to persons
on public property, public property or to utilities serving the public.
      (3)   Upon finding that any tree or shrub or part thereof constitutes a
nuisance, an imminent peril or extreme danger to persons upon public property,
public property or utilities serving the public, the Building Official/Mayor
direct the property owner, lessee or other person to remove, treat or trim the
tree or shrub to a degree and in a manner as the Building Official/Mayor shall
determine will correct the nuisance, imminent peril or extreme danger. Service
of an order by the Mayor to accomplish the foregoing may be in the manner
specified in F.S. § 162.12. The order shall set forth the time limit for
compliance, which shall depend upon the degree of extreme danger, imminent
peril or nuisance created by the tree or shrub. In cases of imminent peril or
extreme danger to public property, persons on public property or to utilities
serving the public, the Mayor shall have the authority to require immediate
compliance.
      (4)   If, at the end of the time period set forth in the order, the tree
or shrub has not been removed or trimmed as directed, it may be declared a
nuisance and the Mayor may have the tree or shrub removed or trimmed as
appropriate to avoid extreme danger or imminent peril. The costs of this
service, including labor, equipment and materials, may be assessed to the
private property owner. A tree or shrub may be deemed a nuisance if it, or any
part of it:
         (a)   Appears dead, decayed, diseased, insect infested, dangerous or
likely to fall on public property, persons on public property or utilities
serving the public;
         (b)   Is not pruned to a height of 14 feet above the street to
accommodate vehicles such as garbage trucks, buses and street maintenance
trucks;
         (c)   Is not pruned to a height of nine feet above the sidewalk;
         (d)   Interferes with sewers;
         (e)   Is in dangerous proximity to interfere with utilities serving
the public; or
         (f)   Interferes with a planned public improvement.
   (E)   Recorded statement constitutes a lien. Where the amount due the town
is not paid by the owner within 30 days after the cutting, trimming and/or
removal of the trees or shrubs performed by or on behalf of the town, under
this section, the Mayor may cause to be recorded in the public records of the
county a sworn statement showing the cost and expenses incurred for the work
done and the date, place and property on which the work was done. The recording
of the sworn statement shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount
due in principal for labor, administrative costs and fees incurred by the town,
plus interest and court costs, if any, for collection, including reasonable
attorney fees, until payment has been made. The costs and expenses shall be
collected in the manner fixed by law for the foreclosure of mortgages. Lien
shall accrue interest at the rate of 12% per annum. Sworn statements recorded
in accordance with the provisions hereof shall be prima facie evidence that all
legal formalities have been complied with and that the work has been done
properly and satisfactorily, and shall be full notice to every person concerned
that the amount of the statement, plus interest, constitutes a charge against
the property designated or described in the statement and that the same is due
and collectible as provided by law.
(Ord. 2009-02, passed 7-28-2009; Ord. 2018-01, passed 2-28-2018) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.020 APPEALS.
   Any persons adversely affected by a decision in the enforcement or
interpretation of any terms or provisions of this subchapter may appeal the
decision to the Town Council. The appeal must be filed within 30 days of the
issuance in writing of the order by the Mayor. The appeal must state the order
appealed from and the precise basis of the appeal. The appeal shall be filed
with the Town Clerk and no fee shall be charged for the appeal. Any person
adversely affected by a decision of the Town Council on appeal may seek relief
in a court of competent jurisdiction by filing a petition for a writ of
certiorari pursuant to the State Rules of Appellate Procedure.
(Ord. 2009-02, passed 7-28-2009)
MORTGAGE REGISTRATION CODE
§ 91.035 TITLE AND PURPOSE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the Town of Palm Shores Mortgage
Registration Code. It is the intent of this subchapter to protect and preserve
public safety, security and quiet enjoyment of occupants, abutters and
neighborhoods by:
   (A)   Requiring all property owners, including lenders, trustees and service
companies, to properly maintain abandoned foreclosing properties; and
   (B)   Regulating the maintenance of abandoned foreclosing, properties to
prevent blighted and unsecured buildings and structures.
(Ord. 2009-04, passed 7-28-2009)
§ 91.036 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED REAL PROPERTY. Real property is abandoned when:
      (1)   Mortgage foreclosure proceedings or tax a sale has been initiated
for that property, and the property is vacant;
      (2)   Where the title was retained by the beneficiary of a mortgage
involved in the foreclosure; or
      (3)   Any properties transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure or
sale.
   DAYS. Consecutive calendar days.
   DEFAULT. When used in reference to a mortgage in DEFAULT means that the
mortgage holder has decided to file a mortgage foreclosure action on the
defaulted mortgage. A mortgage shall not be in DEFAULT until a time as the
mortgagee declares the mortgage to be in DEFAULT either in writing or by its
actions, or commences foreclosure proceedings in court.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any full time law enforcement officer, building
official, fire inspector or code officer employed by the town.
   FORECLOSURE. The process by which a property, placed as security for a real
estate loan, is prepared for sale to satisfy the debt if the borrower defaults.
   INITIATION OF THE FORECLOSURE PROCESS. Taking any of the following actions:
      (1)   Taking possession of real property;
      (2)   Delivering the mortgagee’s notice of intention to foreclose to the
borrower; or
      (3)   Commencing a foreclosure action on a property in Brevard County
Circuit or County Court.
   LOCAL. Within 20 driving miles distance of the property in question.
   MORTGAGEE. The creditor, including but not limited to, service companies,
lenders in a mortgage agreement and any agent, servant or employee of the
mortgagee, or any successor in interest and/or assignee of the mortgagee’s
rights, interests or obligations under the mortgage agreement.
   OWNER. Every person, entity, service company, property manager or real
estate broker, who alone or severally with others:
      (1)   Has legal or equitable title to any dwelling, dwelling unit, mobile
dwelling unit or parcel of land, vacant or otherwise, including a mobile home
park;
      (2)   Has care, charge or control of any dwelling, dwelling unit, mobile
dwelling unit or parcel of land, vacant or otherwise, including a mobile home
park, in any capacity including but not limited to agent, executor, executrix,
administrator, administratix, trustee or guardian of the estate of the holder
of legal title;
      (3)   Is a mortgagee in possession of any property;
      (4)   Is an agent, trustee or other person appointed by the courts and
vested with possession or control of any property;
      (5)   Is an officer or trustee of the association of unit owners of a
condominium; each person is bound to comply with the provisions of these
minimum standards as if he or she were the OWNER. However, this subchapter
shall not apply to a either condominium association created pursuant to F.S.
Ch. 718; a cooperative association created pursuant to F.S. Ch. 719; or a
homeowner’s association created pursuant to F.S. Ch. 720 to the extent that the
association forecloses on or initiates the foreclosure process for unpaid
assessments due or owing to the association. OWNER also means every person who
operates a rooming house; or
      (6)   Is a trustee who holds, owns or controls mortgage loans for
mortgage backed securities transactions and has initiated the foreclosure
process.
   PROPERTY. Any real property, or portion thereof located in the town,
including building or structures situated on the property. For purposes of this
subchapter only, PROPERTY does not include property owned or subject to the
control of the town or any of its governmental bodies.
   SECURING. Measures that assist in making the property inaccessible to
unauthorized persons.
   TOWN. The Town of Palm Shores, Florida.
   TOWN MAYOR. The Mayor of the town or other person(s) designated by the Town
Mayor to carry out the enumerated responsibilities of the Town Mayor in this
subchapter.
   VACANT. Any building/structure that is not occupied by humans beings or is
uninhabited.
(Ord. 2009-04, passed 7-28-2009)
§ 91.037 REGISTRATION OF ABANDONED, FORECLOSING PROPERTIES; DUTY TO PROVIDE
WRITTEN NOTICE OF ABANDONED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY.
   (A) Any mortgagee who holds a mortgage on real property located within the
town shall perform an inspection of the property that is the security for the
mortgage, upon default by the mortgagor or prior to the issuance of a notice of
default. If the property is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, it
shall be deemed abandoned and the mortgagee shall, within ten days of the
inspection, register the property with the Building Department, on forms
provided by the town. Even though the real property may not be vacant, if the
mortgage on the property is in default not later than ten days after the date
that a default is declared by the mortgagee of the mortgage on a particular
parcel of real property, the mortgagee shall register the property with the
code enforcement administrator, or the administrator’s designee, on forms
provided by the town.
   (B)   If the property is occupied but remains in default, it shall be
inspected by the mortgagee or the mortgagee’s designee monthly until the
mortgagor or other party remedies the default.
   (C)   Within ten days of date that the mortgagee declares its mortgage on a
particular parcel of real property to be in default, the mortgagee shall
register the real property with the town and at the time of registration shall
designate in writing to the town a local (located within Brevard County)
property manager to inspect, maintain and secure the real property subject to
the mortgage in default.
   (D)   Registration pursuant to this section shall contain the name of the
mortgagee; the direct mailing address of the mortgagee, e-mail address and
telephone number; the name of the local contact person and the contact person’s
address, e-mail and telephone number. The local property manager shall be
responsible for the inspection, security and maintenance of the property. The
local contact person named in the registration shall be located within Brevard
County and available in Brevard County Monday through Friday between 9:00 a.m.
and 5:00 p.m., holidays and lunch hours excepted, to be contacted by the town.
The town is prohibited from charging for any registration or a modification of
registration.
   (E)   This section shall also apply to properties that have been the subject
of a foreclosure sale where the title was transferred to the beneficiary of a
mortgage involved in the foreclosure and any properties transferred under a
deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale.
   (F)   Properties subject to this section shall remain under the annual
registration requirement, inspection, security and maintenance standards of
this section as long as they remain vacant or subject to having been declared
by a mortgagee to be in default.
   (G)   Any person or other legal entity that has registered a property under
this section must report any change of information contained in the
registration within ten days of the change.
   (H)   Failure of the mortgagee and/or property owner of record to properly
register or to revise from time to time the registration to reflect a change of
circumstances as required by this subchapter is a violation of the town code
and may result in a citation by the town’s enforcement officer.
(Ord. 2009-04, passed 7-28-2009) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.038 MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Properties subject to this subchapter shall be kept free of weeds,
overgrown brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building materials, any
accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers, notices, except those required
by federal, state or local law, discarded personal items included, but not
limited to, furniture, clothing, large and small appliances, printed material
or any other items that give the appearance that the property is abandoned or
not being properly maintained.
   (B)   The property shall be maintained free of graffiti or similar markings
by removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint that matches the color
of the exterior structure.
   (C)   Yards shall be landscaped and maintained pursuant to the standards set
forth in this code.
      (1)   LANDSCAPING. Shall include, but not be limited to, grass, ground
covers, bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings, decorative rock or bark or
artificial turf/sod designed specifically for residential, commercial or
industrial installation, as applicable. LANDSCAPING shall not include weeds,
gravel, broken concrete, asphalt or similar material.
      (2)   MAINTENANCE. Shall include, but not be limited to, watering,
irrigation, cutting and mowing of required landscape and removal of all
trimmings.
   (D)   Pools and spas shall be kept in working order so that pool and spa
water remains free and clear of pollutants and debris. Pools and spas shall
comply with the enclosure requirements of this code and the Florida Building
Code, as amended from time to time.
   (E)   Failure of the mortgagee and/or property owner of record to properly
maintain the property is a violation of the town code and may result in
citation by the town’s enforcement officer.
(Ord. 2009-04, passed 7-28-2009) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.039 SECURITY REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Properties subject to this subchapter shall be maintained in a secure
manner so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons.
   (B)   A SECURE MANNER shall include, but not be limited to, the closure and
locking of windows, doors, gates and other openings of the size that may allow
a child to access the interior of the property and/or structure. Broken windows
shall be secured by reglazing or boarding of the window.
   (C)   If a mortgage on property is in default and has become vacant or
abandoned property, a local property manager shall be designated to perform,
and the local property manager or mortgagee contact person must perform weekly
inspections to verify compliance with the requirements of this section, and any
other applicable laws or town ordinances.
   (D)   At the time that the property becomes abandoned property, it shall be
posted with the name and 24-hour contact phone number of the local property
manager. The posting shall be no less than 18 inches by 24 inches, and shall be
of a font that is legible from a distance of 45 feet. The posting shall contain
the following language:
   THIS PROPERTY IS MANAGED BY:
    TO REPORT PROBLEMS OR CONCERNS CALL: (XXX) XXX-XXXX
   (E)   The posting shall be placed on the interior of a window facing the
street to the front of the property so that it is visible from the street, or
secured to the exterior of the building/structure facing the street to the
front of the property so that it is visible from the street or if no area
exists, on a stake of sufficient size to support the posting in a location that
is at all times visual from the street to the front of the property but not
readily accessible to vandals. Exterior posting shall be constructed of and
printed with weather-resistant materials.
   (F)   Failure of the mortgagee and/or property owner of record to properly
inspect and secure the property, and post and maintain the signage noted in
this section, is a violation of this code and may result in a citation by the
town’s enforcement officer.
(Ord. 2009-04, passed 7-28-2009) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.040 OPPOSING, OBSTRUCTING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   Whoever opposes obstructs or resists any enforcement officer, or any person
authorized by the town, in the discharge of duties as provided in this
subchapter, upon conviction may be punished as provided in §
10.99 of the town code or F.S. Ch. 162.
(Ord. 2009-04, passed 7-28-2009) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.041 IMMUNITY OF ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   Any enforcement officer, or any person authorized by the Town Mayor, shall
be immune from prosecution, civil or criminal, for reasonable, good faith
trespass upon real property while in the discharge of duties imposed by this
subchapter.
(Ord. 2009-04, passed 7-28-2009)
§ 91.042 ADDITIONAL IMMUNITY.
   The enforcement officer shall have authority to require the mortgagee and/or
owner of record of any property affected by this section, to implement
additional maintenance and/or security measures including, but not limited to,
securing any and all door, window or other openings, employment of an on-site
security guard, or other measures as may be reasonably required to prevent a
decline of the property.
(Ord. 2009-04, passed 7-28-2009)
§ 91.043 SUPPLEMENTAL PROVISIONS.
   Nothing contained in this subchapter shall prohibit the town from enforcing
its codes by any other means, including, but not limited to, abatement as
otherwise provided by town code.
(Ord. 2009-04, passed 7-28-2009)
§ 91.044 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   The Building Department shall have the authority and the duty to
inspect properties subject to this subchapter for compliance and to issue
citations for any violations.
   (B)   The Building Department shall have the discretion to determine when
and how the inspections are to be made, provided that its policies are
reasonably calculated to ensure that this subchapter is enforced.
(Ord. 2009-04, passed 7-28-2009)
§ 91.045 TOWN ACTIONS IN THE EVENT OF NONCOMPLIANCE.
   (A)   If the town’s enforcement officer determines that the condition of the
property presents an immediate threat to the health safety and welfare of the
citizens of the town, he or she may cause a notice of the noncompliance to be
delivered to owner and/or mortgagee of the property of which the noncompliance
exists. The notice shall provide a reasonable time determined by the
enforcement officer in which the noncompliance in question shall be corrected.
   (B)   If the noncompliance is not corrected within the time set forth in the
notice provided by the enforcement officer, the town shall have the right and
authority, but not the obligation, to cause the violation to be corrected with
the use of town personnel or private contractors. In that event, the town shall
pay the costs of the correction, and the enforcement officer shall submit an
invoice for the costs to the owner and/or occupant of the property to whom the
original notice of noncompliance was addressed.
(Ord. 2009-04, passed 7-28-2009)
§ 91.046 LIEN FOR COSTS INCURRED BY THE TOWN; FORECLOSURE OF LIEN.
   (A)   If the town submits an invoice for the correction of a violation which
has been determined to be an immediate threat to the health, safety and welfare
of the citizens of the town to an owner and/or mortgagee of property, and the
invoice remains unpaid for a period of 30 days after the date of the invoice,
the Town Mayor shall cause to be recorded in the public records of Brevard
County a sworn statement showing the cost and expenses for the work which was
the subject of the invoice and showing the date, place and legal description of
the property on which the work was done. The recording of the sworn statement
shall constitute a lien on the property described therein, to the extent
permitted by law, for the amount due as set forth in the invoice, plus interest
at the legal rate from the date of the invoice. A copy of the recorded
statement shall be furnished to the property owner and/or occupant to whom the
original notice of noncompliance was addressed.
   (B)   If the amount set forth in the recorded statement is not paid within
30 days of the date of recording, the town shall have a right to bring legal
action to foreclose the lien or may bring any other action to enforce the
town’s right to reimbursement for the costs of correcting a violation herein.
The legal proceedings shall be brought in the manner fixed by law for the
foreclosure of mortgages or collection of monies owed and the town shall be
entitled to an award of attorney’s fees and court costs in addition to all
other sums recovered in the proceeding.
(Ord. 2009-04, passed 7-28-2009)
§ 91.047 APPEAL.
   Any person aggrieved by the requirements of this subchapter may seek an
administrative appeal to the Town Mayor. Any person aggrieved by a final
decision issued under this subchapter by the town, may seek relief in any court
of competent jurisdiction as provided by the laws of this state.
(Ord. 2009-04, passed 7-28-2009)
NOISE
§ 91.060 UNLAWFUL ACTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or
continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise that either
annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or
safety of others.
(2000 Code, § 30-66) (Ord. 87-01, passed 4-28-1987) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.061 SPECIFIC PROHIBITIONS.
   The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and
unnecessary noises in violation of this subchapter, and unlawful; but this
enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
   (A)   Horns, signaling devices.
      (1)   The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile,
motorcycle, bus, locomotive or other vehicle within the town except as a danger
warning; the creation by means of any signaling device of any unreasonably loud
or harsh sound;
      (2)   The sounding of any device for an unnecessary and unreasonable
period of time;
      (3)   The use of any signaling device except one operated by hand or
electricity;
      (4)   The use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine
exhaust; and
      (5)   The use of any signaling device when traffic is for any reason held
up.
   (B)   Radios, phonographs and the like. The using, operating or permitting
to be played, used or operated of any radio receiving set, musical instrument,
phonograph or other machine or device of and for the producing or reproducing
of sound in a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the
neighboring inhabitants at any time with louder volume than is necessary for
convenience in hearing for the persons who are in the room, vehicle or chamber
in which the machine or device is operated and who are voluntary listeners. The
operation of any set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in a manner as to be plainly audible to the
nearest occupied dwelling shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this
division; however, string music, mechanical phonograph or radio music may be
provided by a vendor of intoxicating beverages, duly licensed by the town, up
to not later than 12:00 midnight, and by operator of nightclubs duly licensed
as such under appropriate ordinances of the town, up to not later than 12:00
midnight; however, in all the above exceptions it shall be unlawful for the
sound of the music, mechanical phonograph or radio, or entertainment, at any
time during the hours of operation to be audible a distance of more than 50
feet from the exterior wall of premises operated by the licensed vendor or
operator; and it shall be the responsibility of the vendor or operator to
ensure that the premises operated by him or her complies with this provision.
   (C)   Loudspeakers, amplifiers for advertising. The using, operating or
permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio receiving set, musical
instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device
for the producing or reproducing of sound that is cast upon the public streets
for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the
public to any building or structure; however, nothing in this division shall be
construed as a prohibition against the use and operation of loudspeakers or
amplifiers or other machines or devices for producing or reproducing of sound
when the equipment is used in conjunction with parades, charitable affairs, or
municipal uses or purposes for which proper permits have been issued.
   (D)   Yelling, shouting and the like. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling
or singing on the public streets, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any
occupied dwelling and businesses, or of any persons in the vicinity.
   (E)   Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam
engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motorboat or motor vehicle
except through a muffler or other device that will effectively prevent loud or
explosive noises.
   (F)   Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or
vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in a manner as to create a loud and
unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise.
   (G)   Construction or repairing of buildings. The erection (including
excavating), demolition, alteration or repair of any building between the hours
of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. so as to annoy or disturb the quiet of the
immediate neighbors, except during emergency situations in which loss of life
or property is imminent.
   (H)   Schools, courts, churches, hospitals. The creation of any excessive
noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or
court while in use, or adjacent to any hospital, that unreasonably interferes
with the workings of the institution, or that disturbs or unduly annoys
patients in the hospital, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in the
streets indicating that the same is a school, hospital, church or court street.
   (I)   Hawkers, peddlers. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and
vendors that disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood.
   (J)   Drums. The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the
purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise for any performance, show
or sale; however, nothing in this division shall be construed as a prohibition
against the use and operation of drums or other instruments or device for the
purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise when the equipment is used
in conjunction with parades, charitable affairs or municipal uses or purposes
for which proper permits have been issued.
   (K)   Piledrivers, hammers and the like. The operation between the hours of
6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any piledriver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer,
derrick, steam or electric hoist or other appliance the use of which is
attended by loud or unusual noise.
   (L)   Blowers. The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan for
any internal combustion engine the operation of which causes noise due to the
explosion of operating gases or fluids unless the noise from the blower or fan
is muffled and the engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to
deaden the noise.
(2000 Code, § 30-67) (Ord. 87-01, passed 4-28-1987) Penalty, see §
91.999
JUNKED, WRECKED AND ABANDONED PROPERTY
§ 91.075 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED PROPERTY. Any property which has been left unenclosed from the
elements and shall include, but not be limited to: unregistered or nontagged
vehicles, old and dilapidated modes of conveyance such as automobiles, trucks,
tractors, watercraft, wagons and other kind of vehicles and parts thereof,
household appliances, scrap building materials, scrap contractor’s equipment,
tanks, casks, cans, barrels, boxes, drums, piping bottles, glass, old iron
machinery, guns, pistols, rifles, bicycles, tags, paper, excelsior, hair,
mattresses, beds and bedding or any other kind of scrap or waste, rubbish,
trash, junk or unsightly or unsanitary matter.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. The Building Official or any other officer designated
by law, Charter, ordinance or resolution of the town to enforce the provision
of the Town Charter, resolutions or ordinances.
   INOPERABLE CONDITION. Any condition or disability of a vehicle which
disables or prevents its normal operation for a continuous period of 24 hours
or more.
   MAJOR REPAIR.
      (1)   Any painting accomplished by spraying, whether by aerosol
application or by mechanical or electrical spray application;
      (2)   Any sheet metal work or other repair work to the body of a vehicle;
and/or
      (3)   Any mechanical repair of any nature which disables a vehicle or
prevents its normal use or operation for a continuous period of 24 hours or
more.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Lands and improvements owned by the federal government, the
state, the county or the municipalities within the county and includes
buildings, grounds, yards, playgrounds, streets, sidewalks, parkways, rights-
of-way and other similar property.
   VEHICLE. Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a highway or street. The term VEHICLE shall include
both motor vehicles and trailers as defined in F.S. § 316.003, but shall
expressly exclude bicycles and mopeds.
(2000 Code, § 30-87) (Ord. 97-08, passed 4-20-1998)
§ 91.076 ADOPTION OF SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS.
   There is adopted by reference by the town for the purpose of prescribing a
supplemental procedure for removal and destruction of certain abandoned
property F.S. § 705.103, save and except the portions as may be amended in this
subchapter, of which not less than three copies have been and are now filed in
the office of the Town Clerk. The same is adopted and incorporated as fully as
if set forth at length. The provisions therein shall be controlling within the
area of jurisdiction of the town.
(2000 Code, § 30-88) (Ord. 97-08, passed 4-20-1998)
§ 91.077 INTERFERENCE WITH ENFORCEMENT OFFICER; GOOD FAITH TRESPASS.
   (A)   Whoever opposes, obstructs or resists any enforcement officer or any
person authorized by the enforcement officer or Town Council in the discharge
of his or her duties as provided in this subchapter shall be punished upon
conviction as provided by law.
   (B)   Any enforcement officer or any person authorized by the enforcement
officer shall be immune from prosecution, civic or criminal, for reasonable,
good faith trespass upon real property while in the discharge of duties imposed
by this subchapter.
(2000 Code, § 30-89) (Ord. 97-08, passed 4-20-1998) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.078 RIGHT OF CONVICTED DEFENDANT TO REDEEM PROPERTY.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as giving the right to any
convicted defendant to redeem any property as defined in this chapter where the
property was used in violation of the statutes of the state or the ordinances
of the town.
(2000 Code, § 30-90) (Ord. 97-08, passed 4-20-1998)
§ 91.079 PROHIBITIONS.
   The storage or stockpile of abandoned property within the town is strictly
prohibited on either public or private property.
(2000 Code, § 30-91) (Ord. 97-08, passed 4-20-1998) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.080 WHEN PROPERTY IS DEEMED ABANDONED.
   The leaving of property on any public right-of-way or other public lands
within the town for a continuous period of 48 hours shall be prima facie
evidence that the property has been abandoned.
(2000 Code, § 30-92) (Ord. 97-08, passed 4-20-1998) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.081 EVIDENCE OF ABANDONMENT, JUNKING AND THE LIKE, OF VEHICLES.
   The absence of a license plate for the current year and/or the absence of a
current motor vehicle registration shall be prima facie evidence that the
vehicle is abandoned, junked or discarded.
(2000 Code, § 30-93) (Ord. 97-08, passed 4-20-1998)
§ 91.082 NOTICE.
   (A)   Whenever the enforcement officer of the town shall ascertain that an
article of abandoned property is present on public property within the town, he
or she shall cause a notice to be placed upon the article in the following
form:
   NOTICE TO THE OWNER(S) AND ALL PERSONS
   INTERESTED IN THE ATTACHED PROPERTY
   This property, to wit: (brief description) is unlawfully upon (public)
property know as (brief description of location) and being in violation of §§
91.075 through
91.090 of the code of ordinances for the Town of Palm Shores and must be
removed within ten days from the date of this notice; otherwise it shall be
presumed to be abandoned property and will be removed, disposed of and/or
destroyed by order of the Town of Palm Shores.
                     Dated this______________________________________________
                     Signed:________________________________________________
                           (Title, address, telephone number of enforcement
officer)
   (B)   In addition to posting a notice as required in division (A) above of
this section, a notice shall also be sent to the registered owner of the
abandoned property, if ascertainable through reasonable investigation by the
enforcement officer.
   (C)   Alternatively, the enforcement officer may enforce violations of this
section pursuant to provisions of state law and ordinances of the town
providing for code enforcement through citation. Use of this method of code
enforcement is in addition to and may be used as an alternative to the method
of enforcement set forth in the divisions (A) and (B) above of this section.
Notices as required by state statute and town ordinances shall be used for this
division and the notice requirements as provided in divisions (A) and (B) above
of this section shall not be required.
(2000 Code, § 30-94) (Ord. 97-08, passed 4-20-1998)
§ 91.083 REMOVAL.
   If at the end of ten days after posting of notice as provided in this
subchapter, the owner or any person interested in the abandoned article or
articles has not removed the articles, the enforcement officer may cause the
article of abandoned property to be removed and destroyed and salvage value, if
any, shall be retained by the town to be applied against the cost of removal
and destruction thereof.
(2000 Code, § 30-95) (Ord. 97-08, passed 4-20-1998)
§ 91.084 PERSONS CLAIMING ABANDONED PROPERTY PRIOR TO SALE.
   (A)   Any person having a claim upon property which has been abandoned may
take possession of same at any time prior to the sale provided for in this
subchapter, but the person shall reimburse the General Fund of the town for all
reasonable expenses for storage or other expenses in connection therewith.
   (B)   If any property shall be sold as provided in this section, the
proceeds of the sale after paying all costs actually expended for advertising
or otherwise in the sale shall be deposited in the General Fund of the town.
(2000 Code, § 30-96) (Ord. 97-08, passed 4-20-1998)
§ 91.085 ABANDONED PROPERTY TO BE SOLD AT AUCTION; NOTICE OF AUCTION.
   All property abandoned on public or private lands which has been removed by
the town as set forth in the subchapter shall be disposed of in the following
manner:
   (A)   If the residence or address of the owner or any person holding a lien
upon the property cannot be ascertained, or if the owner or person holding a
lien upon the property fails to take possession of the property within 60 days
after the mailing of a notice provided for in this section, the property shall
be sold at public auction by the town at some place within the town limits; and
   (B)   Prior to the sale, a notice shall be published in some newspaper,
published in the town, publication to be at least 70 days prior to the date of
the sale. The publication shall give the time and place of sale and description
of the property to be sold. A copy of the notice shall be mailed to the owner
and each person holding a lien on the property, if the address of the person is
known. The notice shall be mailed 70 days prior to the date of the sale.
(2000 Code, § 30-97) (Ord. 97-08, passed 4-20-1998)
§ 91.086 CERTIFICATE OF TITLE TO PROPERTY SOLD AT AUCTION.
   (A)   The town shall not guarantee title to property or deliver a title of
ownership to property sold pursuant to §
91.085, but shall furnish the purchaser with a certificate in substantially the
following form:
   CERTIFICATE OF SALE
   Town of Palm Shores
   Palm Shores, Florida 32940
   This is to certify that the following described property was abandoned in
the Town of Palm Shores, Brevard County, Florida, and was placed in the custody
of the town where it was held for 60 days, after which time, it having been
impossible to find the owner of the same, this property was sold to the highest
bidder after legal advertisement. This CERTIFICATE OF SALE is therefore issued
to ________ residing at ________.
      Property:
________________________________________________________________
      Dated at Palm Shores, Brevard County, Florida, this ________ day of ____,
________.
                                          By:__________________________
                                          Town Clerk, Town of Palm Shores
   (B)   This form is to be in duplicate. The original shall be given to the
purchaser and the duplicate bound in a book by the Town Clerk.
(2000 Code, § 30-98) (Ord. 97-08, passed 4-20-1998)
§ 91.087 DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS OF SALE OF ABANDONED PROPERTY; RECOVERY OF
PROCEEDS.
   If any abandoned property is sold as provided in this chapter, the proceeds
of the sale, after paying all the costs actually expended for advertising or
otherwise in the sale, shall be deposited in the General Fund of the town. The
proceeds of any sale deposited in the General Fund of the town shall not be
expended or disbursed for 90 days after the date of the sale, and at any time
during the period the owner or any person having an interest in the property
may upon making proof of the ownership or interest recover back from the
General Fund the proceeds of the sale, less all the expenses of caring for the
property.
(2000 Code, § 30-99) (Ord. 97-08, passed 4-20-1998)
§ 91.088 ABANDONED PROPERTY ON PRIVATE PROPERTY; STORAGE OF VEHICLES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, either as owner, occupant, lessee,
agent, tenant or otherwise, to store or deposit or cause or permit to be stored
or deposited any abandoned, junked or discarded motor vehicles, or junked or
discarded trailer, watercraft or any other vehicle, with or without motor
power, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor
vehicle, upon any public or private property within the town.
(2000 Code, § 30-100) (Ord. 97-08, passed 4-20-1998) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.089 REMOVAL OF ABANDONED, JUNKED VEHICLES FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   If any abandoned property is located on private property other than those
premises licensed for that use, located with the town, the enforcement official
shall cause the abandoned property to be removed upon ten days’ written notice
to the owner or occupant of any premises upon which the motor vehicle, trailer
or other vehicle is stored or deposited, or to the owner thereof if the
identity of the owner of the motor vehicle can be ascertained through license
plates or otherwise. If the motor vehicle, trailer, boat or other vehicle is
not removed after the ten days’ written notice, the enforcement official shall
remove the same or cause the removal and disposal at public sale at the cost of
the owner or occupant of the premises, or the owner of the motor vehicle,
trailer or other vehicle, if the owner can be ascertained.
(2000 Code, § 30-101) (Ord. 97-08, passed 4-20-1998)
§ 91.090 DISMANTLED OR INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE.
   No person except a duly licensed automotive repair establishment shall for
any purpose keep, retain, store or place at any one time more than one motor
vehicle which has been wrecked or dismantled or is in an inoperable condition
upon any lot, parcel or tract of land in the town for a period not to exceed 60
days, unless the vehicle is kept within a fully enclosed building; nor shall
any person, except a duly licensed automotive repair establishment, repair,
rebuild, dismantle or tear down more than one motor vehicle at any one time
upon any lot, parcel or tract of land in the town for a period not to exceed 60
days, except within a fully enclosed building.
(2000 Code, § 30-102) (Ord. 97-08, passed 4-20-1998) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for
which no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions
of §
10.99.
   (B)   Mortgage Registration Code. Violations of §§
91.035 through
91.047 may be either cited, reported and considered pursuant to the provisions
of §
10.99, or may be remedied as provided in §§
91.045 and
91.046. Each day a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
(Ord. 2009-04, passed 7-28-2009)
CHAPTER 92: WATERWAYS
Section
Boats
   
92.01   Horsepower limitation on motorboats
BOATS
§ 92.01 HORSEPOWER LIMITATION ON MOTORBOATS.
   No motorboat shall be operated by commercial owners or operators of
motorboats that has an engine of more than 15 hp powering it.
(2000 Code, § 42-31) (Ord. 89-04, passed 4-25-1989) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 93: TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
93.01   Title
   
93.02   Intent and purpose
   
93.03   Definitions
   
93.04   Registration for placing or maintaining communications facilities in
public rights-of-way
   
93.05   Permit for placing or maintaining communications facilities in public
rights-of-way
   
93.06   Notice of transfer, sale or assignment of assets in public rights-of-
way
   
93.07   Placement or maintenance of a communications facilities in public
rights-of-way
   
93.08   Existing communications facilities in public rights-of-way
   
93.09   Insurance
   
93.10   Construction bond
   
93.11   Enforcement remedies
   
93.12   Abandonment of a communications facility
   
93.13   Suspension of permits
   
93.14   Appeals
   
93.15   Involuntary termination of registration
   
93.16   Indemnification
   
93.17   Security Fund
   
93.18   Force majeure
   
93.19   Reservation of rights and remedies
Small Wireless Facilities in Rights-of-Way
   
93.30   Definitions; purpose
   
93.31   Penalty
   
93.32   Emergency repair or removal
   
93.33   Small wireless facilities and support structures
   
93.34   Permit application
   
93.35   Application and review procedure
   
93.36   Bonding requirements
   
93.37   Indemnification and insurance
   
93.38   Waivers
   
93.39   Appeals
   
93.40   Abandonment, termination and removal
§ 93.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Town of Palm Shores
Communications Right-of-Way Code.
(Ord. 2010-01, passed 1-26-2010)
§ 93.02 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   It is the intent of the town to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare by providing for the placement or maintenance of communications
facilities in the public rights-of-way within the town; adopting and
administering reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with state and
federal law, including F.S. § 337.401, as amended from time to time, Florida
Constitution of 1968, Article VIII, section 2, F.S. §§ 166.011 et seq., as the
same may be amended from time to time (municipal home-rule authority), and in
accordance with the provisions of the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996,
and other federal and state law; establishing reasonable rules and regulations
necessary to manage the placement or maintenance of communications facilities
in the public rights-of-way by all communications services providers; and
minimizing disruption to the public rights-of-way. In regulating its public
rights-of-way, the town shall be governed by and shall comply with all
applicable federal and state laws.
(Ord. 2010-01, passed 1-26-2010)
§ 93.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONMENT. The permanent cessation of all uses of a communications
facility; provided that this term shall not include cessation of all uses of a
facility within a physical structure where the physical structure continues to
be used. By way of example, and not limitation, cessation of all use of a cable
within a conduit, where the conduit continues to be used, shall not be an
ABANDONMENT of a facility in public rights-of-way.
   COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY or FACILITY or COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM or SYSTEM. Any
permanent or temporary plant, equipment and property, including but not limited
to amplifiers, cables, wires, conduits, ducts, fiber optics, head end, poles
(excluding mono poles), antennae, converters, splice boxes, cabinets, hand
holes, manholes, vaults, tower, drains, surface location markers,
appurtenances, and other equipment or pathway placed or maintained or to be
placed or maintained in the public rights-of-way of the town and used or
capable of being used to transmit, convey, route, receive, distribute, provide
or offer communications services. A COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY shall not include
any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric
utility systems, or a facility that serves only subscribers in one or more
multiple unit dwellings under common ownership or control, unless such facility
or facilities uses any public rights-of-way.
   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES.  The transmission, conveyance or routing of voice,
data, audio, video, or any other information or signals to a point, or between
or among points, by or through any electronic, radio, satellite, cable,
optical, microwave, or other medium or method now in existence or hereafter
devised, regardless of the protocol used for such transmission or conveyance.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, for purposes of this chapter “cable service”, as
defined in F.S. § 202.11(1), as amended from time to time, is included in the
definition of COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES, and cable service providers may be
subject to other ordinances, resolutions, and regulations of the town.
   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES PROVIDER. Any person, including a municipality or
county, providing communications services through the placement or maintenance
of a communications facility in public rights-of-way. COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES
PROVIDER shall also include any person, including a municipality or county,
that places or maintains a communications facility in public rights-of-way but
does not provide communications services. COMMUNICATION SERVICES PROVIDER shall
not include any cable television provider that has a current cable television
franchise agreement with the town on the date this chapter is adopted, however,
upon the expiration of such franchise agreement and in the event the franchise
agreement is not renewed in accordance with federal law, the term COMMUNICATION
SERVICES PROVIDER shall also include cable television providers.
   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission and any legally appointed or
elected successor.
   IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY or IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY. In, on, over, under
or across the public rights-of-way.
   MAINTENANCE. In reference to the placement or maintenance of communications
facilities in the public rights-of-way act(s) including but not limited to
installation, operation, removal, repair, improvement, expansion,
rehabilitation, construction, deactivation, or reactivation of communications
facility. Any act or omission to act that is argued or claimed to be an
abandonment of a communication facilities within the public right-of-way which
is not specifically approved in writing by the town shall not be construed to
be interpreted as an abandonment of a communications facilities.
   PLACE OR MAINTAIN or PLACEMENT OR MAINTENANCE or PLACING OR MAINTAINING. To
erect, construct, install, maintain, place, repair, extend, expand, remove,
occupy, locate, operate, activate, reactivate, deactivate, rehabilitate, or
relocate. A communications services provider that owns or exercises physical
control over communications facilities in public rights-of-way, such as the
physical control to maintain and repair, is PLACING OR MAINTAINING the
facilities. A person providing service only through resale or only through use
of a third party’s unbundled network elements is not PLACING OR MAINTAINING the
communications facilities through which such service is provided. The
transmission and receipt of radio frequency signals through the airspace of the
public rights-of-way does not constitute PLACING OR MAINTAINING facilities in
the public rights-of-way.
   PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY. A public right-of-way, public utility easement,
highway, street, bridge, tunnel, sidewalk, waterway, alley, or public property
for which the town is the authority that has jurisdiction and control and may
lawfully grant access to pursuant to applicable law, and includes the surface,
the airspace over the surface and the area below the surface. The term PUBLIC
RIGHTS-OF-WAY shall not include private property. The term PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
shall not include any real or personal town property except as described above
and shall not include town buildings, fixtures, poles, conduits, facilities or
other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in
the public rights-of-way. No reference in this chapter to the PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-
WAY shall be deemed to be a representation or guarantee by the town that its
title to any property is sufficient to permit its use for the purpose of
installing or operating a communications system, and the registrant shall be
deemed to gain only such rights to use the public right-of-way in the town as
the town may have the undisputed right and power to give.
   REGISTRANT. A communications services provider, whether natural, corporate,
or otherwise, domestic or foreign, that has registered with the town in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and the lawful successor,
transferee, or assignee of such person.
   TRANSFER. The disposal by the registrant, directly or indirectly, by gift,
assignment, voluntary sale, merger, consolidation or otherwise, of 20% or more
at one time of the ownership or controlling interest in the system, or 35%
cumulatively over the term of the permit of such interests to a corporation,
partnership, limited partnership, trust or association, or person or group of
persons acting in concert or a change in control.
(Ord. 2010-01, passed 1-26-2010)
§ 93.04 REGISTRATION FOR PLACING OR MAINTAINING COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES IN
PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   (A)   Registration required. A communications services provider that desires
to place or maintain a communications facility in public rights-of-way in the
town shall first register with the Town Clerk in accordance with this chapter.
No registrant shall place or maintain any communications facility in a public
right-of-way without a permit to do so issued by the town.
   (B)   Registration rights in addition to other requirements. A registration
shall not convey any title, equitable or legal, to the registrant in the public
rights-of-way. Registration under this chapter governs only the placement or
maintenance of communications facilities in public rights-of-way. Registration
does not excuse a communications services provider from obtaining appropriate
access or pole attachment agreements before locating its facilities on the
town’s or another person’s facilities. Registration does not excuse a
communications services provider from complying with all applicable town
ordinances, codes or regulations, including this chapter. Other ordinances,
codes or regulations may apply to the placement or maintenance in the rights-
of-way of facilities that are not communications facilities.
   (C)   Registration information required. Each communications services
provider that desires to place or maintain a communications facility in public
rights-of-way in the town shall file a single registration with the town which
shall include the following information:
      (1)   Name of the applicant;
      (2)   Name, address and telephone number of the applicant’s primary
contact person in connection with the registration, and the person to contact
in case of an emergency;
      (3)   Evidence of the insurance coverage required under this chapter and
acknowledgment that registrant has received and reviewed a copy of this
chapter, which acknowledgment shall not be deemed an agreement;
      (4)   The number of the applicant’s certificate of authorization or
license to provide communications services issued by the state public service
commission, the Federal Communications Commission, or other federal or state
authority, if any; and
      (5)   For an applicant that does not provide a state public service
commission certificate of authorization number, if the applicant is a
corporation, proof of authority to do business in the state, such as the number
of the certificate from or filing with the state department of state.
   (D)   Registration application fees. No registration application fees shall
be imposed.
   (E)   Registration does not give right to install and maintain facilities.
Registration does not in and of itself establish a right to place or maintain
or priority for the placement or maintenance of a communications facility in
the public rights-of-way within the town, but shall establish for the
registrant a right to apply for a permit to place or maintain a communications
facility. Registrations are expressly subject to any future amendment to or
replacement of this chapter and further subject to any additional town
ordinances, as well as any state or federal laws that may be enacted.
   (F)   Renewal of registration. A registrant shall renew its registration
with the Town Clerk by October 1 of even numbered years in accordance with the
registration requirements in this chapter, except that a registrant that
initially registers during the even numbered year when renewal would be due or
the odd numbered year immediately preceding such even numbered year shall not
be required to renew until the next even numbered year. Within 30 days of any
change in the information required to be submitted pursuant to division (C), a
registrant shall provide updated information to the town. If no information in
the then-existing registration has changed, the renewal may state that no
information has changed. Failure to renew a registration may result in the town
restricting the issuance of additional permits until the communications
services provider has complied with the registration requirements of this
chapter.
   (G)   The town shall review the information submitted by the applicant. Such
review shall be by the Mayor or designee. If the applicant submits information
in accordance with division (C) above, the registration shall be effective and
the town shall notify the applicant of the effectiveness of registration in
writing. If the town determines that the information has not been submitted in
accordance with division (C) above, the Mayor shall notify the applicant of the
non-effectiveness of registration, and reasons for the non-effectiveness, in
writing. The town shall so reply to an applicant within 30 days after receipt
of registration information from the applicant. Non-effectiveness of
registration shall not preclude an applicant from filing subsequent
applications for registration under the provisions of this section. An
applicant has 30 days after receipt of a notice of non-effectiveness of
registration to appeal the decision as provided in §
93.14.
   (H)   A registrant may cancel a registration upon written notice to the town
stating that it will no longer place or maintain any communications facilities
in rights-of-way within the town and will no longer need to obtain permits to
perform work in rights-of-way. A registrant cannot cancel a registration if the
registrant continues to place or maintain any communications facilities in
rights-of-way.
   (I)   In accordance with applicable town ordinances, codes or regulations, a
permit may be required of a communications services provider that desires to
place or maintain a communications facility in rights-of-way. An effective
registration shall be a condition of obtaining a permit. Notwithstanding an
effective registration, permitting requirements shall apply. A permit may be
obtained by or on behalf of a registrant having an effective registration if
all permitting requirements are met.
(Ord. 2010-01, passed 1-26-2010)
§ 93.05 PERMIT FOR PLACING OR MAINTAINING COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES IN PUBLIC
RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   (A)   Subject to the provisions of §
93.07(O), a registrant that desires to place or maintain a communications
facility within a particular segment of the public rights-of-way in the town
shall first obtain a permit from the town in accordance with this chapter. No
registrant shall place or maintain any communications facility in a public
right-of-way without a permit to do so issued by the town.
   (B)   A permit shall not convey any title, equitable or legal, to the
registrant in the public rights-of-way. Permits under this chapter gives the
registrant/permittee a license to place or maintain communications facilities
in public rights-of-way.
   (C)   Each registrant that desires to place or maintain a communications
facility within a particular segment of the public rights-of-way in the town
shall first obtain a permit by filing with the town Building Department an
application for a permit which shall include the following information:
      (1)   Name of the registrant who is applying for a permit;
      (2)   Name, address and telephone number of the registrant’s primary
contact person in connection with the permit, and the person to contact in case
of an emergency;
      (3)   The location of the proposed communication facilities, including a
description of the facilities to be installed, where the facilities are to be
located, and the approximate size of facilities that will be located in the
public rights-of-way;
      (4)   A description of the manner in which the facility will be installed
(such as, anticipated construction methods or techniques);
      (5)   A “maintenance of traffic plan” for any disruption of the public
rights-of-way;
      (6)   If appropriate given the facility proposed, an estimate of the cost
of restoration to the public rights-of-way;
      (7)   The timetable for construction of the project or each phase
thereof, and the areas of the town which will be affected; and
      (8)   Such additional information as the town finds reasonably necessary
with respect to the placement or maintenance of the communications facility
that is the subject of the permit application to review such permit
application.
   (D)   Permit application fees. No permit application fees shall be imposed.
   (E)   The town shall either issue or deny the permit to a registrant within
30 days after receipt of permit application information from the registrant. An
incomplete application shall not preclude a registrant from filing subsequent
applications for permit for the same public right-of-way segment, or from
filing applications for a different segment of the public right-of-way,
pursuant to the provisions of this section. A registrant whose permit
application has been conditionally approved or disapproved may appeal the
determination of the town Building Department to the Town Council within 30
days of the Building Department’s written decision.
   (F)   Standards for the issuance of a permit. The following shall be
standards for the issuance of each permit issued by the town for placement or
maintenance of a communication facility in the public right-of-way:
      (1)   Minimum interference. The facility shall not interfere with
existing utilities or other facilities. The permit applicant shall submit a
general layout plan demonstrating how the installation, maintenance, and
continuous location of facilities will achieve the most minimal level of
interference with other utilities and facilities.
      (2)   Utility crowding. The facility shall be three feet away from any
other utility or where space does not permit such distance shall be as far away
as possible.
      (3)   Identification. The plan of installation and actual installation
shall provide the method by which the facilities are clearly and conspicuously
marked for easy identification. All facilities installed after the effective
date of this chapter shall include tape, tracer wire, or other similar means of
locating buried facilities deemed acceptable by the town Building Department.
      (4)   Ownership of installed communication facilities. Application for
permit shall identify who shall own the utilities.
      (5)   Underground facilities. It shall be the permittees responsibility
to locate and identify all of the permitees existing underground utilities and
facilities as required by F.S. Chapter 556.
      (6)   Pavement cuts. A permit application shall describe the manner in
which the facility will be installed. If pavement cuts will be used, the
application shall so specify. If the permit is approved, pavement cuts may be
used, and the permit applicant will pay for the cost to make the pavement cuts.
No authorization for pavement cuts is required for repair work of the type
referenced in §
93.07(O).
      (7)   Unacceptable materials. The permittee shall not use and shall
provide certification that it or any builder or contractor installing or
maintaining a facility at its direction shall not use asbestos- containing or
lead-containing materials in the construction, installation, or maintenance of
any facility placed in the town’s right-of-ways after the effective date of
this chapter.
      (8)   Approved procedures and materials. The permittee shall construct
all facilities in accordance with any applicable town or other governmental
building, fire, life safety, or other codes or requirements. No facility shall
be flammable or explosive in character. No hazardous materials, as defined by
42 USC § 9601 et seq., or any regulation adopted in furtherance thereof, shall
be used in the installation or maintenance of the facility.
      (9)   Minimum interference with motor vehicle, pedestrian, or other
traffic. The facility shall not interfere with motor vehicle, pedestrian, or
other traffic within the public right-of-way or on private property, unless
consented to by the local government having operational and maintenance
responsibility for the public-right-of-way or other private property. The
permit applicant shall submit a plan demonstrating how the installation,
maintenance, and continuous location of communication facilities will achieve
the most minimal level of interference with motor vehicle, pedestrian, or other
traffic.
      (10)   Tree trimming; landscaping. The permittee may trim trees or other
vegetation owned by the town to prevent branches, leaves or roots from touching
or otherwise interfering with its existing or proposed wires, lines, fiber
optic lines, cables, structures, or other appurtenances to the communications
facilities or as approved by the town. The permittee shall use its best efforts
to obtain the prior permission of the owner of any privately-owned trees or
other vegetation before it prunes or trims same.
   (G)   Permit conditions. The following shall be conditions of each permit
issued by the town for placement or maintenance of a communication facility in
the public right-of-way:
      (1)   Generally. The permittee shall give appropriate notice to the town
and other appropriate governmental agency having jurisdiction over a public
property or public right-of-way and residents or business owners within a
reasonable time of proposed tree/root trimming, pruning, clipping, or cutting,
but in no event shall such notice be given less than five business days before
such commencement, except in the case of an emergency.
      (2)   Preconstruction.
         (a)   Before commencing work within the public right-of-way, the
registrant shall comply with the Underground Facility Damage Prevention and
Safety Act, F.S. Ch. 556; and
         (b)   No sidewalk or street public right-of-way shall be closed in
part or in whole as a result of construction for longer than 60 days.
      (3)   Town right of inspection. The town Building Department shall have
the right to inspect installation or restoration work in the town’s right-of-
way performed under the provisions of this chapter and to make such tests as it
shall find necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of this section. No
construction work within a segment of the public right-of-way shall be deemed
completed until such time as the town shall accept the work as having been made
consistent with this code and regulations promulgated hereunder. The fact that
construction work has been accepted by the town shall not be interpreted to bar
the town from a future determination that the work was improperly completed.
      (4)   Notice of construction. At least three days before the
communication service provider begins any major permitted work, the town may
require the communications services provider to post a notice at town hall and
or at or near the rights-of-way to be affected by the work showing the
commencement date of work and its projected duration.
      (5)   Permit drawings. Within 15 days of the completion of the placement
of a new communications facility within the public right-of-way, the registrant
shall supply to the town a revised permit drawing if the actual installation
differs in any material respect from the initial permit drawings. It shall be
the permittee’s responsibility to locate and identify all of the permittee’s
existing underground utilities and facilities as required by F.S. Ch. 556.
(Ord. 2010-01, passed 1-26-2010)
§ 93.06 NOTICE OF TRANSFER, SALE OR ASSIGNMENT OF ASSETS IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-
WAY.
   If a registrant transfers, sells or assigns its assets located in public
rights-of-way incident to a transfer, sale or assignment of the registrant's
assets, the transferee, buyer or assignee shall be obligated to comply with the
terms of this chapter. Written notice of any such transfer, sale or assignment
shall be provided by such registrant to the town within 20 days prior to the
effective date of the transfer, sale or assignment. If the transferee, buyer or
assignee is a current registrant, then the transferee, buyer or assignee is not
required to re-register. If the transferee, buyer or assignee is not a current
registrant, then the transferee, buyer or assignee shall register as provided
in this chapter within 30 days of the transfer, sale or assignment. If permit
applications are pending in the registrant’s name, the transferee, buyer or
assignee shall notify the Town Engineer that the transferee, buyer or assignee
is the new applicant.
(Ord. 2010-01, passed 1-26-2010)
§ 93.07 PLACEMENT OR MAINTENANCE OF A COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY IN PUBLIC RIGHTS
-OF-WAY.
   (A)   Registrant. A registrant shall not commence placement or maintenance
of a communications facility in the public rights-of-way until all applicable
permits, if any, have been issued by the town or other appropriate authority,
except in the case of an emergency. The term “emergency” shall mean a condition
that affects the public’s health, safety or welfare, which includes an
unplanned out-of-service condition of a pre-existing service. The registrant
shall provide prompt notice to the town of the placement or maintenance of a
communications facility in the public rights-of-way in the event of an
emergency, and the registrant shall be required to obtain an after-the-fact
permit if a permit would have originally been required to perform the work
undertaken in the public rights-of-way in connection with the emergency. The
town may issue a blanket permit to cover certain activities, such as routine
maintenance and repair activities that may otherwise require individual
permits.
   (B)   Limitation of installation of communication facilities. To the extent
not otherwise prohibited by state or federal law, the town shall have the power
to prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional communications
facilities within a particular area of the public right-of way.
   (C)   Non-interference with use of public right-of-way by others. All
communications facilities shall be placed or maintained so as not to
unreasonably interfere with the use of the public rights-of-way by the public
and with the rights and convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the
public rights-of-way. The use of trenchless technology (such as, directional
bore method) for the installation of facilities in the rights-of-way as well as
joint trenching or the co-location of facilities in existing conduit is
strongly encouraged, and should be employed wherever feasible. The Mayor or
designee may promulgate reasonable rules and regulations concerning the
placement or maintenance of a communications facility in rights-of-way
consistent with this chapter and other applicable law.
   (D)   Restoration of public right-of-way. After the completion of any
placement or maintenance of a communications facility in the public rights-of-
way or each phase thereof, a registrant shall, at its own expense, restore the
public rights-of-way to its original condition before such work. If the
registrant fails to make such restoration within 30 days, or such longer period
of time as may be reasonably necessary due to the circumstances and permitted
by the town, following the completion of such placement or maintenance, the
town may perform restoration and charge the costs of the restoration against
the registrant. For 12 months (365 days) following the original completion of
the work, the registrant shall guarantee its restoration work and shall correct
any restoration work that does not satisfy the requirements of this chapter at
its own expense.
   (E)   Removal or relocation. Removal or relocation at the direction of the
town of a registrant’s communications facilities in the public rights-of-way
shall be governed by the provisions of F.S. §§ 337.403 and 337.404, as amended
from time to time.
   (F)   Permit. A permit from the town constitutes authorization to undertake
only certain activities in the public rights-of-way in accordance with this
chapter and the conditions of the permit, and does not create a property right
or grant authority to impinge upon the rights of others who may have an
interest in or legally utilizing the public rights-of-way.
   (G)   Registration with Sunshine One. In connection with excavation in the
public rights-of-way, a registrant shall, where applicable, comply with the
Underground Facility Damage Prevention and Safety Act set forth in F.S. Ch.
556, as amended from time to time.
   (H)   Construction, installation or repairs. Upon request of the town, and
as notified by the town of the other work, construction, installation or
repairs referenced below, a registrant may be required to coordinate placement
or maintenance activities under a permit with any other work, construction,
installation or repairs that may be occurring or scheduled to occur within a
reasonable time frame in the subject segment of the public rights-of-way, and
the registrant may be required to alter its placement or maintenance schedule
as necessary so as to minimize disruptions and disturbance in the public
rights-of-way.
   (I)   Interfering, displacing, damaging or destroying facilities. A
registrant shall not place or maintain its communications facilities so as to
interfere with, displace, damage or destroy any facilities, including but not
limited to, sewers, gas or water mains, storm drains, pipes, cables or conduits
of the town, county, any other governmental entity, or any other person’s
facilities lawfully occupying the public rights-of-way of the town.
   (J)   No warranty of fitness or suitability. The town makes no warranties or
representations regarding the fitness, suitability, or availability of the
town’s public rights-of-way for the registrant’s communications facilities and
any performance of work, costs incurred or services provided by the registrant
shall be at the registrant's sole risk.
   (K)   Compliance with chapter. The town shall have the right to make such
inspections of communications facilities placed or maintained in public rights-
of-way as it finds necessary to insure compliance with this chapter.
   (L)   Plans of installation. A permit application to place a new or replace
or remove an existing communications facility in the public rights-of-way shall
include plans showing the location of the proposed installation of facilities
in the public rights-of-way. If the plans so provided require revision based
upon actual installation, the registrant shall promptly provide revised plans.
The plans shall be in a hard copy format or an electronic format specified by
the town. Such plans in a format maintained by the registrant shall be provided
at no cost to the town. Pursuant to F.S. § 202.195, as amended from time to
time, certain proprietary confidential business information obtained from the
communications services provider by the town may be exempted from open public
records.
   (M)   Town’s right to relocate provider's facilities. To the extent
permitted by F.S. §§ 337.403 and 337.404, the town reserves the right to place
and maintain, and permit to be placed or maintained, sewer, gas, water,
electric, storm drainage, communications, and other types of utilities or
facilities, cables or conduit, and to do, and to permit to be done, any
underground and overhead installation or improvement that may be deemed
necessary or proper by the town within the public rights-of-way occupied by the
registrant. The town further reserves without limitation the right to alter,
change, or cause to be changed, the grading, installation, relocation, or width
of the public rights-of-way within the limits of the town and within the limits
as same may from time to time be altered. Any communications facilities of the
communications services provider found to unreasonably interfere in any way
with the convenient, safe, or continuous use, or the construction, maintenance,
improvement extension, or expansion of a public right-of-way shall, upon 30
days written notice, be removed or relocated by the provider at its own expense
except as provided in F.S. § 337.403(1)(a),(b),(c). If the facilities are not
promptly relocated by the communications services provider, the town or other
governmental agency shall have the right to relocate the facilities at the
expense of the communications services provider. In such instances, the
provider shall indemnify and hold harmless the town and other governmental
entity from claims for losses, liability, attorneys’/paralegal fees, court
costs, damages, or otherwise.
   (N)   Temporary relocation. A registrant shall, on the request of any person
holding a permit issued by the town, temporarily raise or lower its
communications facilities to permit the work authorized by the permit. The
expense of such temporary raising or lowering of the facilities shall be paid
by the person requesting the same, and the registrant shall have the authority
to require such payment in advance. The registrant shall be given not less than
30 days advance written notice to arrange for such temporary relocation.
   (O)   Emergency repairs or out-of-service condition. No permit shall be
required in the event that the communications provider needs to make emergency
repairs or correct an out-of-service condition to the telecommunication
facility within the right-of-way.
   (P)   Prohibition or limitation of new or additional facilities. To the
extent not otherwise prohibited by state or federal law, the town shall have
the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional
communications facilities within a particular area of public rights-of-way.
   (Q)   All safety practices required by applicable law or accepted industry
practices and standards shall be used during the placement or maintenance of
communications facilities.
(Ord. 2010-01, passed 1-26-2010)
§ 93.08 EXISTING COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   A communications services provider with an existing communications facility
in the public rights-of-way of the town has 60 days from notification
concerning the adoption of this chapter to comply with the terms herein or be
in violation hereof.
(Ord. 2010-01, passed 1-26-2010)
§ 93.09 INSURANCE.
   (A)   Certificate of insurance.
      (1)   A registrant shall provide, pay for and maintain satisfactory to
the town the types of insurance described herein. The registrant shall file
with the Town Clerk and keep in full force and effect at all times during the
effective period hereof, a certificate of insurance naming the town as an
additional insured including a waiver of subrogation provision evidencing
general liability, auto liability, and worker’s compensation coverage. Failure
to furnish the certificates of insurance in a timely manner shall constitute a
violation of this code.
      (2)   Each policy shall be issued by a company licensed to conduct
insurance business in the state of having a financial rating in Best's
Insurance Guide of “A+” or better and a financial quality rating of VII or
better. All insurance required hereunder by this section shall be occurrence
based in nature. Claims made insurance shall not be acceptable.
   (B)   No liability limit. Neither the provisions of this section or any
damages recovered by the town hereunder, shall be construed to nor limit the
liability of the registrant for damages based upon any use of the public right-
of-way, transaction, or course of dealing with the registrant hereunder.
   (C)   Endorsement. All insurance policies maintained pursuant hereto shall
contain the following, or a comparable, endorsement, acceptable to the Mayor,
or the manager’s designee:
      “It is hereby understood and agreed that this insurance policy may not be
modified or canceled by the insurance company nor the intention not to renew be
stated by the insurance company until 30 days after receipt by the Town Manager
of the Town of Palm Shores, Florida, by registered or certified mail, return
receipt requested, of a written notice of such intention to cancel or not to
renew.”
   (D)   Broad form indemnification agreement. All contractual liability
insurance policies, including but not limited to general liability, auto
liability, and worker’s compensation) maintained pursuant hereto shall include
the provision of the following hold harmless clause:
      “The [insert name of registrant] agrees to indemnify, save harmless and
defend the Town of Palm Shores, Florida, its officers, managers, and employees,
and each of them against and hold it and them harmless from any and all
lawsuits, claims, demands, liabilities, losses and expenses, including court
costs and reasonable attorney’s fees for or on account of any injury to any
person, or any death at any time resulting from such injury, or any damage to
any property, which may arise or which may be alleged to have arisen out of or
in connection with the work covered by the registrant’s use of the public
right-of-way and performed or caused to be performed.”
   (E)   Limits of coverage. The limits of coverage of insurance required shall
be not less than the following:
      (1)   Worker’s compensation and employer’s liability insurance.
         (a)   Worker’s compensation - state statutory requirements.
         (b)   Employer’s liability - $1,000,000 limit each accident.
         (c)   One million dollars limit per accident.
         (d)   Five hundred thousand dollars limit per each employee.
      (2)   Comprehensive general liability. Bodily injury and property damage
- $1,000,000 combined single limit each occurrence. Such general liability
insurance must include coverage for premises/operations, contractual liability,
independent contractors and subcontractors, explosion and collapse hazard,
underground hazard, additional insured endorsement (naming the town as an
additional insured including a waiver of subrogation provision), broad form
comprehensive general liability, broad form property damage, products/completed
operations hazard, contractor’s pollution liability, contractual liability
endorsement and insurance, broad form property damage, XCU coverage, and
personal injury.
      (3)    Automobile liability. Bodily injury and property damage -
$1,000,000 combined single limit each accident.
   (F)   Self insurance. The provisions of this section do not apply if the
registrant provides the town proof of self insurance.
(Ord. 2010-01, passed 1-26-2010)
§ 93.10 CONSTRUCTION BOND.
   (A)   Requirement of bond or letter of credit. Prior to issuing a permit
where the work under the permit will require restoration of the public rights-
of-way, (as determined by the town), the town may require a construction bond
or a letter of credit to secure the restoration of the public rights-of-way.
The permitee shave have the option to either provide a bond or a letter of
credit. The bond or letter of credit shall secure both payment and performance
of permit requirements. The bond or letter of credit shall be maintained and in
effect through the time set in the permit and for 24 months following the
completion of construction within the public rights-of-way. The bond or letter
of credit shall be 100% of the amount of restoration cost to restore the right-
of-way to a condition equivalent to or better than prior to the commencement of
work within the public right-of-way. In the event that a letter of credit is
utilized, the registrant shall obtain and continuously maintain an unexpired,
irrevocable letter of credit, which shall at all times be in the possession of
the town during the same term as would have been required for the bond. The
form and contents of such bond or letter of credit shall be acceptable to the
Mayor and the Town Attorney. The letter of credit shall be released only upon
expiration of the aforementioned time frame or upon the replacement of the
letter of credit by a successor registrant. The town may elect not to require a
bond where the town determines it is not necessary to secure restoration
considering by way of example and not by way of limitation the ability of the
provider to cover any claims without the need for additional security.
   (B)   Rights reserved in addition to other rights. The rights reserved to
the town under this section are in addition to all other rights of the town,
whether reserved in this chapter, or authorized by other law, or at law or in
equity, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to the
construction bond or letter of credit will affect any other right the town may
have.
   (C)   Conditions. The bond or letter of credit shall be issued upon the
following conditions:
      (1)   Twenty-four months after the completion of the restoration in
public rights-of-way in accordance with the bond or the letter of credit, the
registrant may eliminate the bond or letter of credit. However, the town may
subsequently require a new bond or letter of credit for any subsequent work in
the public rights-of-way.
      (2)   The construction bond shall be issued by a surety having a rating
reasonably acceptable to the town; shall be subject to the approval of the Town
Engineer, Town Attorney, or their respective designees; and shall provide that:
“For 24 months after issuance of this bond [or letter of credit], this bond [or
letter of credit] may not be canceled, or allowed to lapse, until 60 days after
receipt by the town, by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written
notice from the issuer of the bond [or letter of credit] of intent to cancel or
not to renew.”
      (3)   The bond shall be issued by a surety, located within this state,
and licensed and authorized by the state to do business as a surety in the
state. The irrevocable letter of credit shall be issued by a bank or savings
and loan association acceptable to the town (not on a lender “watch list” or
other listing suggesting financial infirmity of the lending institution),
located in this state, and authorized to do business in this state by either
the State Comptroller/Chief Financial Officer or the United States government.
The letter of credit shall name the town as the beneficiary.
      (4)   There shall be recoverable by the town jointly and severally from
the principal and surety or the financial institution that has issued the
letter of credit, any and all fines and liquidated damages due and owing to the
town and any and all damages, losses, costs, fees, attorney fees and expenses
suffered or incurred by the town resulting from the failure of the registrant,
its or their contractors, subcontractors, materialmen, laborers, or agents to:
faithfully comply with the provisions of this code or this chapter; comply with
all orders, permits and directives of any town agency or body having
jurisdiction over its acts or defaults; pay any claims, liens, fees, or taxes
due and owing to the town which arise directly or indirectly by reason of the
construction, operation, maintenance, removal, activation, deactivation,
abandonment, or repair of the public right-of-way or a communications
facilities. Such losses, costs and expenses shall include but not be limited to
attorney’s and paralegal fees and other associated expenses.
      (5)   The total amount of the bond or letter of credit shall be forfeited
as a liquidated damage paid to the town in the event:
         (a)   The registrant abandons portions of the communications
facilities within the public right-of-way and without approval of the town or
fails to complete construction of the communications facilities within the
public right-of-way or fails to properly, completely, and timely restore the
public right-of-way, or any part thereof;
         (b)   The registrant sells, assigns, or otherwise conveys the
communications facilities without the issuance of a permit to the successor
person; or
         (c)   The permit is terminated or otherwise revoked by reason of the
default of the registrant.
   (D)   Reduction of bond or letter of credit. Upon written application by the
registrant, the town may, at its sole option, permit the amount of the bond or
letter of credit to be reduced or waived for the duration of the term of such
letter of credit or bond or other periods of time, when it is determined by the
Town Engineer to be in the public interest. Upon written application by the
registrant, the town may, at its sole option, permit the terms of the
requirements of the performance bond/letter of credit to be altered or waived
for the remaining portions of the term of the permit or other periods of time,
when it is determined by the town to be in the public interest to alter or
waive the terms of the bond or letter of credit. For example, but not limited
to, where such security is not necessary due to the amount of restoration that
needs to be done or the ability of the registrant to cover any claims without
the need for additional security.
   (E)   Use of bond or letter of credit. Prior to drawing upon the letter of
credit or the bond for the purposes described in this section, the town shall
notify the registrant in writing that payment is due, and the registrant shall
have not more than 30 days from the receipt of such written notice to make a
full and complete payment. If the registrant does not make the payment within
30 days or demonstrate reason acceptable to the town why such action should not
be taken, the town may withdraw the amount thereof, with interest and
penalties, from the letter of credit or the bond. Within three days of a
withdrawal from the letter of credit or bond, the town shall send to the
registrant, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notification
of the amount, date and purpose of such withdrawal.
   (F)   Replenishment of letter of credit or performance bond. No later than
30 days, after mailing to the registrant by certified mail notification of a
withdrawal pursuant to division (E), the registrant shall replenish the letter
of credit and/or bond in an amount equal to the amount so withdrawn. Failure to
make timely replenishment of such amount to the letter of credit and/or bond
shall constitute a failure of the registrant to faithfully comply with the
provisions of this chapter and the registrant.
   (G)   Non-renewal, alteration, or cancellation of letter of credit or
performance bond. The bond and letter of credit required herein shall require
30 days written notice of any non-renewal, alteration or cancellation to both
the town and the registrant. The registrant shall, in the event of any such
cancellation, alteration, or non-renewal notice, obtain, pay all premiums for,
and file with the town, written evidence of the issuance of a replacement bond,
policies, or letter of credit within 30 days following receipt by the town or
the registrant of any notice of cancellation, alteration, or non-renewal.
   (H)   Inflation. To offset the effects of inflation the amount of the bond
or letter of credit provided for herein, the same shall be subject to a
reasonable increase at the end of every three-year period thereof, applicable
to the next three-year period, at the sole discretion of the town.
   (I)   Default. The bond and letter of credit provided pursuant to this
section shall become the property of the town in the event that the permit is
canceled or terminated by reason of the default of the registrant.
   (J)   Right to require replacement of bonds or letter of credit. If the town
becomes aware of the financial condition of any bonding or financial
institution issuing a performance bond or letter of credit as required herein
and the financial condition is deemed by the town to jeopardize the collateral
posted with the town, the town may, at any time, require that any such bond or
letter of credit be replaced with such other bond or letter of credit
consistent with the requirements set forth in this section.
   (K)   Blanket bond. The registrant shall have the additional choice of
providing the town with a blanket bond, in which case a construction bond or
letter of credit may only be required for any work to the extent the cost of
restoration exceeds the amount of the blanket bond.
(Ord. 2010-01, passed 1-26-2010)
§ 93.11 ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES.
   (A)   (1)   A registrant’s failure to comply with provisions of this chapter
shall constitute a violation of this chapter and shall subject the registrant
to the code enforcement provisions and procedures as provided in the town code.
      (2)   In addition, violation of any provision in this chapter may be
punishable as provided in F.S. § 162.22, as amended from time to time.
   (B)   Failure of the town to enforce any requirements of this chapter shall
not constitute a waiver of the town’s right to enforce that violation or
subsequent violations of the same type or to seek appropriate enforcement
remedies.
(Ord. 2010-01, passed 1-26-2010)
§ 93.12 ABANDONMENT OF A COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY.
   (A)   Upon abandonment of the communication facility in the public right-of-
way, the permitee shall provide the town with notice within 60 days of the
abandonment, and the precise location of the facility. During the 60-day time
period, the registrant shall apply for a permit to remove the abandoned
facility from the public rights-of-way, or apply for an exemption from the
foregoing removal requirement stating with specificity the basis therefore.
When a permit application to place a new facility shows a facility to be placed
out-of-service, the permit application to place a new facility shall be
considered a permit to apply for an exemption to the removal requirement.
Removal shall be accomplished at the sole expense of the registrant.
   (B)   Upon application for an exemption from the requirement to remove an
abandoned facility, the town shall grant such request not to remove all or any
portion of such abandoned facility, if the town determines that the abandoned
facility’s presence will not in the future interfere with the public health,
safety, economic order, aesthetics, and welfare of the community and the
region, which shall include, but shall not be limited to, a determination that
such facility:
      (1)   Shall not compromise safety at any time for any public rights-of-
way user or during construction or maintenance within the public rights-of-way;
      (2)   Shall not prevent another person from locating facilities in the
area of public rights-of-way where the abandoned facility is located when other
alternative locations are not reasonably available; and
      (3)   Shall not create a maintenance condition that is disruptive to the
public rights-of-way’s use or to the user or the general public.
      (4)   In the event of subsection (2), the town may require the third
person to coordinate with the registrant that owns the existing facility for
joint removal and placement, where agreed to by the registrant.
   (C)   In the event that the town does not approve the exemption from removal
requirement for the facility proposed to be abandoned, the registrant, by its
notice of abandonment to the town, shall be deemed to consent to the alteration
or removal of all or any portion of the facility by the town or another person
at such third party’s cost.
   (D)   If the registrant fails to remove all or any portion of an abandoned
facility as directed by the town within a reasonable time period as may be
required by the town under the circumstances, the town may perform such removal
and charge the cost of the removal against the registrant.
(Ord. 2010-01, passed 1-26-2010)
§ 93.13 SUSPENSION OF PERMITS.
   (A)   The town may suspend a permit for work in the rights-of-way for one or
more of the following reasons:
      (1)   Violation of permit conditions, including conditions set forth in
the permit, this chapter or other applicable town ordinances, codes or
regulations governing placement or maintenance of communications facilities in
rights-of-way;
      (2)   Misrepresentation or fraud by registrant in a registration or
permit application to the town;
      (3)   Failure to properly renew or ineffectiveness of registration; or
      (4)   Failure to relocate or remove facilities as may be lawfully
required by the town.
   (B)   The Mayor or designee shall provide notice and an opportunity to cure
any violation of subsections (1) through (4) above, each of which shall be
reasonable under the circumstances.
(Ord. 2010-01, passed 1-26-2010)
§ 93.14 APPEALS.
   (A)   Final, written decisions of the Mayor or designee suspending or
denying a permit, denying an application for a registration or denying an
application for renewal of a registration are subject to appeal.
   (B)   An appeal must be filed with the Mayor or designee within 30 days of
the date of the final, written decision to be appealed.
      (1)   Any appeal not timely filed as set forth above shall be waived.
      (2)   All appeals shall be before the Town Council.
      (3)   The hearing shall occur within 30 days of the receipt of the
appeal, unless waived by the registrant, and a written decision shall be
rendered within 20 days of the hearing.
      (4)   The party seeking such appeal, and any other interested party
wishing to be heard, may appear at the hearing in person, by agent or by
attorney. The appellant shall be entitled to make an initial presentation
respecting the appeal and, at the conclusion of presentations or statements by
all other parties, shall be entitled to offer a statement in rebuttal to such
presentations if the appellant so desires.
      (5)   When the Town Council has taken action respecting an appeal under
this chapter, no application for the same relief shall be accepted by the
Mayor, or other designated staff, for consideration by the Council for a period
of six months from the date of such action, provided however, that an applicant
may request that the Town Council waive the provision of this section for
proper cause.
      (6)   Any person or persons, jointly or severally aggrieved by any
decision of the Town Council respecting an appeal under this chapter may apply,
in the manner provided by law, to the County Circuit Court for judicial relief.
      (7)   Upon correction of the grounds that gave rise to a suspension or
denial, the suspension or denial shall be lifted.
(Ord. 2010-01, passed 1-26-2010)
§ 93.15 INVOLUNTARY TERMINATION OF REGISTRATION.
   (A)   The town may terminate a registration if:
      (1)   A federal or state authority suspends, denies, or revokes a
registrant’s certification or license to provide communications services;
      (2)   The registrant’s placement or maintenance of a communications
facility in the rights-of-way presents an extraordinary danger to the general
public or other users of the rights-of-way and the registrant fails to remedy
the danger promptly after receipt of written notice; or
      (3)   The registrant ceases to use all of its communications facilities
in rights-of-way and has not complied with §
93.12 of this chapter.
   (B)   Prior to termination, the registrant shall be notified by the Mayor or
designee with a written notice setting forth all matters pertinent to the
proposed termination action, including which of (1) through (3) above is
applicable as the reason therefore, and describing the proposed action of the
town with respect thereto. The registrant shall have 60 days after receipt of
such notice within which to address or eliminate the reason or within which to
present a plan, satisfactory to the Mayor or designee to accomplish the same.
If the plan is rejected, the Mayor or designee shall provide written notice of
such rejection to the registrant and shall make a recommendation to the Town
Council regarding a decision as to termination of registration. A decision by a
town to terminate a registration may only be accomplished by an action of the
Town Council. A registrant shall be notified by written notice of any decision
by the Town Council to terminate its registration. Such written notice shall be
sent within seven days after the decision.
   (C)   In the event of termination, the former registrant shall notify the
town of the assumption or anticipated assumption by another registrant of
ownership of the registrant’s communications facilities in rights-of-way or
provide the town with an acceptable plan for disposition of its communications
facilities in rights-of-way. If a registrant fails to comply with this
division, which determination of non-compliance is subject to appeal as
provided in §
93.14, the town may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity,
including but not limited to taking possession of the facilities where another
person has not assumed the ownership or physical control of the facilities or
requiring the registrant within 90 days of the termination, or such longer
period as may be agreed to by the registrant, to remove some or all of the
facilities from the rights-of-way and restore the rights-of-way to its original
condition before the removal.
   (D)   In any event, a terminated registrant shall take such steps as are
necessary to render safe every portion of the communications facilities
remaining in the rights-of-way of the town.
   (E)   In the event of termination of a registration, this section does not
authorize the town to cause the removal of communications facilities used to
provide another service for which the registrant or another person who owns or
exercises physical control over the facilities holds a valid certification or
license with the governing federal or state agency, if required for provision
of such service, and is registered with the town, if required.
(Ord. 2010-01, passed 1-26-2010)
§ 93.16 INDEMNIFICATION.
   (A)   Each grantee shall, at the grantee’s sole cost and expense, fully
indemnify, defend and hold harmless the town, and in their capacity as such,
the officers, agents, boards, commissioners, consultants attorneys and
employees thereof, from and against any and all claims, suits, actions,
proceedings, liability and judgments for damages or otherwise arising out of,
or alleged to arise out of, the award of the franchise, the exercise of the
rights granted thereunder, and/or the construction, maintenance or operation of
the system in the town, including claims without limitation:
      (1)   Arising out of, or alleged to arise out of, the award of a
franchise to the grantee, assertion by the town of a claim of confidentiality
on behalf of the grantee, and/or the grantee’s operation of the utility system
under the franchise;
      (2)   For actual or alleged injury to persons or property, including loss
of use of property due to an occurrence, whether or not such property is
physically damaged or destroyed, in any way arising out of or through, or
alleged to arise out of or through, the acts or omissions of the grantee or its
officers, agents, employees, contractors or subcontractors;
      (3)   Arising out of or alleged to arise out of any claim for damages for
invasion of the right of privacy, defamation of any person, firm or
corporation, or the violation or infringement of any copyright, trademark,
trade name, service mark or patent, or of any other right of any person, firm
or corporation; and
      (4)   Arising out of, or alleged to arise out of, grantee’s failure to
comply with the provisions of any statute, regulation or ordinance of any
federal, state or any local agency applicable to the grantee in its business.
   (B)   Indemnification expenses shall include, but not be limited to, all
out-of-pocket expenses, such as reasonable attorneys’ fees, and shall include
the reasonable value of any services rendered by the Town Attorney or his or
her assistants or any consultants, agents and employees of the town. Nothing
herein shall be deemed to prevent the parties indemnified and held harmless
herein from participating in the defense of any litigation by their own
counsel. Such participation shall not under any circumstances relieve the
grantee from its duty of defense against liability or of paying any judgment
entered against such party.
(Ord. 2010-01, passed 1-26-2010)
§ 93.17 SECURITY FUND.
   (A)   At or prior to the time a registrant receives its first permit to
place or maintain a communications facility in rights-of-way after the
effective date of this chapter, the registrant may be required to file with the
town, for the town’s approval, an annual bond, cash deposit or irrevocable
letter of credit in the sum of $25,000 having as a surety a company qualified
to do business in the state, and acceptable to the Mayor or designee, which
shall be referred to as the “Security fund.” The Security Fund shall be
maintained from such time through the earlier of:
      (1)   Transfer, sale, assignment or removal of all communications
facilities in rights-of-way; or
      (2)   Twelve months after the termination or cancellation of any
registration.
   (B)   The Security Fund shall be conditioned on the full and faithful
performance by the registrant of all requirements, duties and obligations
imposed upon registrant by the provisions of this chapter. The Security Fund
shall be furnished annually or as frequently as necessary to provide a
continuing guarantee of the registrant’s full and faithful performance at all
times. In the event a registrant fails to perform its duties and obligations
imposed upon the registrant by the provisions of this chapter, there shall be
recoverable, jointly and severally from the principal and surety of the
Security Fund, any damages or loss suffered by the town as a result, including
the full amount of any compensation, indemnification or cost of removal,
relocation or abandonment of any facilities of the registrant in rights-of-way,
plus a reasonable allowance for attorneys’ fees, up to the full amount of the
security fund. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the town may in its discretion
not require a Security Fund or may accept a corporate guarantee of the
registrant or its parent company.
(Ord. 2010-01, passed 1-26-2010)
§ 93.18 FORCE MAJEURE.
   In the event a registrant’s performance of or compliance with any of the
provisions of this chapter is prevented by a cause or event not within the
registrant’s control, such inability to perform or comply shall be deemed
excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a result; provided,
however, that such registrant uses all practicable means to expeditiously and
diligently cure or correct any such inability to perform or comply. For
purposes of this chapter, causes or events not within a registrant’s control
shall include, without limitation, acts of God, floods, earthquakes,
landslides, hurricanes, fires and other natural disasters, acts of public
enemies, riots or civil disturbances, sabotage, strikes and restraints imposed
by order of a governmental agency or court. Causes or events within
registrant’s control, and thus not falling within this section, shall include,
without limitation, the registrant’s financial inability to perform or comply,
economic hardship, and misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance by any of the
registrant’s directors, officers, employees, contractors or agents.
(Ord. 2010-01, passed 1-26-2010)
§ 93.19 RESERVATION OF RIGHTS AND REMEDIES.
   (A)   The town reserves the right to amend this chapter as it shall find
necessary in the lawful exercise of its police powers.
   (B)   This chapter shall be applicable to all communications facilities
placed in the public rights-of-way on or after the effective date of this
chapter and shall apply to all existing communications facilities in the public
rights-of-way prior to the effective date of this chapter, to the full extent
permitted by state and federal law.
   (C)   The adoption of this chapter is not intended to affect any rights or
defenses of the town under any existing franchise, license or other agreements
with a communications services provider.
   (D)   Nothing in this chapter shall affect the remedies the town has
available under applicable law.
   (E)   Any person who uses the communications facilities of a registrant,
other than the registrant that owns the facilities, shall not be entitled to
any rights to place or maintain such facilities in excess of the rights of the
registrant that places or maintains the facilities.
   (F)   Approved registrations and permits are expressly subject to any future
amendment to or replacement of this chapter and further subject to any
additional town ordinances, as well as any state or federal laws that may be
enacted.
   (G)   The town shall have all powers not otherwise preempted by the
regulations of the FCC or applicable federal or state law or regulation, and
shall have all powers conferred on a permitting authority or allowed by any
provision of state or federal law which are not addressed in this chapter.
   (H)   Should any amendment be made to any federal or state law or should any
provision thereof be held to be invalid or unenforceable by a court of
competent jurisdiction which materially affects the town’s authority with
respect to the regulation of this chapter, the town shall have the right to
amend this chapter to the extent it deems appropriate, and the existing permit
shall be subject to such amendment.
(Ord. 2010-01, passed 1-26-2010)
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES IN RIGHTS-OF-WAY
§ 93.30 DEFINITIONS; PURPOSE.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ANTENNA. Communications equipment that transmits or receives
electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in providing wireless services.
      APPLICANT. The record owner or an owner's representative of a tract of
land that is applying for a permit under this section.
      COLLOCATE or COLLOCATION. To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate,
or replace one or more wireless facilities on, under, within, or adjacent to a
wireless support structure or utility pole. The term does not include the
installation of a new utility pole or wireless support structure in the public
rights-of-way.
      EASEMENT. The right, privilege, or interest that one party has in the
land of another. This may include utilities, drainage, ingress and egress, or
other public or private uses subject to the right of use designated in the
reservation of the servitude. For the purpose of this subchapter, easement
permitting pertains to publicly controlled easements.
      FCC. The Federal Communications Commission.
      LICENSED CONTRACTOR. A contractor licensed by the State of Florida to
perform general construction contracting, underground construction or
electrical work.
      MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY. A small wireless facility having dimensions no
larger than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height
and an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than 11 inches.
      PERFORMANCE SECURITY. One hundred twenty-five percent of the construction
cost of improvements to be posted with the town by the applicant for all
improvements made within town controlled rights-of-way and/or easements.
      PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company
or organization of any kind.
      PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY or RIGHTS-OF-WAY. Property or any interest therein,
including easements, which is acquired for or devoted to a public road,
including but not limited to, roadways, highway, street, or bridge for which
the town is the jurisdictional authority and may lawfully grant access to
pursuant to applicable law, and includes the surface, the air space over the
surface and the area below the surface.
      ROAD or STREET. A way which affords the principal means of access by
vehicles to abutting property, streets, sidewalks, alleys, highways, and other
ways open to travel to the public or private residents and includes all areas
within the rights-of-ways or easements in which such ways are located.
      SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY. A wireless facility that meets the following
qualifications:
         (a)   Each antenna associated with the facility is located inside an
enclosure of no more than six cubic feet in volume or, in the case of antennas
that have exposed elements, each antenna and all of its exposed elements could
fit within an enclosure of no more than six cubic feet in volume; and
         (b)   All other wireless equipment associated with the facility is
cumulatively no more than 28 cubic feet in volume. The following types of
associated ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of equipment
volume: electric meters, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation
boxes, ground-based enclosures, grounding equipment, power transfer switches,
cutoff switches, vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other
services, and utility poles or other support structures.
      SUPPORT STRUCTURE. A wireless support structure or utility pole proposed
for utilization for the collocation of small wireless facilities.
      SUBSTANTIAL MODIFICATION. The mounting of a small wireless facility on a
utility pole or wireless support structure in a manner that: (a) increases the
height of the utility pole or wireless support structure by 10% of the original
height of the utility pole wireless support structure or greater; or (b) adds
an appurtenance to the utility pole or wireless support structure that
protrudes horizontally from the utility pole or wireless support structure more
than the width of the utility pole or wireless support structure and existing
appurtenances. A modification that defeats the purpose of any existing
concealment elements is also considered a substantial modification. A
substantial modification is not a waiver to the maximum allowable height.
      UTILITY POLE. A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in
part to provide communications services or for electric distribution, lighting,
traffic control, signage, or a similar function. The term includes the vertical
support structure for traffic lights but does not include a horizontal
structure to which signal lights or other traffic control devices are attached
and does not include a pole or similar structure 15 feet in height or less
unless the Town Mayor grants a waiver for such pole.
      WIRELESS FACILITY. Equipment at a fixed location which enables wireless
communications between user equipment and a communications network, including
radio transceivers, antennas, wires, coaxial or fiber-optic cable or other
cables, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless
of technological configuration, and equipment associated with wireless
communications. The term includes small wireless facilities. The term does not
include:
         (a)   The structure or improvements on, under, within, or adjacent to
the structure on which the equipment is collocated;
         (b)   Wireline backhaul facilities; or
         (c)   Coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is between wireless structures
or utility poles or that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or directly
associated with a particular antenna.
      WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER. A person who has been certificated to
provide telecommunications service in the state and who builds or installs
wireless communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, or wireless
support structures but is not a wireless services provider.
      WIRELESS PROVIDER. A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless
services provider.
      WIRELESS SERVICES. Any services provided using licensed or unlicensed
spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile, using wireless facilities.
      WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER. A person who provides wireless services.
      WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE. A freestanding structure, such as a monopole,
a guyed or self-supporting tower, or another existing or proposed structure
designed to support or capable of supporting wireless facilities. The term does
not include a utility pole.
   (B)   Purpose.
      (1)   To insure that a proposed improvement within a town-controlled
right-of-way or easement is non-injurious to the public use or any contiguous
and/or other directly affected properties.
      (2)   To provide guidelines and procedures to ensure that the permitted
improvements contain the essential information and data, both graphic and
written, necessary for the applicable town sections and departments, and the
town council to reach fair and equitable decisions.
      (3)   To provide the applicant with a specific set of procedures and
exhibit requirements which, if followed as directed, will substantially reduce
the applicant's probability of encountering unnecessary delays.
      (4)   To set out and fully describe the policies and conditions under
which the review of a site development plan will be evaluated.
      (5)   To implement the local government regulatory authority granted in
the Advanced Wireless Infrastructure Deployment Act, F.S. § 337.401(7), and
establish reasonable development standards for the location of small wireless
facilities on town-owned utility poles, infrastructure or improvements in the
public rights-of-way, while minimizing the potential negative impacts of such
facilities. The wireless facilities and associated support structures permitted
in this subchapter include only such small wireless facilities and structures
as defined herein.
(Ord. 2018-06, passed 8-29-2018)
§ 93.31 PENALTY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct any improvement or
any part of an improvement within a right-of-way or easement dedicated to the
town without a valid permit.
   (B)   Any person damaging any town road or easement shall be required to
either restore the road or easement to its condition prior to the damage, or
shall pay to the town the sum of money determined by the Town Engineer and
Building Department to be necessary to restore the road or easement to its
condition prior to the damage.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly affix, install, place, attach, maintain, or
fail to remove an unauthorized attachment to town-owned infrastructure or other
property of the town on demand by the town or any authorized representative
thereof.
   (D)   No person shall use an attachment on town-owned infrastructure or
other property of the town to provide a service not authorized by a permit.
   (E)   It is a violation of this subchapter to fail to pay the costs to
remove abandoned improvements from the right-of-way as required in §
93.40.
   (F)   Each unauthorized attachment or use is a separate offense. Each day a
violation of this subchapter continues is a separate offense.
(Ord. 2018-06, passed 8-29-2018)
§ 93.32 EMERGENCY REPAIR OR REMOVAL.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit any utility company or owner of
said improvement from repairing or removing improvements in a town right-of-way
in the event of an emergency which threatens life or property. The person
performing, or at whose direction the emergency repair, replacement, or removal
is performed, shall, within 72 hours, apply for a permit if required, for the
emergency repairs and shall repair and replace any damage to town improvements
caused by emergency repair or removal.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit the emergency removal of public or
private improvements within a right-of-way or easement dedicated to the town by
the town in the event of an emergency. In the event of such removal, the owner
of the improvement shall be responsible for the cost of permitting and
replacement of the improvement in accordance with this subchapter.
(Ord. 2018-06, passed 8-29-2018)
§ 93.33 SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES AND SUPPORT STRUCTURES.
   (a)   General.
      (1)   Small wireless facilities and support structures that comply with
the requirements of this subchapter may be installed and located within town
public rights-of-way through the right-of-way/ easement permitting process. The
cost of maintaining such collocated facilities is the responsibility of the
permitee.
      (2)   A person is not authorized to collocate or attach wireless
facilities, including any antenna, micro wireless facility, or small wireless
facility, on a privately owned utility pole, a utility pole owned by an
electric cooperative or a municipal electric utility, a privately owned
wireless support structure, or other private property without the consent of
the property owner.
      (3)   Approval of the installation, placement, maintenance, or operation
of a small wireless facility pursuant to this division does not authorize the
provision of any voice, data, or video communications services or the
installation, placement, maintenance, or operation of any communications
facilities other than small wireless facilities in the right-of-way.
      (4)   Collocation of small wireless facilities or micro wireless
facilities on a utility pole, unless otherwise permitted by federal law, is
prohibited in the public right-of-way located within a location subject to
covenants, conditions, restrictions, articles of incorporation, and bylaws of a
homeowners' association. This paragraph does not apply to the installation,
placement, maintenance, or replacement of micro wireless facilities on any
existing and duly authorized aerial communications facilities.
      (5)   Collocation of small wireless facilities or micro wireless
facilities on a town utility pole or placement of a wireless support structure
is prohibited in a location subject to covenants, conditions, restrictions,
articles of incorporation, and bylaws of a homeowners' association. This
limitation does not apply to the installation, placement, maintenance, or
replacement of micro wireless facilities on any existing and duly authorized
aerial communications facilities.
      (6)   A wireless provider shall, in relation to a small wireless facility
or support structure in the public rights-of-way, comply with nondiscriminatory
undergrounding requirements that prohibit above-ground structures in public
rights-of-way. Any such requirements may be waived by the Town Mayor.
   (B)   Standards.
      (1)   Height. The height of a small wireless facility is limited to ten
feet above the utility pole or wireless support structure upon which the small
wireless facility is to be collocated. Unless waived by the town, the height
for a new utility pole or wireless support structure is limited to the tallest
existing utility pole or wireless support structure as of July 1, 2017, located
in the same right-of-way, other than a utility pole or wireless support
structure for which a waiver has previously been granted, measured from grade
in place within 500 feet of the proposed location. If there is no utility pole
or wireless support structure within 500 feet, the height is limited to 50
feet. A structure granted a permit and installed pursuant to this division
shall comply with state and federal regulations pertaining to airport airspace
protections.
      (2)   If more than 220 volts are necessary for the operation of the small
wireless facility and are utilized in the utility pole or wireless support
structure, a sign shall be attached to the utility pole or wireless support
structure stating in large, bold, high contrast letters (minimum height of each
letter four inches): "HIGH VOLTAGE - DANGER."
      (3)   All small wireless facilities and support structures shall have a
plaque placed upon it for the purpose of identification (either by the ASR
registration number or other identifying information) including the party
responsible for the operation and maintenance of the facility or structure. The
plaque shall not exceed 0.25 square feet. No other signage, other than a "high
voltage - danger sign," if applicable, or any signage required by the FCC, is
allowed on a small wireless facility, utility pole or wireless support
structure.
      (4)   All wiring and fiber shall be concealed within the support
structure and all conduit, wiring and fiber shall be buried between structures
and/or structures and ground mounted cabinets. All service lines (e.g.,
electric lines) to the support structure must also be buried unless service
lines in the area of the support structure are aerial. In that event, service
lines to the utility pole or wireless support structure may also be aerial,
except for any service drop crossing a street or right-of-way which would need
to be bored and placed under such street or right-of-way.
      (5)   New support structures and small wireless facilities shall be
designed to blend into the surrounding environment and complement existing
streetscape elements through the use of color, camouflaging and architectural
treatment. Any equipment mounted to the support structures shall also match the
support structure in color and general design. These design standards may be
waived by the Town Mayor, in consultation with the Town Engineer, upon a
showing that the design standards are not reasonably compatible for the
particular location of a small wireless facility or that the design standards
impose an excessive expense. The waiver shall be granted or denied within 45
days after the date of the request.
      (6)   Any proposed new support structure shall be designed and engineered
structurally, electrically and in all other respects, to accommodate both the
initial small cell facility and one or more additional small wireless
facilities.
      (7)   Small wireless facilities shall be flush-mounted onto support
structures, unless it is demonstrated through RF propagation analysis that
flush-mounted antennas will not meet the network objectives of the desired
coverage area.
      (8)   All small wireless facilities and support structures shall be
designed and constructed to conform to all applicable provisions of this
subchapter, the Florida Building Code, as amended, the Florida Department of
Transportation Manual, as amended.
      (9)   All wireless facilities in the public rights-of-way shall comply
with current radio frequency emissions standards of the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) and any other applicable FCC rules.
      (10)   All proposed collocations and ancillary equipment shall comply
with the ANSI/EIA/ TIA-222 (as amended) code for the town, if applicable.
      (11)   All small wireless facilities and support structures shall be
constructed to conform with the requirements of the Occupational Safety and
Health Administration (OSHA).
      (12)   All small wireless facilities, utility poles and wireless support
structures shall be designed and constructed to conform to all applicable
standards of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) manual, as
amended.
      (13)   All small wireless facilities and support structures must be
located to avoid any physical or visual obstruction to pedestrian, bicycle, or
vehicular traffic or to otherwise create safety hazards to pedestrians,
bicyclists or motorists.
      (14)   The placement of small wireless facilities on existing support
structures in public rights-of-way is encouraged and preferred over the
installation of new support structures. An applicant must provide satisfactory
evidence to the town that no existing support structures can be reasonably used
or replaced for use for the proposed collocation.
      (15)   All new support structures must be constructed to permit
collocation by other wireless service providers where feasible. The term "where
feasible," as it applies to collocation, means that utilization of a support
structure by another party would, at the time of such utilization, comply with
sound engineering principles, would not materially degrade or impair the
support structure's utilization by existing users, would not unduly burden the
structural integrity of the support structure, and would not otherwise
materially and adversely impact existing users. Reasonable terms for use of a
support structure that may be imposed by the owner include a requirement for
reasonable rent or fees, taking into consideration the capitalized cost of the
support structure and land, the incremental cost of designing and constructing
the support structure so as to accommodate additional users, increases in
maintenance expenses relating to the support structure and a fair return on
investment, provided such amount is also consistent with rates paid by other
providers at comparable support structure sites.
(Ord. 2018-06, passed 8-29-2018)
§ 93.34 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   A right-of-way/easement permit is required to (1) collocate a small
wireless facility on a support structure; (2) install a new support structure
for collocation; or (3) perform a substantial modification to an existing small
wireless facility or support structure.
   (B)   Consolidated application. An applicant seeking to collocate small
wireless facilities may, at the applicant's discretion, file a consolidated
application and receive a single permit for the collocation of up to 30 small
wireless facilities. If the application includes multiple small wireless
facilities, the town may separately address small wireless facility
collocations for which incomplete information has been received or which are
denied.
   (C)   A permit is not required for:
      (1)   Routine maintenance;
      (2)   Replacement of existing small wireless facilities with small
wireless facilities that are substantially similar or of the same or smaller
size or same color and concealment;
      (3)   Installation, placement, maintenance, or replacement of micro
wireless facilities that are suspended on cables strung between existing
utility poles in compliance with applicable codes by or for a communications
services provider authorized to occupy the rights-of-way and who is remitting
taxes under F.S. Ch. 202.
   (D)   An applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed small wireless
facility, support structure or substantial modification complies with all
applicable laws and ordinances.
   (E)   One hard copy and a digital copy of the application, plans and
supporting documents shall be submitted to the building department. In addition
to the standard permit submittal requirements, applications for small wireless
facilities, support structures or substantial modifications shall submit plans
which include the following:
      (1)   Name, address, phone number and email address of the applicant's
primary contact person in connection with the application and the person to
contact in case of an emergency.
      (2)   Evidence of and proof of insurance or self-insuring status adequate
to defend and cover claims insurance coverage, if required by the town.
      (3)   A copy of federal or state certification authorizing the applicant
to provide wireless services as a wireless services provider or
telecommunications services as a wireless infrastructure provider.
      (4)   If the applicant is a corporation or limited liability company,
proof of authority to do business in the State of Florida.
      (5)   For utilization of support structures not owned by the town, a
notarized affidavit signed by an authorized representative of the support
structure owner verifying consent to collocate on their support structure.
      (6)   An applicant for a new support structure must demonstrate that an
existing structure is not reasonably available for collocation. A report and
supporting technical data shall be submitted, demonstrating the following:
         (a)   All antenna attachments and collocations, including all
potentially useable cross country utility distribution towers, existing support
structures and other elevated structures within the proposed service area and
alternative antenna configurations have been examined, and found unacceptable.
         (b)   Reasoning as to why existing facilities such as cross country
utility distribution and other elevated structures or existing structures are
not acceptable alternatives to a new support structure.
         (c)   Reasoning as to why the adequacy of existing support structures
or the mitigation of existing support structures are not acceptable in meeting
the applicant's need or the needs of service providers shall consist of any of
the following:
            1.   No existing support structures located within the geographic
area meet the applicant's engineering requirements, and why.
            2.   Existing support structures do not have sufficient structural
integrity to support a small wireless facility and the existing support
structures cannot be sufficiently improved,
            3.   Other limiting factors that render existing support structures
unsuitable.
      (7)   Signed statement from a qualified person, together with their
qualifications, shall be included that warrants radio frequency emissions from
the antenna array(s) comply with FCC standards. The statement shall also
certify that both individually and cumulatively, and with any other facilities
located on or immediately adjacent to the proposed facility, the replacement
antenna complies with FCC standards. A copy of the radio frequency emissions
report verifying compliance with FCC standards shall be included with the
signed statement. Any signage required or recommended by the FCC to warn of RF
emissions associated with the small wireless facility shall be posted by the
applicant on the support structure.
      (8)   A stamped or sealed structural analysis of the proposed tower
prepared by a registered professional engineer licensed by the State of Florida
indicating the proposed and future loading capacity of the utility pole is
compliant with the Florida Building Code, as amended, or other applicable
requirements.
      (9)   Title report or American Land Title Association (A.L.T.A.) survey
showing all easements on the subject property.
      (10)   Simulated photographic depiction of the proposed and/or appearance
from vantage points approved by the town, including the facility types the
applicant has considered including:
         (a)   Overall height.
         (b)   Configuration.
         (c)   Physical location.
         (d)   Mass and scale.
         (e)   Materials and color.
         (f)   Illumination, if applicable.
      (11)   Proof of FAA compliance with Subpart C of the Federal Aviation
Regulations, Part 77, and "Objects Affecting Navigable Airspace," if
applicable.
      (12)   Signal propagation map for the purposes of determining potential
interference with traffic control devices.
      (13)   All other documentation, evidence, or materials necessary to
demonstrate compliance with the applicable approval criteria set forth in this
subchapter.
      (14)   Site plan. Signed and sealed site plans shall include the
following:
         (a)   Name of project and date.
         (b)   The limits of right-of-way and limits of work where work shall
be performed.
         (c)   The state plane coordinates and GIS coordinates of the proposed
location.
         (d)   Deed book, survey book, road plat or official records book and
page reference.
         (e)   Scale, north arrow, and vicinity map.
         (f)   Maximum height of the proposed structure and proposed and future
mounting elevations of future antenna, including individual measurement of the
base, support structure, and lightning rod.
         (g)   Location and size of all major public or private streets and
rights-of-way.
         (h)   Depict and identify within a minimum of 50 feet of work all
above ground infrastructure and improvements, including without limitation,
pavement, curb, sidewalks, landscaping and vegetation, buildings, utility
poles, etc. and all below ground infrastructure and utilities, including
without limitation foundations, tanks, utilities, etc. within limits of work.
         (i)   Depict and identify all existing easements within limits of work
and any additional easement(s) acquired (e.g., access easement, temporary
construction easement or other easement) for construction of work. Easements
must denote recording information.
         (j)   For new support structures, the location of existing support
structures within a 100 foot radius and the height of existing support
structures within 500 feet of the proposed structure in either direction on the
same side of the right-of-way.
         (k)   A statement or statements certifying that the construction of
wireless communication facilities proposed to be located in the public rights-
of-way will comply with all applicable standards, codes, rules and regulations
referenced in this subchapter.
         (l)   A statement describing the proposed support structure's capacity
to permit multiple users, including an example of the number and type of
antennas or other attachments that can be accommodated on support structures.
         (m)   Compliance with American National Standards Institute (ANSI)
standards for electromagnetic radiation. In order to protect the public from
excessive exposure to electromagnetic radiation, the facility applicant shall
certify through a written statement that the facility meets or exceeds current
ANSI standards as adopted by the FCC.
(Ord. 2018-06, passed 8-29-2018)
§ 93.35 APPLICATION AND REVIEW PROCEDURE.
   (A)   A right-of-way/easement permit application for collocation of small
wireless facilities, installation of a new support structure or substantial
modification is subject to the application review timeframes in this section.
   (B)   Permit applications for new support structures must include an
attestation that small wireless facilities will be collocated on the utility
pole or wireless support structure and will be used by a wireless services
provider to provide service within nine months after the date the application
is approved. A permit application for the collocation of small wireless
facilities may be included with an application to install a new support
structure.
   (C)   Determination of completion/defects. Within 14 calendar days after
receiving an application, the town must determine and notify the applicant by
electronic mail as to whether the application is complete. If an application is
deemed incomplete, the town must specifically identify the missing information.
An application is deemed complete if the town fails to provide notification to
the applicant within 14 calendar days. If the town determines that an
application is not complete, the permit authority shall notify the applicant in
writing of all defects in the application. An applicant that receives a written
notice of incompletion may cure the defects and resubmit the corrected
application within 30 calendar days of receiving the notice. If an applicant is
unable to cure the defects within the 30 day period, the applicant shall notify
the permit authority of the additional time the applicant requires to cure the
defects.
   (D)   A complete application is deemed approved if the town fails to approve
or deny the application within 60 calendar days after receipt of the
application. If the town does not use the 30-day negotiation period provided
below, the parties may mutually agree in writing to extend the 60-day
application review period. The town shall grant or deny the application at the
end of the extended period.
   (E)   Alternative location. The town may request that the proposed location
of a small wireless facility be moved to another location in the right-of-way
and placed on an alternative town utility pole or support structure or may
place a new utility pole. The town and the applicant may negotiate the
alternative location, including any objective design standards and reasonable
spacing requirements for ground-based equipment, for 30 days after the date of
the request. At the conclusion of the negotiation period, if the alternative
location is accepted by the applicant, the applicant must notify the town of
such acceptance and the application shall be deemed granted for any new
location for which there is agreement and all other locations in the
application. If an agreement is not reached, the applicant must notify the town
of such non-agreement and the town must grant or deny the original application
within 90 days after the date the application was filed. A request for an
alternative location, an acceptance of an alternative location, or a rejection
of an alternative location must be in writing and provided by electronic mail.
   (F)   The town must notify the applicant of approval or denial by electronic
mail. The town shall approve a complete application unless it does not meet the
applicable codes. If the application is denied, the town must specify in
writing the basis for denial, including the specific code provisions on which
the denial was based, and send the documentation to the applicant by electronic
mail on the day the town denies the application. The applicant may cure the
deficiencies identified by the town and resubmit the application within 30 days
after notice of the denial is sent to the applicant. The town shall approve or
deny the revised application within 30 days after receipt or the application is
deemed approved. Any subsequent review shall be limited to the deficiencies
cited in the denial.
   (G)   Denial. The town may deny a permit application for a small wireless
facility, support structure or substantial modification where:
      (1)   The applicant fails to submit a complete application;
      (2)   The applicant fails to supplement its application with additional
information as requested in the evaluation of the application;
      (3)   The applicant fails to pay the filing fee, if applicable;
      (4)   The proposed installation or modification materially interferes
with the safe operation of traffic control equipment.
      (5)   The proposed installation or modification materially interferes
with sight lines or clear zones for transportation, pedestrians, or public
safety purposes.
      (6)   The proposed installation or modification materially interferes
with compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act, as amended, or
similar federal or state standards regarding pedestrian access or movement.
      (7)   The proposed installation or modification materially fails to
comply with the 2010 edition of the Florida Department of Transportation
Utility Accommodation Manual, as amended.
      (8)   The proposed installation or modification is not in compliance with
the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 2018-06, passed 8-29-2018)
§ 93.36 BONDING REQUIREMENTS.
   Any permitee placing or installing any structure or object on town-owned
utility poles, equipment or structures within the right-of-way shall ensure
that, at least 30 days prior to the commencement of any work on town utility
poles, equipment or structures, performance security is provided to the town,
in the form of a letter of credit, in a form deemed legally sufficient by the
town attorney, bond or cash, posted in the amount of 125% of the estimated
costs of replacing the utility pole or equipment or structure. Ten percent of
that amount shall be provided as a cash bond. The estimate shall be prepared by
an engineer registered in the State of Florida to practice professional
engineering. Upon completion and approval of all permitted improvements, 90% of
the posted security will be released by the town. Ten percent of the
performance security shall remain in place at all times the attachment,
structure or object remains installed or placed on town utility poles or other
town-owned equipment within the public right-of-way. If at any time the
security funds are not in place, the structure or object shall be deemed
abandoned and shall be subject to removal pursuant to §
93.40.
(Ord. 2018-06, passed 8-29-2018)
§ 93.37 INDEMNIFICATION AND INSURANCE.
   (A)   As a condition of a permitee having its improvements or equipment
located in town public right-of-way or attached to town-owned utility poles,
equipment or structures placed within the public right-of-way, the permitee
agrees to and shall, to the extent permitted by law, defend, indemnify and hold
harmless the town, its employees, officers, agents and contractors against any
claim of liability or loss of any kind, including administrative orders and
regulations, and specifically including, without limitation, any claim of
liability or loss from personal injury or property damage resulting from or
arising out of the presence of the permitee's equipment in the town right-of-
way or attached to town- owned utility poles, equipment or structures placed
within the right-of-way and also as to any willful misconduct of the user, its
employees, contractors or agents, except to the extent such claims or damages
may be due to or caused by the willful misconduct of the town, or its
employees, officers, contractors or agents.
   (B)   The permitee agrees as a condition of permit issuance to indemnify the
town and pay the cost of the town's legal defenses, including fees of attorneys
as may be selected by the town, for all claims described in the hold harmless
clause above. Such payment on behalf of the town shall be in addition to any
and all other legal remedies available to the town and shall not be considered
to be the town's exclusive remedy.
   (C)   Any permitee placing or installing any structure or object on a town-
owned utility pole, equipment or structure located within the public right-of-
way shall ensure that, at least 30 days prior to the commencement of any work
the permitee provides to the town a certificate or certificates issued by an
insurer or insurers authorized to conduct business in Florida that is rated not
less than category A-VII by A.M. Best, subject to approval by the town,
verifying the following minimum policy coverage amounts:
General Liability Insurance policy with a $1,000,000 combined single limit for
each occurrence to include the following coverage: Operations, Products and
Completed Operations, Personal Injury, Contractual Liability covering the
right-of-way/easement permit, "X-C-U" hazards, and Errors & Omissions.
Auto Liability Insurance which includes coverage for all owned, non-owned and
rented vehicles with a $1,000,000 combined single limit for each occurrence.
Workers' Compensation and Employers Liability Insurance covering all employees
of the permitee and subcontractors, as required by law.
In the event the permit activity involves professional or consulting services,
in addition to the aforementioned insurance requirements, the permitee shall
also procure and maintain a Professional Liability Insurance Policy in the
amount of $1,000,000 per claim.
In the event the permit activity involves services related to building
construction projects the permitee shall also procure and maintain a Builders
Risk Insurance Policy with loss limits equal to the value of the construction
project.
   (D)   In addition to the above, Specialty Insurance policies covering
specific risks of loss (including but not limited to, for example: Longshore
coverage, Crane and Rigging, Inland Marine, etc.) may be required by the town.
Any additional specialty insurance coverage requirement will be dictated by the
specific activity proposed under the right-of-way/easement permit and insurance
underwriting standards, practices, procedures or products available in the
commercial insurance market at the time of the contract inception. The permitee
is required to procure and maintain all such specialty coverage in accordance
with prudent business practices within the permitee's industry.
   (E)   The permitee shall provide certificates of insurance to the town
demonstrating that the aforementioned insurance requirements have been met
prior to the commencement of work under the right-of-way/easement permit. The
certificates of insurance shall indicate that the policies have been endorsed
to cover the town as an additional insured (a waiver of subrogation in lieu of
additional insured status on the workers compensation policy is acceptable) and
that these policies may not be canceled or modified without 30 days prior
written notice to the town. The policies shall remain effective until all
wireless facilities are removed from town-owned utility poles, infrastructure
or other improvements.
   (F)   The insurance coverage enumerated above constitutes the minimum
requirements and shall in no way lessen or limit the liability of the permitee
unless against any and all claims for bodily injury, sickness, disease, death,
personal injury, damage to property or loss of use of any property or assets is
caused in whole or in part by any negligent act or omission of the town.
   (G)   The town shall not be liable to a permitee, or any of its respective
agents, representatives, or employees for any lost revenue, lost profits, loss
of technology, use of rights or services, incidental, punitive, indirect,
special or consequential damages, loss of data, or interruption or loss of use
of service, even if the town has been advised of the possibility of such
damages, whether under theory of contract, tort (including negligence), strict
liability or otherwise that is related to, arises out of, flows from or is, in
some part, caused by permitee's attachment to or use of town-owned
infrastructure.
   (H)   A permitee may not construe a permit, correspondence, or other
communication as affecting a right, privilege or duty previously conferred or
imposed by the town to or on another person. The town reserves the right to
continue or extend a right, privilege, or duty or to contract with additional
users of town-owned rights-of-way without regard to resulting economic
competition.
   (I)   A permitee is solely responsible for the risk and expense of
installation, operation, and maintenance of the permitee's attachments,
structures or improvements. The town does not warrant or represent that town-
owned utility poles, equipment or structures are suitable for placement of a
permitee's attachments. A permitee must accept the town-owned infrastructure
"as is" and "where is" and assumes all risks related to the use. The town is
not liable for any damage to attachment(s) due to an event of damage to the
pole or premises.
   (J)   A permitee may not transfer, assign, convey, or sublet a permit to
collocate on town-owned utility poles, equipment or structures without the Town
Council's prior written consent. A transfer, assignment, conveyance, or
subletting of a collocation permit without the Town Council's prior written
consent is not binding on the town. A written request to approve such a change
shall be submitted to the town. A written response will be provided within 30
days of receipt of the request.
(Ord. 2018-06, passed 8-29-2018)
§ 93.38 WAIVERS.
   (A)   Where the Town Mayor or designees and affected agencies find that
undue hardship or unreasonable practical difficulty may result from strict
compliance with this subchapter, the Town Mayor shall approve a waiver to the
requirements of this subchapter if the waiver serves the public interest.
However, if in the opinion of the Town Mayor, the intensity and location of the
development warrants an evaluation by the Town Council, the Town Mayor may
require that the applicant obtain Council approval. The applicant shall be
advised by the town, when it is determined that board action will be required.
   (B)   Conditions. An applicant seeking a waiver shall submit a written
request to the Town Mayor for the waiver stating the reasons for the waiver and
the facts which support such waiver. All requests for waivers must be submitted
prior to or in conjunction with a right-of-way/easement permit application,
preliminary plat, final engineering, final plat approval, or other applicable
land development application. A waiver, unless they determine the following:
      (1)   The particular physical conditions, shape or topography of the
specific property involved causes an undue hardship to the applicant if the
strict letter of the code is carried out.
      (2)   The granting of the waiver will not be injurious to the other
adjacent property;
      (3)   The conditions, upon which a request for waiver are based, are
peculiar to the property for which the waiver is sought and are not generally
applicable to other property and do not result from actions of the applicant;
and
      (4)   The waiver is consistent with the intent and purpose of the town
zoning regulations, the town land use plan of the town and the requirements of
this subchapter.
      (5)   Delays attributed to state or federal permits.
      (6)   Natural disasters.
      (7)   The Town Engineer and affected agencies, applicable, concur that an
undue hardship was placed on the applicant.
   If the Town Mayor approves a waiver, the Town Engineer may attach such
conditions to the waiver to assure that the waiver will comply with the intent
and purpose of this Code.
(Ord. 2018-06, passed 8-29-2018)
§ 93.39 APPEALS.
   The Town Council shall hear appeals relating to any administrative decision
or determination concerning implementation or application of these provisions,
and shall make the final decision approving or disapproving the decision or
interpretation. Any request for appeal shall be submitted to the Town Clerk
within 30 calendar days of any decision or determination. The Town Clerk shall
schedule a hearing before the Town Council within 30 calendar days of receipt
of the written request. The request shall contain the basis for the appeal and
appropriate fees. An administrative decision or determination may only be
reversed or overturned by a four-fifths vote of the entire Council entitled to
vote on such appeal.
(Ord. 2018-06, passed 8-29-2018)
§ 93.40 ABANDONMENT, TERMINATION AND REMOVAL.
   (A)   A person does not have the right to place any object, structure or
improvement in the public right-of-way or place an attachment or object on
town-owned utility poles, equipment or structures located in the public right-
of-way except as authorized in this subchapter. If an unauthorized object,
structure, improvement or attachment is discovered, the town may immediately
remove it without incurring liability to the owner, and at the owner's sole
expense, if the owner of the unauthorized attachment does not (1) remove the
unauthorized structure or attachment within three business days of
notification; or (2) apply for permission to have the attachment on town-owned
infrastructure within three business days of notification, including payment of
applicable charges or penalties.
   (B)   Any object, structure, improvement or attachment located in the public
right-of-way may be removed immediately by the town if necessary to protect
public safety or prevent imminent damage to town-owned utility poles, equipment
or structures.
   (C)   Notwithstanding any section of this subchapter to the contrary, the
town may terminate any permit or authorization to locate utilities and
associated infrastructure or attachments thereto in the public right-of-way,
when determined by the Town Engineer as necessary to accommodate a town right-
of-way or traffic safety improvement project. Such utilities, associated
infrastructure or attachments shall be removed as soon as practicable with a
time frame coordinated by the Town Engineer. The permittee or utility is
responsible for any removal and relocation costs.
   (D)   Any permitted attachment to a town-owned utility pole, infrastructure
or other improvement that is not operated for a continuous period of three
months shall be considered abandoned. The failure to pay any required fee
adopted by the Town Council for the location of an attachment on a town-owned
utility pole, infrastructure or other improvement is also deemed abandonment.
The owner of such facility shall remove the same, including any antennas,
attachments, other related appurtenances, and equipment enclosure, within 30
days of receipt of notice from the town notifying the owner of such
abandonment. Any new support structure that does not collocate a small wireless
facility to provide service within nine months after the date the support
structure permit is approved is considered abandoned.
      (1)   If there are two or more service providers using a single utility
pole or wireless support structure, then the abandonment period for the
structure shall not begin until all such service providers have ceased
operation.
      (2)   If, within the 30-day notice period, the abandoned small wireless
facility or support structure is not removed the town shall have the authority
to remove said facility.
   (E)   The failure to comply with this section will result in immediate
removal of the object, structure, improvement or attachment by the town and the
imposition of penalties as described herein. The public right-of-way shall be
restored to its original condition prior to the construction of the structure
or improvement at the expense of the owner or permitee. The town will invoice
the owner or permitee for all costs associated with removal and restoration,
plus a 10% penalty fee.
(Ord. 2018-06, passed 8-29-2018)
CHAPTER 94: FERTILIZER USE AND APPLICATION
Section
   
94.01   Short title; purpose and intent
   
94.02   Definitions
   
94.03   Applicability
   
94.04   Timing of fertilizer application
   
94.05   Fertilizer free zones
   
94.06   Fertilizer content and application rates
   
94.07   Application practices
   
94.08   Management of grass clippings and vegetative matter
   
94.09   Exemptions
   
94.10   Training
   
94.11   Licensing of commercial applicators
 
   
94.99   Penalty
§ 94.01 SHORT TITLE; PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   These regulations shall be known as the Town of Palm Shores Fertilizer
Use and Application Code.
   (B)   These regulations regulate the proper use of fertilizers by any
applicator; requires proper training of commercial and institutional fertilizer
applicators; establishes training and licensing requirements; establishes a
prohibited application period; specifies allowable fertilizer application rates
and methods, fertilizer-free zones, low maintenance zones, and exemptions.
These regulations require the use of best management practices which provide
specific management guidelines to minimize negative secondary and cumulative
environmental effects associated with the misuse of fertilizers. These
secondary and cumulative effects have been observed in and on the town's
natural and constructed stormwater conveyances, rivers, creeks, canals,
springs, lakes, estuaries and other water bodies. Collectively, these water
bodies are an asset critical to the environmental, recreational, cultural and
economic well-being of the town residents and the health of the public.
Overgrowth of algae and vegetation hinder the effectiveness of flood
attenuation provided by natural and constructed stormwater conveyances.
Regulation of nutrients, including both phosphorus and nitrogen contained in
fertilizer, will help improve and maintain water and habitat quality.
(Ord. 2011-15, passed 11-1-2011)
§ 94.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATOR.  The Mayor of the Town of Palm Shores, or an administrative
official of the town designated by the Mayor to administer and enforce the
provisions of these regulations.
   APPLICATION  or  APPLY.  The actual physical deposit of fertilizer to turf
or landscape plants.
   APPLICATOR.  Any person who applies fertilizer on turf and/or landscape
plants in the town.
   APPROVED BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES TRAINING PROGRAM.  A training program
approved per F.S. § 403.9338, or any more stringent requirements set forth in
this chapter that includes the most current version of the Florida Department
of Environmental Protection's "Florida-friendly Best Management Practices for
Protection of Water Resources by the Green Industries, 2008," as revised.
   BOARD  or GOVERNING BOARD.  The Town Council of the town.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES.  Turf and landscape practices or combination of
practices based on research, field-testing, and expert review, determined to be
the most effective and practicable on-location means, including economic and
technological considerations, for improving water quality, conserving water
supplies and protecting natural resources.
   CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER, OFFICIAL,  or INSPECTOR.  Any designated employee
or agent of the town whose duty it is to enforce codes and ordinances enacted
by the town.
   COMMERCIAL FERTILIZER APPLICATOR.  Except as provided in F.S. § 482.1562(9),
means any person who applies fertilizer for payment or other consideration to
property not owned by the person or firm applying the fertilizer or the
employer of the applicator.
   FERTILIZE, FERTILIZING  or FERTILIZATION.  The act of applying fertilizer to
turf, specialized turf, or landscape plants.
   FERTILIZER.  Any substance or mixture of substances that contains one or
more recognized plant nutrients and promotes plant growth, or controls soil
acidity or alkalinity, or provides other soil enrichment, or provides other
corrective measures to the soil.
   GUARANTEED ANALYSIS.  The percentage of plant nutrients or measures of
neutralizing capability claimed to be present in a fertilizer.
   INSTITUTIONAL APPLICATOR.  Any person, other than a private, non-commercial
or a commercial applicator (unless such definitions also apply under the
circumstances), that applies fertilizer for the purpose of maintaining turf
and/or landscape plants. INSTITUTIONAL APPLICATORS  shall include, but shall
not be limited to, owners, managers or employees of public lands, schools,
parks, religious institutions, utilities, industrial or business sites and any
residential properties maintained in condominium and/or common ownership.
   LANDSCAPE PLANT.  Any native or exotic tree, shrub, or groundcover
(excluding turf).
   LOW MAINTENANCE ZONE.  An area a minimum of ten feet wide adjacent to water
courses which is planted and managed in order to minimize the need for
fertilization, watering, mowing, and the like.
   PERSON.  Any natural person, business, corporation, limited liability
company, partnership, limited partnership, association, club, organization,
and/or any group of people acting as an organized entity.
   PROHIBITED APPLICATION PERIOD.  The time period during which a Flood Watch
or Warning, or a Tropical Storm Watch or Warning, or a Hurricane Watch or
Warning is in effect for any portion of the town, issued by the National
Weather Service, or if heavy rain 1 is likely.
   RESTRICTED APPLICATION PERIOD.  June 1 to September 30.
   SATURATED SOIL.  A soil in which the voids are filled with water. Saturation
does not require flow. For the purposes of these regulations, soils shall be
considered saturated if standing water is present or the pressure of a person
standing on the soil causes the release of free water.
   SLOW RELEASE, CONTROLLED RELEASE, TIMED RELEASE, SLOWLY AVAILABLE,  or WATER
INSOLUBLE NITROGEN.  Nitrogen in a form which delays its availability for plant
uptake and use after application, or which extends its availability to the
plant longer than a reference rapid or quick release product.
   TOWN.  The Town of Palm Shores.
   TURF, SOD,  or LAWN.  A piece of grass-covered soil held together by the
roots of the grass.
   WORLD METEOROLOGICAL ORGANIZATION DEFINITION OF HEAVY RAIN.  Rainfall
greater than or equal to 50 mm (two inches) in a 24 hour period.
   URBAN LANDSCAPE.  Pervious areas on residential, commercial, industrial,
institutional, highway rights-of-way, or other nonagricultural lands that are
planted with turf or horticultural plants. For the purposes of this section,
agriculture has the same meaning as in F.S. § 570.02.
(Ord. 2011-15, passed 11-1-2011; Ord. 2014-05, passed 5-27-2014)
§ 94.03 APPLICABILITY.
   These regulations shall be applicable to and shall regulate any and all
applicators of fertilizer and areas of application of fertilizer within the
area of the town, unless such applicator is specifically exempted by the terms
of these regulations. These regulations shall be prospective only, and shall
not impair any existing contracts.
(Ord. 2011-15, passed 11-1-2011)
§ 94.04 TIMING OF FERTILIZER APPLICATION.
   No applicator shall apply fertilizers containing nitrogen and/or phosphorus
to turf and/or landscape plants during the prohibited application period, or to
saturated soils. In addition, fertilizer containing nitrogen or phosphorus
shall not be applied to turf or landscape plants during the restricted
application period.
(Ord. 2011-15, passed 11-1-2011; Ord. 2014-05, passed 5-27-2014)
§ 94.05 FERTILIZER FREE ZONES.
   Fertilizer shall not be applied within ten feet of any pond, stream,
watercourse, lake, canal, or wetland as defined by the Florida Department of
Environmental Protection (F.A.C. Ch. 62-340) if more stringent Town Code
regulations apply, this provision does not relieve the requirement to adhere to
the more stringent regulations. Newly planted turf and/or landscape plants may
be fertilized in this Zone only for a 60 day period beginning 30 days after
planting if need to allow the plants to become well established. Caution shall
be used to prevent direct deposition of nutrients into the water. Fertilizer
containing nitrogen shall not be applied within 25 feet of the Indian River
Lagoon.
(Ord. 2011-15, passed 11-1-2011; Ord. 2014-05, passed 5-27-2014)
§ 94.06 FERTILIZER CONTENT AND APPLICATION RATES.
   (A)   No fertilizer containing phosphorous shall be applied to turf or
landscape plants in the town unless a soil or plant tissue deficiency is
verified by a University of Florida, Institute of Food and Agriculture
Sciences, approved testing methodology. In the case that a deficiency has been
verified, the application of a fertilizer containing phosphorous shall be in
accordance with rates and directions provided by F.A.C. Rule 5E-1.003(2).
Deficiency verification shall be no more than two years old. However, recent
application of compost, manure, or top soil shall warrant more recent testing
to verify current deficiencies.
   (B)   The nitrogen content of fertilizer applied to turf or landscape plants
within the town shall contain at least 50% slow release nitrogen per guaranteed
analysis label.
   (C)   Unless otherwise stipulated fertilizers applied to turf within the
town shall be formulated and applied at rates that are in accordance with
requirements and directions provided by F.A.C. Rule 5E-1.003(2), Labeling
Requirements For Urban Turf Fertilizers. Unless otherwise stipulated herein,
fertilizer applied to landscape plants within the town shall be applied in
accordance with UF/IFAS recommendations.
   (D)   Fertilizer containing nitrogen or phosphorus shall not be applied
before seeding or sodding a site, and shall not be applied for the first 30
days after seeding or sodding, except where hydro-seeding for temporary or
permanent erosion control in an emergency situation (wildfire, and the like),
or in accordance with the Stormwater Pollution Plan for that site.
(Ord. 2011-15, passed 11-1-2011; Ord. 2014-05, passed 5-27-2014)
§ 94.07 APPLICATION PRACTICES.
   (A)   Spreader deflector shields are required when fertilizing via rotary
(broadcast) spreaders. Deflectors must be positioned such that fertilizer
granules are deflected away from all impervious surfaces, fertilizer-free zones
and water bodies, including wetlands.
   (B)   Fertilizer shall not be applied, spilled, or otherwise deposited on
any impervious surfaces.
   (C)   Any fertilizer applied, spilled, or deposited, either intentionally or
accidentally, on any impervious surface shall be immediately and completely
removed to the greatest extent practicable.
   (D)   Fertilizer released on an impervious surface must be immediately
contained and either legally applied to turf or any other legal site, or
returned to the original or other appropriate container.
   (E)   In no case shall fertilizer be washed, swept, or blown off impervious
surfaces into stormwater drains, ditches, conveyances, or water bodies.
(Ord. 2011-15, passed 11-1-2011)
§ 94.08 MANAGEMENT OF GRASS CLIPPINGS AND VEGETATIVE MATTER.
   In no case shall grass clippings, vegetative material, and/or vegetative
debris be washed, swept, or blown off into stormwater drains, ditches,
conveyances, water bodies, wetlands, or sidewalks or roadways. Any material
that is accidentally so deposited shall be immediately removed to the maximum
extent practicable.
(Ord. 2011-15, passed 11-1-2011)
§ 94.09 EXEMPTIONS.
   The provisions set forth above in this chapter shall not apply to:
   (A)   Bona fide farm operations as defined in the Florida Right to Farm Act,
F.S. § 823.14.
   (B)   Other properties not subject to or covered under the Florida Right to
Farm Act that have pastures used for grazing livestock.
   (C)   Any lands used for bona fide scientific research, including, but not
limited to, research on the effects of fertilizer use on urban stormwater,
water quality, agronomics, or horticulture.
   (D)   Plants, trees and vegetables used for edible food, owned by individual
property owners or a community, provided that fertilizer application rates do
not exceed UF/IFAS recommendations or those from a County Extension Agent.
   (E)   Yard waste, compost, mulches, or other similar materials that are
primarily organic in nature and are applied to improve and enrich the physical
condition of the soil.
(Ord. 2011-15, passed 11-1-2011; Ord. 2014-05, passed 5-27-2014)
§ 94.10 TRAINING.
   (A)   All commercial and institutional applicators of fertilizer within the
incorporated area of the town, shall abide by and successfully complete the
six-hour training program in the "Florida-friendly Best Management Practices
for Protection of Water Resources by the Green Industries" offered by the
Florida Department of Environmental Protection through the University of
Florida Extension "Florida-Friendly Landscapes" program, or an approved
equivalent.
   (B)   Private, non-commercial applicators are encouraged to follow the
recommendations of the University of Florida IFAS Florida Yards and
Neighborhoods program when applying fertilizers.
(Ord. 2011-15, passed 11-1-2011)
§ 94.11 LICENSING OF COMMERCIAL APPLICATORS.
   (A)   Prior to January 1, 2014, all commercial applicators of fertilizer
within the town, shall abide by and successfully complete training and
continuing education requirements in the “Florida-friendly Best Management
Practices for Protection of Water Resources by the Green Industries” offered by
the Florida Department of Environmental Protection through the University of
Florida IFAS “Florida-10 Friendly Landscapes” program, or an approved
equivalent program, prior to obtaining a Town Local Business Tax Certificate
for any category of occupation which may apply any fertilizer to turf and/or
landscape plants. Commercial fertilizer applicators shall provide proof of
completion of the program to the town within 180 days of the effective date of
this chapter.
   (B)   After December 31, 2013, all commercial applicators of fertilizer
within the town, shall have and carry in their possession at all times when
applying fertilizer, evidence of certification by the Florida Department of
Agriculture and Consumer Services as a Commercial Fertilizer Applicator per
F.A.C. 5E-14.117(18).
   (C)   All businesses applying fertilizer to turf and/or landscape plants
(including but not limited to residential lawns, golf courses, commercial
properties, and multi-family and condominium properties) must ensure that at
least one employee has a "Florida-Friendly Best Management Practices for
Protection of Water Resources by the Green Industries" training certificate
prior to the business owner obtaining a Local Business Tax Certificate. Owners
for any category of occupation which may apply any fertilizer to turf and/or
landscape plants shall provide proof of completion of the program to the town.
(Ord. 2011-15, passed 11-1-2011)
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   Any person found in violation of these regulations shall be subject to a
fine of not less than $50 for a first offense, $100 for a second offense, and
$250 for a third or subsequent offense.
(Ord. 2011-15, passed 11-1-2011)
CHAPTER 95: GARAGE SALES
Section
   
95.01   Limitation on garage sales
 
   
95.99   Penalty
§ 95.01 LIMITATION ON GARAGE SALES.
   (A)   GARAGE SALE shall be defined as the sale of new, old, used, or
unwanted personal property displayed or offered for sale on the premises of a
residence as an incidental use of the primary use permitted in the applicable
zoning classification and not in any area within a zoning district which would
permit the retail or wholesale of such articles or items, nor similar
commercial operations. Such definition includes the word "carport sale," "yard
sale," "red tag sale," "estate sale" and other title indicating the same or
similar activity. The sale of personal property purchased for the purpose of
resale shall be prohibited.
   (B)   Each person desiring to hold a garage sale must reside at the site of
the sale.
   (C)   Only four garage sale events per residence, per calendar year shall be
allowed. Each sales event per each address shall not exceed two days and shall
be conducted during daylight hours only. Multiple family garage sales are not
prohibited.
   (D)   At the conclusion of any garage sale, all unsold property shall be
removed or packed in such a manner so as not to be visible from any public
streets or abutting properties.
   (E)   Any person holding a garage sale shall ensure that neither public
property nor private property is damaged or destroyed due to the garage sale.
Any person holding a garage sale shall ensure that attendees of the garage sale
do not trespass upon the property and/or encroach upon the privacy of other
residents. Town Hall facilities shall not be used for any parking unless
approved by the town. Any person conducting the sale shall provide for and
control adequate parking for motor vehicles so as to reasonably prevent unsafe
conditions and traffic congestion on a public street or private street adjacent
to the sale premises.
   (F)   Temporary residential garage sale signs are exempt from permits and
may be placed as permitted in §
153.009. At the conclusion of any garage sale event, all signs shall be removed
immediately.
   (G)   No building permit or other permit or license shall be required to
conduct a garage or yard sale.
   (H)   No parking shall be permitted on the right-of-way of U.S. Highway 1.
   (I)   No display of goods is permitted upon any public right-of-way,
easements, sidewalks, bike paths or other pedestrian ways. Goods shall be
located no closer than ten feet from the public right-of-way.
   (J)   Through traffic on public roadways shall not be obstructed.
   (K)   The shipping or delivery of products, equipment, or articles to the
sale site shall be prohibited.
   (L)   No vehicles shall obstruct the driveways of other homes or businesses.
   (M)   Nothing herein is intended to waive the requirements of Chapter 115,
Special Activity Permits, for any event falling within the requirements of said
chapter.
(Ord. 2012-11, passed 8-28-2012)
§ 95.99 PENALTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to conduct a garage sale
except as provided herein. Any violation of any requirement of this chapter may
be punished as per F.S. Ch. 162, or as provided in §
10.99(A)(1) of the Code of Ordinances of the town. The town may also bring suit
to restrain, enjoin or otherwise prevent the violation of this chapter in the
Circuit Court of the county.
(Ord. 2012-11, passed 8-28-2012)
CHAPTER 96: PUBLIC CAMPING, SLEEPING AND STORAGE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY
ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
Section
   
96.01   Unlawful public camping, sleeping and storage of personal property on
public property
§ 96.01 UNLAWFUL PUBLIC CAMPING, SLEEPING AND STORAGE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY ON
PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   The purpose of this section is to prevent harm to the health or safety of
the public and to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare by
prohibiting camping, sleeping and storage of personal property on public
property, which interferes with the rights of others to use the areas in the
manner for which it is intended.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning:
      CAMP. To pitch, use, or occupy camp facilities for the purposes of
habitation, as evidenced by the use of camp paraphernalia.
      CAMP FACILITIES. Include, but are not limited to, tents, huts, temporary
shelters (regardless of the type of material used to construct such temporary
shelter), cars, trucks or recreational vehicles. CAMP FACILITIES do not include
tents or temporary shelters when used temporarily in a park for recreation or
play during daylight hours when the park is open to the public.
      CAMP PARAPHERNALIA. Includes, but is not limited to, tarpaulins, cots,
beds, sleeping bags, blankets, mattresses, hammocks, cooking facilities, or
equipment.
      PARK. Land that is owned by the Town of Palm Shores and designated as a
“town park” by resolution, zoning, comprehensive plan, or any land that has
been dedicated and accepted by the Town Council for use as a passive or active
recreation area. Included in this definition are all-natural resources, water
bodies, wildlife, facilities, improvements, and materials in, on, or under the
lands so designated. PARK also includes all associated areas, including parking
lots for parks. The definition of “town park” shall extend to adjacent town
right-of-way when such areas are determined by the Town Administrator, or
designee, as utilized for a park purpose.
 
   61
2025 S-7
62   Palm Shores - General Regulations
      PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any real property, right-of-way, building, structure,
equipment, sign, shelter, vegetation, trail, and public open space, including
all associated areas such as parking lots, controlled or owned by the town,
Brevard County or the State of Florida.
      PUBLICLY CAMP OR SLEEP.
         (a)   The term includes:
            1.   Lodging or residing overnight in a temporary outdoor
habitation used as a dwelling or living space and evidenced by the erection of
a tent or other temporary shelter, the presence of bedding or pillows, or the
storage of personal belongings; or,
            2.   Lodging or residing overnight in an outdoor space without a
tent or other temporary shelter.
         (b)   The term does not include:
            1.   Lodging or residing overnight in a motor vehicle that is
registered, insured, and located in a place where it may lawfully be.
            2.   Camping for recreational purposes on property designated for
such purposes.
      STORE.  To put aside or accumulate for use when needed, to put for
safekeeping, to place or leave in a location.
      STREET. Any highway, lane, road, street, right-of-way, sidewalk,
boulevard, alley, and every way or place in the town open as a matter of right
to public pedestrian and vehicular travel. This does not include private
streets or rights-of-way.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to publicly camp, sleep or to
store personal property, including camp facilities or camp paraphernalia, in
the following areas:
      (1)   Any park; or,
      (2)   Any street or right-of-way; or,
      (3)   Any public property, improved or unimproved.
   (C)   Exception. Division (B) above is not intended to apply and it is an
exception to the provisions of this section regarding camping if:
 
2025 S-7
   Public Camping, Sleeping and Storage of Personal Property on Public
Property   63
      (1)   Camping is in a recreational vehicle, travel trailer, camper or
like unit located at town-owned public parking facilities specifically
designated for temporary lodging and in accordance with the rules and
ordinances established by the town.
      (2)   Temporary shelters are located on single-family dwelling property
for disaster housing in compliance with F.S. § 166.0335, state laws and town
ordinances.
   (D)   Penalties for violations of this section. Any person or agent of any
person or employee of such person violating any of the provisions of this
section shall subject the offender, upon conviction, to a fine not to exceed
$500 or imprisonment for a period of not to exceed 60 days or by both a fine
and imprisonment.
(Ord. 2024-03, passed 9-25-2024)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   BUSINESSES
      
111.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
      
112.   AMUSEMENT AND ENTERTAINMENT
      
113.   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
      
114.   SOLICITORS, CANVASSERS AND PEDDLERS
      
115.   SPECIAL ACTIVITY PERMITS
      
116.   PERMITS, GENERAL
CHAPTER 110: BUSINESSES
Section
General Provisions
   
110.01   Hours of operation; exception
Precious Metals
   
110.15   Record of purchases
Business Tax Receipt
   
110.30   Required
   
110.31   Term
   
110.32   Transfer
   
110.33   Change of location
   
110.34   Delinquency
   
110.35   Engaging in business without a license
   
110.36   Display
   
110.37   Schedule
   
110.38   Payment of tax on professions
Pain Management Clinics
   
110.50   Definitions
   
110.51   Pain management clinics
 
   
110.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 110.01 HOURS OF OPERATION; EXCEPTION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep a business open to the
public between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
   (B)   An owner or duly appointed agent of an owner may apply for a permit of
exemption from division (A) above of this section to be heard after duly
noticed public hearing by the Town Council. The rules governing the approval
for variances as specified in §
157.389, shall apply to the authorization of an exemption.
(2000 Code, § 22-1) (Ord. 96-02, passed 1-29-1996) Penalty, see §
110.99
PRECIOUS METALS
§ 110.15 RECORD OF PURCHASES.
   (A)   (1)   Every person dealing in precious metals such as gold, silver and
platinum shall keep a record of all purchases from private individuals at the
time of each purchase, which individuals are not themselves licensed dealers
regularly engaged in the buying and selling of precious metals. The following
information shall be obtained:
         (a)   The date of the transaction;
         (b)   The number that appears on the seller’s driver’s license, or
comparable identification used;
         (c)   The type of identification used;
         (d)   The name and address of the seller as it appears on the item of
identification;
         (e)   A complete and accurate description of the property; and
         (f)   The signature of the seller.
      (2)   If coins are purchased in large numbers so that it is impractical
to describe each coin separately, the description may consist of a general
description of the various denominations of coins included, together with their
total weight or face value.
   (B)   This record shall be made available to any law enforcement agency or
officer upon request and shall be preserved for a period of one year after
purchase.
(2000 Code, § 22-51) (Ord. 81-4, passed 6-9-1981) Penalty, see §
110.99
BUSINESS TAX RECEIPT
§ 110.30 REQUIRED.
   No person shall maintain a permanent business location or branch office
within the town for the privilege of engaging in or managing any business,
profession or occupation within the town limits without first obtaining a
license from the Town Clerk. This license shall be issued to every person or
corporation upon receipt of the amounts hereinafter provided for by the Town
Clerk, who shall issue all licenses. For purposes of this chapter, the term
LICENSE  shall be synonymous with the term LOCAL BUSINESS TAX RECEIPT  as
defined by F.S. Ch. 205 and such terms may be used interchangeably herein.
(2000 Code, § 38-31) (Ord. 81-10, passed 8-11-1981; Ord. 2013-09, passed 9-24-
2013) Penalty, see §
110.99
Statutory reference:
   Levy; municipalities, see F.S. § 205.042
§ 110.31 TERM.
   All licenses shall be sold by the Town Clerk beginning on August 1 of each
year and shall be due and payable on September 30 of each year and shall expire
on September 30 of the succeeding year. No license shall be issued for more
than one year nor for less than one year prior to April 1 of each year, after
which date a license for six months may be issued upon payment of half the
amount of the annual license tax subscribed, except as otherwise provided in
this subchapter.
(2000 Code, § 38-32) (Ord. 81-10, passed 8-11-1981) Penalty, see §
110.99
Statutory reference:
   Business tax receipts; dates due and delinquent; penalties, see F.S. §
205.053(1).
§ 110.32 TRANSFER.
   (A)   All licenses may be transferable to a new owner, with the approval of
the Town Clerk when there is a bona fide sale or transfer of the business,
profession or occupation.
   (B)   The transfer shall be upon payment of a transfer fee of up to 10% of
the annual license tax, but not less than $3 nor more than $25, and
presentation of the original license and evidence of the sale to the Town
Clerk.
(2000 Code, § 38-33) (Ord. 81-10, passed 8-11-1981) Penalty, see §
110.99
Statutory reference:
   Conditions for levy; municipalities, see F.S. § 205.043(2)
§ 110.33 CHANGE OF LOCATION.
   Upon written request and presentation of the original license, any license
may be transferred from one location to another location in the town upon
payment of a transfer fee of up to 10% of the annual license tax, but not less
than $3 nor more than $25.
(2000 Code, § 38-34) (Ord. 81-10, passed 8-11-1981) Penalty, see §
110.99
Statutory reference:
   Conditions for levy; municipalities, see F.S. § 205.043(2)
§ 110.34 DELINQUENCY.
   All licenses not renewed by October 1 of each year shall be considered
delinquent.
(2000 Code, § 38-35) (Ord. 81-10, passed 8-11-1981) Penalty, see §
110.99
Statutory reference:
   Business tax receipts; dates due and delinquent; penalties, see F.S. §
205.053(1)
§ 110.35 ENGAGING IN BUSINESS WITHOUT A LICENSE.
   Any person engaging in or managing any business, occupation or profession
without first obtaining an occupational license shall be subject to a penalty.
(2000 Code, § 38-36) (Ord. 81-10, passed 8-11-1981) Penalty, see §
110.99
Statutory reference:
   Business tax receipts; dates due and delinquent; penalties, see F.S. §
205.053(1)
§ 110.36 DISPLAY.
   The license for each business shall be prominently displayed in the office
or place of business or other appropriate place.
(2000 Code, § 38-38) (Ord. 81-10, passed 8-11-1981)
§ 110.37 SCHEDULE.
   The following enumerated license taxes shall be paid for the following
classifications of businesses, occupations and professions:
License Classification Tax
License Classification                                              Tax
Abstractors                                                         $105.00
Acetylene/electric welding                                          $84.00
Advertisers                                                         $210.00
Advertising business                                                $147.00
Alleys, bowling                                                     $354.37
Apartment house                                                     $236.25
Asphalt or other paving material manufacturer                       $1,050.00
Auction shop                                                        $275.62
Auctioneer                                                          $157.50
Auditors/accountants                                                $105.00
Auto and marine transport                                           $77.70
Auto motel/motor court
   Base                                                          $105.00
   First 10 units                                                $73.50
   Each additional unit                                          $7.35
Auto wrecking service                                               $105.00
Automatic music machine                                             $157.50
Automobile business and RV sales, service                           $210.00
Bait and tackle shops                                               $236.25
Banks                                                               $590.62
Barbershops                                                         $73.50
Beauty shops                                                        $73.50
Bicycle agency, repair                                              $42.00
Bicycle rental                                                      $52.50
Boat builders with yard and sales                                   $236.25
Boats for hire                                                      $21.00
Bonds, criminal/bail                                                $210.00
Bookkeeping service                                                 $105.00
Bootblack stands                                                    $21.00
Bottling works                                                      $236.25
Broadcasting, radio or T.V.                                         $236.25
Brokers                                                             $210.00
Business schools                                                    $105.00
Cabinet makers                                                      $77.70
Cafeterias/restaurants
   Base                                                          $42.00
   Accommodates 25 persons or less, each person                  $3.15
   Accommodates over 25 persons, each person                     $1.57
Carnivals                                                           $315.00
Cemetery                                                            $354.37
Children’s nursery                                                $52.50
Circus                                                              $590.62
Citrus fruit shipper                                                $210.00
Cleaning, pressing, dyeing                                          $157.50
Clinical laboratory/research                                        $210.00
Coin machine                                                        $210.00
Commercial sewing                                                   $77.70
Computer consult/repair/service/sales                               $131.25
Concrete block plant                                                $210.00
Confectionery store                                                 $84.00
Contractors
   General                                                       $105.00
   Other and subcontractor                                       $52.50
   Communications                                                $52.00
Credit association                                                  $50.00
Dairy products                                                      $210.00
Dance hall                                                          $393.75
Dancing schools                                                     $105.00
Deadly weapons sales (gun shop)                                     $210.00
Decorators                                                          $105.00
Detective                                                           $105.00
Developer                                                           $210.00
Dragline and crane companies                                        $105.00
Drugstore                                                           $105.00
Electric light and power company                                    $315.00
Electricians and plumbers                                           $105.00
Engine repair (small)                                               $77.70
Engine repair (large)                                               $131.25
Express company                                                     $315.00
Exterminators/fertilizers                                           $157.50
Filling station                                                     $157.50
Fishery                                                             $77.70
Florist shops                                                       $110.00
Fortuneteller                                                       $1,050.00
Fruit, vegetable stands                                             $73.50
Funeral home                                                        $315.00
Furniture store                                                     $147.50
Gasoline, oils, grease service                                      $315.00
Gift shop                                                           $52.50
Golf
   Driving ranges                                                $157.50
   Miniature                                                     $105.00
Heating, air conditioning sales and service                         $105.00
High-rise or apartment house
First 20 units                                                      $236.25
   For each additional unit                                      $15.75
Hobby shop                                                          $73.50
Home improvement/repair                                             $77.70
Hospitals                                                           $420.00
Hypnotic therapeutist                                               $105.00
Ice cream parlor                                                    $105.00
Ice sales station                                                   $393.75
Income tax service                                                  $105.00
Insurance adjuster company                                          $52.50
Insurance company or agent                                          $157.50
Iron works                                                          $105.00
Irrigation sales and service                                        $105.00
Itinerant vendors                                                   $105.00
Jewelry and watch repair                                            $73.50
Junk shops                                                          $393.75
Laboratories and research                                           $131.25
Landscape architect                                                 $157.50
Laundries                                                           $52.50
Lawn/tractor sales and service                                      $157.50
Lawn service                                                        $42.00
Manufacturers                                                       $353.85
Merchant’s license/adult books and video                          $236.25
Milk/dairy products                                                 $210.00
Mind readers                                                        $656.25
Money lenders                                                       $393.75
Mower sales and service                                             $157.50
Neon lighting sign manufacturer                                     $157.50
News and magazines shops                                            $105.00
Newspaper                                                           $157.50
Newsstand                                                           $73.50
Nursery, trees and shrubs                                           $73.50
Nursing home
   Up to 10 patients                                             $105.00
   Each additional patient                                       $6.30
Packing house                                                       $157.50
Paint and body shop                                                 $105.00
Palmists                                                            $1,050.00
Parking lots                                                        $236.25
Pawnbrokers                                                         $525.00
Pet shop                                                            $73.50
Pharmacy                                                            $105.00
Photographers                                                       $105.00
Piano tuner                                                         $73.50
Pipe fitting                                                        $73.50
Playground equipment manufacture and sales                          $183.75
Pony rides                                                          $52.50
Pressure cleaning                                                   $77.70
Printing                                                            $157.50
Professional licenses; e.g., accountants, architects, attorneys,
dentists, doctors, engineers, physicians, veterinarians, all other  $105.00
professions
Public copying or stenographer                                      $78.75
Railroad, steamship, airline company                                $492.18
Real estate/developers/managers                                     $210.00
Refrigeration, air conditioning repair                              $105.00
Retail and wholesale sales                                          $315.00
Roof painting                                                       $73.50
Roofing and sheet metal                                             $105.00
Rugs/carpet cleaning                                                $77.70
Sawmills                                                            $210.00
Septic tank cleaning                                                $210.00
Service stations                                                    $105.00
Sewing, dressmaking                                                 $52.50
Shooting galleries                                                  $210.00
Shows                                                               $236.25
Sign painting                                                       $77.70
Skating rink                                                        $210.00
Soda fountain                                                       $105.00
Solicitors                                                          $105.00
Sporting goods shop                                                 $105.00
Storage (cold)                                                      $210.00
Storage
   Automobile or marine                                          $210.00
   Wholesale                                                     $236.25
Street paving contractor                                            $236.25
Sundries and food establishments                                    $77.70
Taxicab; auto for hire                                              $157.50
Taxidermist                                                         $105.00
Telegraph system                                                    $315.00
Telephone answering service                                         $105.00
Telephone companies                                                 $420.00
Theaters and movie houses                                           $236.25
Theatrical shows, per week                                          $393.75
Trading post, used merchandise                                      $236.25
Trailer parks or travel trailer parks
   Base                                                          $105.00
   First 5 units                                                 $44.10
   Each additional                                               $2.10
Tree trimming                                                       $73.50
U-drive-it car and truck                                            $236.25
Upholstering                                                        $73.50
Water conditioning and service                                      $105.00
Well drilling and installation                                      $105.00
Wildlife rehabilitation                                             $210.00
Window cleaners                                                     $52.50
All other businesses or occupations not specifically listed in this $77.70
schedule
 
(2000 Code, § 38-39) (Ord. 81-10, passed 8-11-1981; Ord. 2002-17, passed 1-9-
2003; Res. 2007-06, passed 6-26-2007) Penalty, see §
110.99
Statutory reference:
   Exemptions from licenses, see F.S. §§ 205.063 through 205.193
§ 110.38 PAYMENT OF TAX ON PROFESSIONS.
   The tax provided in §
110.37 for accountants, architects, lawyers, physicians or other similar
professions and occupations, shall be construed to mean that each individual
shall pay the tax, whether practicing by himself or herself or in partnership
or employed by another.
(2000 Code, § 38-40) (Ord. 81-10, passed 8-11-1981)
PAIN MANAGEMENT CLINICS
§ 110.50 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DRUG STORE. A retail pharmacy, with or without a drive-thru lane, unless
otherwise specified in this code.
   MEDICAL OFFICE. A professional office that provides services to the public
by physicians, dentists, surgeons, chiropractors, pharmacists, osteopaths,
physical therapists, nurses, acupuncturists, podiatrists, optometrists,
psychiatrists, or others who are duly licensed to practice their respective
profession in the State of Florida, as well as other persons, including
technicians and assistants, who are acting under the supervision and control of
a licensed health care practitioner. Retail pharmacies staffed by pharmacists
that sell prescription drugs, nonprescription drugs, or both, as well as other
goods for sale to the public are not MEDICAL OFFICES for purposes of this code.
Pain management clinics are MEDICAL OFFICES for purposes of this code.
   PAIN MANAGEMENT CLINIC. Any office, center, clinic or other facility
unaffiliated with any hospital hospice and/or facility for the treatment of the
terminally ill in Brevard County, Florida, for which its primary focus,
advertising or concentration is providing, prescribing and/or dispensing of
medication (i) to persons with complaints of pain, chronic or otherwise; or
(ii) with the intent to reduce or manage pain.
   RETAIL PHARMACY. A business offering goods or services for retail sale and
on-site dispensing of prescription drugs, nonprescription drugs or both.
(Ord. 2010-06, passed 8-25-2010)
§ 110.51 PAIN MANAGEMENT CLINICS.
   (A)   Pain management clinics shall be allowed only in the C, Commercial
Zoning District, of the town, and are prohibited as home occupations. Pain
management clinics are subject to the following supplemental regulations:
      (1)   On-site sale, provision or dispensing of those substances
identified in Schedule I, II, III and IV, in F.S. § 893.03 and those identified
in and by F.S. § 893.035 and F.S. § 89.0356 is prohibited, unless otherwise
expressly permitted by state or federal law.
      (2)   Any parking demand created by a pain management clinic shall not
exceed the parking spaces located on-site, or allocated on-site, as required by
the town’s parking regulations. An applicant shall be required to demonstrate
that on-site traffic and parking attributable to the pain management clinic
will be sufficient to accommodate traffic and parking demands generated by the
pain management clinic based upon a current traffic and parking study prepared
by a certified professional. Traffic and parking analyses shall be required to
be predicted in part upon traffic and parking impacts from existing pain
management clinics in Florida. The source of any such information shall be
provided to the town for purposes of verification. Town staff shall be required
to verify the information contained in the traffic and parking study with the
appropriate(s) of the local government(s) where the comparable information is
derived.
      (3)   No pain management clinic shall limit the form of payment for goods
or services to cash only.
      (4)   Each application for a certificate of occupancy for a pain
management clinic shall disclose each owner and operator of such clinic, and
the individual principal of any entity that owns a clinic. Such information
shall be updated within 30 days of any change in ownership or the principals of
any owner.
      (5)   No pain management clinic shall be owned, in whole or in part, or
have any contractual relationship with, whether as a principal, officer,
member, managing member, employee, independent contractor or otherwise, any
physician, pharmacist or any other person who prescribes drugs who, within five
years prior to the receipt of any application for a certificate of occupancy or
business license, (i) has been suspended, had his or her license revoked or
been subject to disciplinary action for prescribing, dispensing, administering,
providing, supplying or selling any controlled substance in violation of any
state, federal or similar law where such person is licensed to practice; (ii)
has been convicted of, pled no lo contendre to, or violated any plea agreement
regarding an arrest, for a violation of any state, federal, or similar law
where such person is licensed to practice related to drugs or alcohol,
specifically including but not limited to, prescribing, dispensing,
administering, providing, supplying or selling any controlled substance; (iii)
had been suspended, had his or her license revoked or been subject to
disciplinary action by any state, federal or other governmental entity where
such person is licensed to practice to take any action against such person’s
license as result of dependency on drugs or alcohol; or (iv) has been convicted
of, pled no lo contendre to, or violated any plea agreement regarding an arrest
for, any felony or crime involving moral turpitude.
      (6)   No pain medication clinic shall employ any person who has been
convicted of, pled no lo contendre to, or violated any plea agreement regarding
an arrest for any felony or crime involving moral turpitude within any five
year period before any application for a certificate of occupancy or business
license. Any application for a certificate of occupancy or business license
shall include an affidavit, under oath, by the medical director, attesting that
neither the medical director nor any other person employed in any capacity by
the pain management clinic, whether an employee, independent contractor or
otherwise, (i) has been convicted of, pled no lo contendre to, or violated any
plea agreement regarding an arrest, for a violation of any state, federal or
similar law related to drugs or alcohol, specifically including but not limited
to prescribing, dispensing, administering, providing, supplying or selling any
controlled substance; or (ii) has been convicted of, pled no lo contendre to,
or violated any plea agreement regarding an arrest for, any felony or crime
involving moral turpitude. The failure to provide the required affidavit shall
result in the automatic right of the pain management clinic to operate in the
town.
      (7)   A pain management clinic shall be operated by a medical director
who is a Florida licensed physician.
      (8)   A pain management clinic, in order to obtain a certificate of
occupancy, shall provide the town with any applications (i) an inventory of
diagnostic equipment to be located at the clinic; (ii) a natural disaster
management plan; and (iii) a floor plan showing the location and the nature of
adequate security for protection of any drugs to be dispensed in the course of
business.
   (B)   Any remedies related to enforcement of the regulations recited herein
are in addition and supplemental to those existing by law.
(Ord. 2010-06, passed 8-25-2010)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for
which no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions
of §
10.99.
   (B)   Precious metals. Each purchase violating §
110.15 shall constitute a separate offense, and any person convicted of
violating the provisions of this section shall be punished as provided in §
10.99.
(2000 Code, § 22-51) (Ord. 81-4, passed 6-9-1981)
   (C)   Business tax receipt.
      (1)   Delinquency. All delinquent licenses shall be subject to a
delinquency penalty of 10% for the month of October plus an additional 5%
penalty for each month of delinquency thereafter until paid, but the total
delinquency penalty shall not exceed 25% of the occupational license fee.
(2000 Code, § 38-35)
      (2)   Engaging in business without a license. Any person engaging in or
managing any business, occupation or profession without first obtaining an
occupational license shall be subject to a penalty of 25% of the license
determined to be due, in addition to the other penalties prescribed in this
chapter. In accordance with §
10.99(A)(3), each day of engaging in business, occupation or profession without
complying with this chapter shall constitute a separate and distinct violation
of such chapter and the penalties herein shall be deemed daily penalties.
(2000 Code, § 38-36)
      (3)   Penalty for violation of §§
110.30 through
110.38. Any person violating any of the provisions of §§
110.30 through
110.38 shall upon conviction be punished by a fine as provided in §
10.99.
      (4)   Additional remedies. Any person who engages in any business,
occupation, or profession covered by this chapter, who does not pay the
required business tax within 150 days after the initial notice of tax due, and
who does not obtain the required receipt is subject to civil actions and
penalties, including court costs, reasonable attorneys’ fees, additional
administrative costs incurred as a result of collection efforts, and a penalty
of up to $250. In accordance with §
10.99(A)(3), each day of engaging in business, occupation or profession without
complying with this chapter shall constitute a separate and distinct violation
of such chapter and the penalties herein shall be deemed daily penalties.
      (5)   Owner of property responsibility. The owner of any property or
premises that allows any tenant or occupant of the property or premises, other
than the owner themselves, to operate any business, occupation or profession
covered by this chapter without a business tax may be brought before the Code
Enforcement Special Magistrate pursuant to
Chapter 31 of this Code and subject to a penalty as prescribed by §
31.99.
(2000 Code, § 38-37) (Ord. 2013-09, passed 9-24-2013)
CHAPTER 111: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
General Provisions
   
111.01   Definitions
Hours of Sale
   
111.15   Limited
Open Containers
   
111.30   Policy and intent
   
111.31   Definitions
   
111.32   Prohibition
   
111.33   Exceptions
   
111.99   Penalty
Cross reference:
   Businesses, see
Ch. 110
   Nudity, sexual conduct prohibited in establishments dealing in alcoholic
beverages, see §
131.17
Statutory reference:
   Alcoholic beverages, see F.S. Ch. 561
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 111.01 DEFINITIONS.
   The words, terms and phrases used in this chapter shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in F.S. Chs. 561 through 565, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning.
(2000 Code, § 6-1)
HOURS OF SALE
§ 111.15 LIMITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any retail vendor in alcoholic beverages
holding a license issued by the state authorizing the vendor to sell alcoholic
beverages but not to serve them, to sell or permit the sale of alcoholic
beverages within the boundaries of the town except during the following times:
      (1)   On Monday through Saturday, between 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. the
following day; or
      (2)   On Sunday between 12:00 noon and 12:00 a.m. the following day.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any retail vendor in alcoholic liquors or
beverages holding a license issued by the state, authorizing them to serve
beverages on the premises to sell, serve or permit the sale of alcoholic
beverages for consumption on the premises and within the boundaries of the town
except during the following times:
      (1)   On weekdays between 8:00 a.m. and 3:00 a.m. the following day; or
      (2)   On Sunday between 12:00 noon and 3:00 a.m. the following day, beer
and wine only may be sold.
(2000 Code, § 6-31) (Ord. 69-01, passed 7-22-1969; Ord. 2022-04, passed 11-25-
2022)
OPEN CONTAINERS
§ 111.30 POLICY AND INTENT.
   The town finds that the consumption of alcoholic beverages while driving or
riding in or on a motor vehicle poses a grave imminent hazard to the health and
welfare of the residents of the town; therefore, it is declared to be the
policy of the town that the consumption of alcoholic beverages and the
possession of any open containers containing alcoholic beverages while driving
or riding in or on a motor vehicle is prohibited while on a highway.
(2000 Code, § 6-61) (Ord. 87-06, passed 1-26-1988) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.31 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Any beverage containing more than one-half of 1% of
alcohol by weight. Proof that a beverage in question was contained in an opened
bottle or can, labeled as beer, ale, malt liquor, malt beverage, wine, wine
cooler or other similar name and that bears the manufacturer’s insignia, name
or trademark shall be prima facie evidence that the beverage is an ALCOHOLIC
BEVERAGE.
   HIGHWAY. Any public street, avenue, boulevard, roadway, alley, sidewalk,
parking lot or other right-of-way or any area upon which the public has the
right to travel, whether public or private, located within the county.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any vehicle, as defined in Florida Statutes, that is self-
propelled and every vehicle that is propelled by electric power, but not
including any bicycle, moped, golf cart or lawnmower.
   OPEN CONTAINER. Any bottle, can or other receptacle or container containing
any alcoholic beverage or any mixture containing an alcoholic beverage, that
has been opened or a seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially
removed.
   POSSESSION OF AN OPEN CONTAINER. The container is physically held by or
readily accessible to a person by being within the person’s grasp or if the
person is observed drinking from the open container. An open container shall
not be considered to be in the possession of a person if the open container is
located in a locked glove compartment, or other locked compartment, trunk or
other nonpassenger area of the vehicle as intended by the manufacturer. An open
container shall not be considered in the possession of a person if the open
container is contained in a properly sealed box or located in the refrigerator
or other cabinet of a motor home or recreational vehicle type unit primarily
designed as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use,
which either has its own motive power or is mounted on or drawn by another
vehicle.
   READILY ACCESSIBLE. The open container that contains any alcoholic beverage
is in the vehicle and although not in the actual, physical manual possession of
the driver or passenger, is located in a place and manner that it can be easily
reached.
(2000 Code, § 6-63) (Ord. 87-06, passed 1-26-1988)
§ 111.32 PROHIBITION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person in any motor vehicle to possess,
to have readily accessible or to transport, or to allow others to possess, to
have readily accessible or to transport any open container containing any
alcoholic beverage, or any mixture containing an alcoholic beverage, while the
motor vehicle is upon a highway within the town.
   (B)   Open containers on public streets, areas prohibited. It shall be
unlawful for any person to serve, drink, consume or possess an open container
of alcoholic beverage on the premises outside of or on any street, alley,
sidewalk, park, deck, walkway, municipal or governmental property or parking
area open to the general public and located within 100 yards of any building
containing an establishment open to the general public, not including any
building customarily used for residential purposes within the town.
   (C)   Loitering outside establishments. No person shall loiter, mill, stand
or sit on the premises outside of or on any streets, alleys, sidewalks, parks,
decks, walkways, municipal or governmental property or parking areas open to
the general public and located within 100 feet of any building containing an
establishment which is licensed by the state or any administrative agency of
the state to sell alcoholic beverages. Nothing in this section shall be
construed to apply to any building or premises customarily used for residential
purposes.
   (D)   The provisions of divisions (B) and (C) above may be waived in
accordance with §
115.06(C)(5) provided; however, that under no circumstances may the provisions
of division (A) above be waived.
(2000 Code, § 6-64) (Ord. 87-06, passed 1-26-1988; Ord. 2013-08, passed 9-24-
2013) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.33 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to the following:
      (1)   Paying passengers and their guests, on a bus, limousine, taxicab or
other motor vehicle that is operated by duly licensed drivers in the course of
conducting an ongoing, duly licensed and authorized business or providing paid
passenger transportation or service, provided that no open container containing
any alcoholic beverage is in the possession of or readily accessible to the
driver;
      (2)   To any open container in a refrigerator in the living area of house
trailers, travel trailers, camping trailers, motor homes, campers and other
similar types of facilities that are primarily designed and constructed to
provide temporary living quarters and utilized for traveling and recreational
purposes and that are equipped with refrigeration facilities;
      (3)   The possession of any open container containing any alcoholic
beverage by any state-licensed beverage sales person, caterer, vendor or agent,
but only for purposes specifically related to their employment as salespersons,
caterers, vendors or agents;
      (4)   The possession of any open container containing any alcoholic
beverage by any duly ordained or authorized minister, pastor, priest, rabbi or
any other similarly designated person of any religious order, monastery, church
or religious body, but only for purposes specifically related to their
fulfillment of their religious duties;
      (5)   The possession of any open container containing any alcoholic
beverage by any law enforcement officers and employees of law enforcement
agencies, but only while in the performance of their lawful duties;
      (6)   The possession of any open container containing any alcoholic
beverage by any person engaged in picking up empty beverage containers solely
for the purpose of collecting the deposit or value of the containers; and
      (7)   The possession of any open containers containing any alcoholic
beverage by any person participating in a litter control or pickup program.
   (B)   The exceptions stated in division (A) above of this section shall
apply to only possession and transportation of alcoholic beverages and open
containers, and not to drinking or consuming alcoholic beverages, except for
the exception that applies to passengers as stated in division (A)(1) above of
this section.
(2000 Code, § 6-65) (Ord. 87-06, passed 1-26-1988)
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this chapter shall be
punished as provided in §
10.99.
(2000 Code, § 6-62) (Ord. 87-06, passed 1-26-1988)
CHAPTER 112: AMUSEMENT AND ENTERTAINMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
112.01   Code adopted
Indoor Skate Parks
   
112.15   Generally
   
112.16   Guidelines
   
112.17   Environment
   
112.18   Exceptions
Slot Machines or Devices
   
112.30   Purpose and intent; findings; jurisdiction; statutory authority
   
112.31   Definitions
   
112.32   Slot machines or devices prohibited
 
   
112.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 112.01 CODE ADOPTED.
   The regulations entitled Amusement Device Code, edition adopted by the Town
Council and on file in the Town Clerk’s office is adopted by reference as the
amusement device code for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing
conditions hazardous to life and property. A copy of the amusement device code
shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk and shall be available for
inspection at the regular business hours of the office.
(2000 Code, § 10-1) (Ord. 96-09, passed 1-28-1997)
INDOOR SKATE PARKS
§ 112.15 GENERALLY.
   All building code and life safety codes in force and effect at the time a
skate park is to be opened, built, rebuilt, used, constructed or otherwise
engaged for public or private use will be used as the governing regulations for
the construction, use or engagement.
(2000 Code, § 10-309) (Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-23-2000)
§ 112.16 GUIDELINES.
   The following guidelines shall also be followed:
   (A)   All ramps four feet or higher will require signed and sealed
engineered drawings;
   (B)   Prior to using existing ramps, regardless of size or height, the
owner/operator shall provide signed, sealed structural inspection reports as to
their safety and ability for public use;
   (C)   Existing ramps four feet or higher will be required to be anchored
down;
   (D)   All new ramps four feet or higher will have to be anchored in
accordance with the engineering specifications;
   (E)   Lighting will be face down into the skating area;
   (F)   A valid signed, sealed certificate of insurance will be submitted to
the Town Clerk prior to occupational license approval. The insurance shall
remain in effect for the life of the occupational license;
   (G)   The owner/operator shall provide the town with a duly executed hold/
harmless agreement, releasing the town from any and all liability in
association with the use of the licensed facility by the public; and
   (H)   Occupational licenses may be approved by the Town Council upon receipt
of the following:
      (1)   Inspection report or sealed engineered drawings as noted above;
      (2)   Insurance forms;
      (3)   Hold harmless agreement; and
      (4)   Building official inspection report.
(2000 Code, § 10-310) (Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-23-2000) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.17 ENVIRONMENT.
   All town ordinances for noise, litter, nuisances, signage, landscaping,
lighting and the like shall remain in effect for this business operation.
(2000 Code, § 10-311) (Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-23-2000)
§ 112.18 EXCEPTIONS.
   This subchapter does not apply to wheelchair ramps for the disabled, unless
a particular ramp is for use as a recreational or leisure activity.
(2000 Code, § 10-312) (Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-23-2000)
SLOT MACHINES OR DEVICES
§ 112.30 PURPOSE AND INTENT; FINDINGS; JURISDICTION; STATUTORY AUTHORITY.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to regulate, within the town those games,
machines or devices which are unlawful under F.S. Ch. 849, because the machines
are slot machines or devices as defined herein and in F.S. Ch. 849. The Town
Council finds that evidence has been propounded indicating that slot machines
or devices can lead to gambling addictions, along with the secondary
consequences that the addictions impose upon the community, including increases
in crime, debt, suicide and other negative effects on the health, safety,
morals and welfare of the residents and visitors to the areas where these
devices exist. By law, local governments have all powers of self-government
which do not conflict with state laws, including those police powers sufficient
to eliminate public nuisances and regulate activities which would otherwise
cause harm to the public. Pursuant to the Town Charter, the Town Council hereby
intends to regulate slot machines or devices to accomplish the purposes set
forth above.
(Ord. 2007-04, passed 2-27-2007)
§ 112.31 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CASINO-TYPE SLOT MACHINE. For the purposes of this subchapter, a machine,
device, game or instrument which is prohibited by F.S. § 849.16, and which, by
means of skill or chance, or both, has as its object the lining up of two or
more colors, lights or spinning objects, or any combination thereof.
   SLOT MACHINES OR DEVICES. An amusement machine, device, game or instrument
operated by means of the insertion of a coin, bill, currency, credit card,
debit card, ticket, token or slug, for use as a game, contest of skill or
amusement of any description, which device, machine, game or instrument is
similar to, or in the nature of a casino-type slot machine. This definition is
not intended to and specifically does not include merchandise vending machines,
coin-operated mechanical or electrical musical instruments or devices, or coin-
operated amusement devices which are not in the nature of, or similar to,
casino-type slot machines.
(Ord. 2007-04, passed 2-27-2007)
§ 112.32 SLOT MACHINES OR DEVICES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to have, own, operate, use or allow another to
have, own, operate or use a slot machine or device in the town and slot
machines or devices are hereby prohibited in the town.
   (B)   No occupational licenses shall be issued by the town for any business
or organization which proposes to operate a slot machine or device in the town,
and no occupational license shall be issued by the town for a slot machine or
device.
   (C)   This subchapter shall not be construed to amend the land development
code, or any other land development regulation or ordinance in effect in the
town.
(Ord. 2007-04, passed 2-27-2007) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for
which no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions
of §
10.99.
   (B)   Slot machines or devices. Violations of §§
112.30 through
112.32 shall be punishable as provided in §
10.99 of the code of ordinances, or enforcement by any other available means
including, but not limited to, an action before the Code Enforcement Board of
the town or a civil action for injunctive relief.
(Ord. 2007-04, passed 2-27-2007)
CHAPTER 113: ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
113.001   Purpose, findings, intent and incorporation of recitals
   
113.002   Construction
   
113.003   Obscenity, indecent exposure unlawful
   
113.004   Definitions
   
113.005   Notice
   
113.006   Business tax receipt; home occupations
   
113.007   Immunity from prosecution
Licensing Provisions
   
113.020   License required
   
113.021   Location generally
   
113.022   Responsibilities of other offices and departments
   
113.023   License application and application fee
   
113.024   Advertising
   
113.025   Contents of application
   
113.026   Continuing duty; false or misleading information
   
113.027   Consent
   
113.028   Investigation of application
   
113.029   Issuance or denial of license
   
113.030   Reasons for denial of application or license
   
113.031   Reapplication after denial
   
113.032   Annual license fee
   
113.033   Contents of license, terms of license, renewals, expiration lapse
   
113.034   Records and reports
   
113.035   Transfer of license
   
113.036   Establishment name change
   
113.037   Suspension and revocation of license
   
113.038   Suspension and revocation proceedings
   
113.039   Worker records
Requirements
   
113.050   General requirements for all adult entertainment establishments and
sexually-oriented businesses
   
113.051   Sexually-oriented business regulations
   
113.052   Adult theater regulations
   
113.053   Adult performance establishment regulations
   
113.054   Commercial bodily contact establishment regulations
   
113.055   Escort service regulations
Engaging in Prohibited Activity
   
113.070   Customers
   
113.071   Workers; operators
Operation
   
113.085   Operation without a license
   
113.086   Operation contrary to operational requirements
   
113.087   Use of restrooms or dressing rooms
Unlawful Activities
   
113.100   Minors
   
113.101   Records
   
113.102   Hours of operation
   
113.103   Special prohibitions relating to escorts and escort services
   
113.104   Special prohibitions related to commercial bodily contact
   
113.105   Commercial bodily contact establishments prohibited; savings
provision
   
113.106   Sexual encounter businesses prohibited; prohibited acts; unlawful
provisions
 
   
113.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 113.001 PURPOSE, FINDINGS, INTENT AND INCORPORATION OF RECITALS.
   (A)   Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually-
oriented businesses and adult entertainment establishments in order to promote
and protect the public health, safety, good order, morals and general welfare
of the citizens of the town, to establish reasonable and uniform regulations of
adult entertainment establishments and sexually-oriented businesses within the
town. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of
imposing an unreasonable limitation or unreasonable restriction on the content
of any lawful communicative materials including sexually-oriented materials.
Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this chapter to unreasonably
restrict or deny access by adults to sexually-oriented materials protected by
the First Amendment or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of
sexually-oriented entertainment protected by the First Amendment to their
intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this chapter to condone
or legitimize the distribution of obscene or otherwise illegal material.
   (B)   Findings. Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects
of adult uses on the community presented in hearings and in reports made
available to the Council, and on findings incorporated in Supreme Court cases
presented for consideration by the Town Council in the record supporting this
chapter, including but not limited to City of Renton v. Playtime Theaters,
Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986); Young v. American Mini Theaters, 427 U.S. 50 (1976);
Barnes v. Glen Theater, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991), on materials made of record
relating to the St. Johns County Public Nudity Ordinance, and on the substance
of and findings made or incorporated in studies accomplished in other
communities and ordinances enacted in other communities, including, but not
limited to, New York, New York; City of Houston Ordinance 97-75; Senate Bill
Number 232, as passed by the Kansas State Legislature; Phoenix, Arizona;
Tucson, Arizona; St. Paul, Minnesota; Minneapolis, Minnesota; Houston, Texas;
Indianapolis, Indiana; Amarillo, Texas; Garden Grove, California; Los Angeles,
California; Austin, Texas; Macon-Bibb County, Georgia; Palm Beach County,
Florida; Manatee County, Florida; the findings of the Attorney General of the
State of Minnesota; the report of United States Attorney General’s Commission
on Pornography (1986); Jacksonville, Florida; Detroit, Michigan; and A Summary
of a National Survey of Real Estate Appraisers Regarding the Effect of Adult
Bookstores on Property Values, conducted by the Division of Planning,
Department of Metropolitan Development, Indianapolis, January 1984; the
publication entitled Protecting Communities From Sexually-Oriented Businesses
(Southwest Legal Press, Inc.); the publication entitled Local Regulation Of
Adult Businesses (Clark, Boardman and Callaghan); publications prepared by the
Florida Family Association, Inc. (Tampa, Florida) relating to the regulation of
sexually-oriented businesses and adverse secondary effects of sexually-oriented
businesses; the Report to: The American Center for Law and Justice on the
Secondary Impacts of Sex Oriented Businesses, Peter R. Hecht, Ph.D. (1996); and
the findings of fact relating to the Adult Entertainment Code of Orange County,
Florida, and the findings of fact relating to the Sexually-Oriented Business
and Adult Entertainment Establishment Ordinance of Seminole County, Florida,
matters and materials submitted at the public hearings relating to this chapter
and other matters and documents relating to all of the above; the Town Council
finds:
      (1)   Sexually-oriented businesses and adult entertainment establishments
lend themselves to ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities that are
presently uncontrolled or not adequately controlled by the operators of the
establishments or businesses. Further, there are presently no mechanisms or
inadequate mechanisms to make the owners of these businesses or establishments
responsible for the activities that occur on their premises;
      (2)   Certain workers of certain sexually-oriented businesses and adult
entertainment establishments defined in this chapter engage in a higher
incidence of certain types of illicit sexual behavior than workers of other
business establishments;
      (3)   Sexual acts, including masturbation and oral and anal sex, occur at
sexually-oriented businesses and adult entertainment establishments, especially
those which provide private or semi-private areas, booths or cubicles for
viewing films, videos, live sex shows and those having physical interaction
between workers and customers;
      (4)   Offering and providing private spaces encourages the previously
mentioned activities, which create unhealthy conditions;
      (5)   Persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult arcades and other
sexually-oriented businesses and adult entertainment establishments for the
purpose of engaging in sex within the premises of businesses and
establishments;
      (6)   At least 50 communicable diseases may be spread by activities
occurring in sexually-oriented businesses and adult entertainment
establishments, including, but not limited to, syphilis, gonorrhea, human
immunodeficiency virus infection (HIV-AIDS), genital herpes, hepatitis B, Non
A, Non B amebiasis, salmonella infections and shigella infections;
      (7)   Since 1981 and to the present, there has been an increasing
cumulative number of reported cases of AIDS caused by the human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in the United States, 600 in 1982, 2,200 in 1983,
4,600 in 1984, 8,555 in 1985, 253,448 through December 31, 1992 and currently
there are 1,400,000 people infected with the disease nationally with 40,000
people becoming infected annually;
      (8)   As of December 31, 1995, there have been 51,838 reported cases of
AIDS in the state with over 100,000 AIDS cases being reported in the state from
1983 through 2005 and the state ranks third in cumulative AIDS cases in the
United States and has the second highest AIDS rate in the United States;
      (9)   From 1981 to June 1996, the number of living persons testing
positive for the HIV antibody with AIDS symptoms has risen to 73,217 in the 28
states having confidential reporting requirements;
      (10)   The number of cases of early (less than one year) syphilis in the
United States reported annually has risen, with 33,613 cases reported in 1982
and 45,200 through November of 1990 and between 2004 and 2005, the national
syphilis rate increased 11.1%;
      (11)   The number of cases of gonorrhea in the United States reported
annually remains at a high level, with over one-half million cases being
reported in 1990 and currently 350,000 cases of gonorrhea are reported annually
with Florida reporting over 20,000 cases of gonorrhea annually;
      (12)   The Surgeon General of the United States, in his report of October
22, 1986, has advised the American public that AIDS and HIV infection may be
transmitted through sexual contact, intravenous drug abuse, exposure to
infected blood and blood components, and from an infected mother to her
newborn;
      (13)   According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS and HIV infection,
as well as syphilis and gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by sexual acts;
      (14)   Sanitary conditions in some sexually-oriented businesses and adult
entertainment establishments are unhealthy, in part, because the activities
conducted there are unhealthy, and, in part, because of the unregulated nature
of the activities and the failure of owners and operators of the facilities to
self-regulate those activities and maintain those facilities;
      (15)   Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen is found
in the areas of sexually-oriented businesses and adult entertainment
establishments where persons view “adult” oriented films which gives rise to
health and aesthetic concerns;
      (16)   The findings noted in division (B)(1) through (B)(15) above and as
set forth hereinafter raise substantial governmental concerns;
      (17)   Sexually-oriented businesses and adult entertainment
establishments have operational characteristics that should be reasonably
regulated in order to protect those substantial governmental concerns;
      (18)   A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to
place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and the operators
of the sexually-oriented businesses and adult entertainment establishments.
Further, a licensing procedure will place a heretofore nonexistent incentive on
the operators to see that the business or establishment is run in a manner
consistent with the good order, health, safety and welfare of its patrons and
workers, as well as the citizens of the town. It is appropriate to require
reasonable assurances that the licensee is the actual operator of the business
or establishment, fully in possession and control of the premises and
activities occurring therein;
      (19)   Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring sufficient lighting
on premises with adult booths advances a substantial governmental interest in
curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity occurring in adult theaters;
      (20)   Requiring licensees of sexually-oriented businesses and adult
entertainment establishments to keep information regarding current workers and
certain past workers will help reduce the incidence of certain types of
criminal behavior by facilitating the identification of potential witnesses or
suspects and by preventing minors from working at businesses and
establishments;
      (21)   The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately
responsible for the day-to-day operation and maintenance of the sexually-
oriented business and adult entertainment establishments, where the information
is substantially related to the significant governmental interest in the
operation of the uses, will aid in preventing the spread of sexually
transmitted diseases;
      (22)   It is desirable in the prevention of the spread of communicable
diseases to obtain a limited amount of information regarding certain workers
who may engage in the conduct which this chapter is designed to prevent or who
are likely to be witnesses to the activity;
      (23)   The fact that an applicant for an adult entertainment
establishment or sexually-oriented business license has been convicted of a
sexually related crime leads to the rational assumption that the applicant may
engage in that conduct in contravention of this chapter;
      (24)   Commercial establishments exist or may exist within the town and
other nearby cities and counties in central Florida where adult entertainment
material is possessed, displayed, exhibited, distributed and/or sold for
commercial purposes in the form of books, magazines, periodicals or other
printed material, or photographs, films, motion pictures, prints, videotapes,
slides, computer digital graphic recordings or other visual representations or
recordings, or recordings or other audio matter, or instruments, novelties,
devices, or paraphernalia which depict, illustrate, describe or relate to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas;
      (25)   Commercial establishments exist or may exist within the town and
other nearby cities or counties in the state where adult entertainment and
sexually-oriented commercial activities in the form of nude, semi-nude or
topless dancers, entertainers, performers or other individuals, who, for
commercial gain, perform or are presented while displaying or exposing
specified anatomical areas; or engage in straddle dancing or touching with
customers;
      (26)   Commercial sexually-oriented businesses exist or operate or may
exist or operate within the town or other nearby cities or counties in the
state where sexually-oriented services are offered for commercial or pecuniary
gain in the form of commercial physical contact, escort services and other
services providing sexual encounters. The workers of sexually-oriented
businesses operating in the state engage in physical contact or touching with
customers including, but not limited to, acts of prostitution, or encourage or
entice the customers to engage in lewdness;
      (27)   The activities occurring at sexually-oriented businesses and adult
entertainment establishments occur at establishments and businesses which
operate primarily for the purpose of making a profit and, as such, are subject
to regulation by the town in the interest of the good order, health, safety,
economy, property values, morals and general welfare of the people, businesses
and industries of the town. A major industry which is important to the
community’s economic welfare is tourism by persons seeking to bring children to
visit the town who wish to stay in a community with a family atmosphere not
dominated by commercialized sexual themes;
      (28)   When the activities occurring at sexually-oriented businesses and
adult entertainment establishments are present in establishments and
businesses, other activities which are illegal, unsafe or unhealthful tend to
accompany them, concentrate around them and be aggravated by them. Other
activities include, but are not limited to, prostitution, pandering,
solicitation for prostitution, lewd and lascivious behavior, exposing minors to
harmful materials and an unhealthy and unsanitary environment, possession,
distribution and transportation of obscene materials, sale or possession of
controlled substances, and violent crimes against persons and property;
      (29)   When the activities occurring at sexually-oriented businesses and
adult entertainment establishments are competitively exploited in
establishments and businesses, they tend to attract an undesirable number of
transients, blight neighborhoods, discourage wholesome tourism, adversely
affect neighboring businesses, lower real property values, promote the
particular crimes described above and, ultimately, lead residents and
businesses to move to other locations;
      (30)   Sexually-oriented businesses and adult entertainment
establishments often have exterior signs or exterior appearance that are
incongruous with other business signage, lower the surrounding property values
and contribute to urban decline;
      (31)   The activities occurring at sexually-oriented businesses and adult
entertainment establishments sometimes occur in establishments and businesses
concurrent with the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages which
concurrence leads to a further increase in criminal activity, unsafe activity
and disturbances of the peace and order of the surrounding community and
creates additional hazards to the health and safety of customers and workers
and further depreciates the value of adjoining real property harming the
economic welfare of the surrounding community and adversely affecting the
quality of life, commerce and community environment;
      (32)   Physical contact or touching within sexually-oriented businesses
and adult entertainment establishments between workers exhibiting specified
anatomical areas and customers poses a threat to the health of both and
promotes the spread of communicable and social diseases;
      (33)   In order to preserve and safeguard the good order, health, morals,
safety and general welfare of the people of the town it is necessary and
advisable for the town to regulate the conduct of owners, managers, operators,
agents, workers, entertainers, performers and customers at sexually-oriented
businesses and adult entertainment establishments;
      (34)   The potential dangers to the good order, morals, health, safety
and general welfare of the people of the town posed by permitting a sexually-
oriented business or adult entertainment establishment to operate without first
meeting the requirements for obtaining a license under this chapter are so
great as to require the licensure of the establishments prior to their being
permitted to operate;
      (35)   Requiring operators of sexually-oriented businesses and adult
entertainment establishments to keep records of information concerning workers
and certain recent past workers as well as customer contracts and other matters
and materials will help reduce the incidence of certain types of criminal
behavior by facilitating the identification of potential witnesses or suspects
and by making it difficult for minors to work at or be customers in the
establishments;
      (36)   Prohibiting sexually-oriented businesses and adult entertainment
establishments from operating within set distances of educational institutions,
religious institutions, residences, areas zoned or designated for residential
use, and parks at which minors are customarily found, will serve to protect
minors from the adverse affects of the activities that accompany the
establishments and businesses;
      (37)   Straddle dancing, unregulated private performances and enclosed
adult booths in sexually-oriented businesses and adult entertainment
establishments have resulted in indiscriminate commercial sex between
individuals and poses a threat to the health of the participants and promotes
the spread of communicable sexually transmitted diseases. Straddle dancing is
primarily conduct rather than communication or expression;
      (38)   Workers at sexually-oriented businesses and adult entertainment
establishments engage in a higher incidence of certain types of unhealthy or
criminal behavior than workers of other establishments and businesses
including, but not limited to, a very high incidence of illegal prostitution or
engaging in lewdness in violation of F.S. Ch. 796, operation without business
tax receipts and illegal and unlicensed massage;
      (39)   Physical contact or touching between workers of sexually-oriented
businesses and adult entertainment establishments and customers poses a threat
to the health of both and promotes the spread of communicable and sexually
transmittable diseases;
      (40)   The practice of not paying or underpaying workers at sexually-
oriented businesses and adult entertainment establishments and requiring them
to earn their entire income from tips or gratuities from their customers who
are predisposed to want sexual activity has resulted in a high incidence of
prostitution and crimes related to lewdness by workers;
      (41)   Sexually-oriented businesses and adult entertainment
establishments involve some activities that are pure conduct engaged in for the
purpose of making a profit, rather than speech or expressive activity and,
therefore, are subject to and require increased regulation to protect the
health, good order, morals, welfare and safety of the community;
      (42)   Requiring sexually-oriented businesses to post a listing of
services provided and restrict services to those listed as well as maintaining
a customer contract and transaction record in a daily register will discourage
incidents of criminal behavior such as lewdness and prostitution thereby
further safeguarding the health of both workers and customers and will assist
facilitating the identification of potential witnesses or suspects if criminal
acts do occur; and
      (43)   The general welfare, health, good order, morals and safety of the
citizens of the town will be promoted by the enactment of this chapter.
   (C)   Intent. It is the intent of this chapter to protect and preserve the
good order, health, peace, morals, safety and welfare of the citizens of the
town. This chapter regulates conduct and is not an ordinance that affects the
use of land as contemplated by F.S. § 166.041.
   (D)   Authority. This chapter is enacted under the constitutionally derived
home rule power of the town in the interest of the good order, health, morals,
peace, safety and general welfare of the people of the town.
   (E)   Recitals. It is the Town Council’s further intention to accomplish
those intents and purposes expressed by the Town Council in the recitals of the
ordinance from which this section derives, each of which are incorporated in by
reference into this section.
   (F)   Speech protection. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit
constitutionally protected expression or speech. This chapter is intended to
reasonably regulate the adult entertainment industry and sexually-oriented
businesses which engage in commercial activities involving acts or services of
a sexually explicit nature or which involve acts or services involving matters
which are sexual in nature.
(Ord. 2007-11, passed 6-26-2007)
§ 113.002 CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   This chapter shall be liberally construed to accomplish its purpose of
reasonably regulating sexually-oriented businesses and adult entertainment
establishments in order to reduce or eliminate adverse secondary effects of the
businesses and establishments. See for example, and not by way of limitation,
Barnes v. Glen Theater, Inc., 501 U.S. 560, 111 S. Ct. 2456, 115 L.Ed. 2d 504
(1991), Café 207, Inc. v. St. Johns County, 856 F. Supp. 641 (M.D. Fla. 1994);
affirmed, Café 207, Inc. v. St. Johns County, 66 F. 3d 272 (11th Cir. 1995);
cert. denied, 134 L Ed. 2d.647 (U.S. April 22, 1996). This chapter shall not be
construed to authorize any illegal act under federal law, state law or town
ordinance. This chapter is intended to reasonably regulate the matters in order
to reduce or eliminate the adverse secondary effects of commercial
establishments and businesses. The regulation of alcoholic beverage
establishments is also addressed in the town code and other provisions of law.
   (B)   Unless otherwise indicated, all provisions of this chapter shall apply
equally to all persons, regardless of sex. Masculine pronouns, such as “he,”
“his,” and “him,” as employed in this chapter, shall also be construed to apply
to feminine pronouns and neutral pronouns, unless the context suggests
otherwise. Words used in the singular number shall include the plural number,
unless the context suggests otherwise.
(Ord. 2007-11, passed 6-26-2007)
§ 113.003 OBSCENITY, INDECENT EXPOSURE UNLAWFUL.
   As a matter of state and federal law, obscenity is unlawful in the town.
Likewise, state law prohibits indecent exposure. Nothing in this chapter shall
be construed to allow or permit the possession, distribution and transportation
of obscene materials; to authorize the exposing of persons under 18 years of
age to motion pictures, exhibitions, shows, representations and presentations
of specified sexual activities or persons displaying or exhibiting specified
anatomical areas; or the indecent exposure of a person as prohibited by state
law.
(Ord. 2007-11, passed 6-26-2007) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.004 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULT BOOKSTORE/ADULT VIDEO STORE.
      (1)   An establishment which, as its principal business purpose, sells or
rents adult material or which offers adult materials for sale or rent as a
significant portion of its stock and trade as defined more particularly herein
below.
      (2)   Any establishment in which any one or more of the following five
elements occur shall be presumed to be an adult bookstore/adult video store:
         (a)   The adult material is accessible to customers; ACCESSIBLE TO
CUSTOMERS means that the item can be physically touched, picked up, handled by
a customer before being transferred from the control of a worker, or is
visually displayed so that an adult or child present in the store can view
substantially more than its name alone;
         (b)   The individual items of adult material offered for sale and/or
rental comprise more than 10% of the unused individual items publicly displayed
at the establishment as stock in trade in the following categories: books,
magazines, periodicals, other printed matter, slides, photographs, films,
motion pictures, videotapes, compact disks, DVDs, computer digital graphic
recordings, other visual representations, audio recordings and other audio
matter;
         (c)   The gross income each month from the sale and rental of adult
material comprises more than 10% of that month’s gross income from the sale and
rental of the goods and material at the establishment;
         (d)   The floor area used to display adult material comprises more
than 10% of the floor area used for display of all goods and material at the
establishment; and/or
         (e)   The establishment uses any of the following terms in
advertisements or any other promotional activities relating to the adult
material: “XXX,” “XX,” “X,” or any series of the letter “X” whether or not
interspersed with other letters, figures or characters; “erotic” or deviations
of that word; “adult entertainment,” “adult books,” “adult videos” or similar
phases; “sexual acts” or similar phrases; “nude” or “nudies” or similar phrases
which letters, words or phrases a reasonable person would believe to be
promotional of the purchase or rental of adult material.
      (3)   In recognition of the provisions of F.S. §§ 847.013 and 847.0133,
which protects minors from exposure to obscene material, any business which is
an adult bookstore/adult video store shall have in place at each entrance to
the business a sign, no greater than one square foot in size, stating “Persons
under 18 years of age not permitted.”
   ADULT BOOTH. A separate booth inside an adult entertainment establishment
accessible to any person, regardless of whether a fee is charged for access.
The term ADULT BOOTH includes, but is not limited to, a peep show booth or
arcade, or other booth used to view adult material. The term ADULT BOOTH does
not include a foyer through which any person can enter or exit the
establishment or a rest room.
   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT.
      (1)   The display or exposure of any specified anatomical area by a
worker to a customer to the extent permitted by
Chapter 131, Public Nudity, as codified, regardless of whether the worker
actually engages in performing or dancing or where workers wear or display to a
customer any covering, tape, pastie or other device which simulates or
otherwise gives the appearance of the display or exposure of any specified
anatomical areas regardless of whether the worker actually engages in
performing or dancing;
      (2)   Providing adult material for commercial or pecuniary gain;
      (3)   The offering, soliciting or contracting to dance or perform by a
worker with or for a customer with the acceptance of any consideration, tip,
remuneration or compensation from or on behalf of that customer; or
      (4)   The dancing or performing by a worker with at or within three feet
of a customer with the acceptance of any consideration, tip, remuneration or
compensation from or on behalf of that customer.
   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT. An adult performance establishment, adult
bookstore/adult video store, adult motel or adult theater as those terms are
defined herein, which is operated for commercial or pecuniary gain. An
establishment with an adult entertainment license shall be presumed to be an
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT.
   ADULT MATERIAL. One or more of the following, regardless of whether it is
new or used:
      (1)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, photographs,
films, motion pictures, DVDs, videotapes, video cassettes, slides, computer
digital graphic recordings or other visual representations, tape recordings,
disks or other audio matter, which have as their primary or dominant theme
matters depicting, illustrating, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas; or
      (2)   Instruments, novelties, devices or paraphernalia which are designed
for use in connection with specified sexual activities, excluding bona fide
birth control devices.
   ADULT MODEL. Any person who, for commercial or pecuniary gain, offers,
suggests or agrees to engage in a private performance, modeling or display of
male or female lingerie, bathing suits, under garments or specified anatomical
areas to the extent permitted by
Chapter 131, Public Nudity, to the view of a customer.
   ADULT MOTEL. Any motel, hotel, boarding house, rooming house or similar
commercial establishment which offers accommodations to the public for any form
of consideration whose advertisements or business name includes the word
“adult” or which advertises to the public outside of the premises of the
establishment and visible from a public right-of-way the presentation of
closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video tapes,
DVDs, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions, which have
as their primary or dominant theme matters depicting, illustrating or relating
to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. The term ADULT
MOTEL is included within the definition of ADULT THEATER.
   ADULT PERFORMANCE ESTABLISHMENT.  
      (1)   Any establishment where any worker:
         (a)   Engages in a private performance, acts as an adult model, or
displays or exposes any specified anatomical areas to a customer, regardless of
whether the worker engages in dancing or any particular activity;
         (b)   Wears and displays to a customer any covering, tape, pastie or
other device which simulates or otherwise gives the appearance of the display
or exposure of any specified anatomical areas, regardless of whether the worker
actually engages in performing or dancing;
         (c)   Offers, solicits or contracts to dance or perform with or for a
customer and accepts any consideration, tip, remuneration or compensation from
or on behalf of that customer; or
         (d)   Dances or performs at or within three feet of a customer and
accepts any consideration, tip, remuneration or compensation from or on behalf
of that customer.
      (2)   A bona fide private club whose membership as a whole engages in
social nudism or naturalism as in a nudist resort or camp and at which
specified sexual activities do not occur shall be presumed not to be an ADULT
PERFORMANCE ESTABLISHMENT.
   ADULT THEATER. An establishment which consists of an enclosed building, or a
portion or part of an enclosed building, or an open-air area used for viewing
by persons of films, motion pictures, DVDs, video cassettes, video tapes,
slides, computer digital graphic recordings or other photographic reproductions
which have as their primary or dominant theme, matters depicting, illustrating
or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. ADULT
MOTELS and ADULT BOOTHS are included within the definition of ADULT THEATER.
   ADULT VIDEO STORE. See ADULT BOOKSTORE.
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES. All distilled spirits and all beverages containing one-
half of 1% or more alcohol by volume. It shall be prima-facie evidence that a
beverage is an alcoholic beverage if there is proof that the beverage in
question was or is known as beer, wine, whiskey, moonshine whiskey, moonshine,
shine, rum, gin, tequila, bourbon, vodka, scotch, scotch whiskey, brandy, malt
liquor, or by any other similar name or names, or was contained in a bottle or
can labeled as any of the above names, or a name similar thereto, and the
bottle or can bears the manufacturer’s insignia, name or trademark. Any person
who, by experience in the handling of alcoholic beverages, or who by taste,
smell, or drinking of alcoholic beverages has knowledge of the alcoholic nature
thereof, may testify as to his or her opinion about whether the beverage is an
alcoholic beverage.
   COMMERCIAL BODILY CONTACT.
      (1)   The manipulation, washing, scrubbing, stroking or touching, for
commercial or pecuniary gain, of the body of another person directly, or
indirectly through a medium or using any object, instrument, substance or
device between a worker and a customer.
      (2)   The following persons engaged in the bona fide performance of the
following activities shall not be deemed to be engaging in commercial bodily
contact for the purposes of this chapter when they are engaged in the bona fide
practice of their occupation or profession:
         (a)   Persons licensed as a massage therapist or apprentice massage
therapist pursuant to F.S. Ch. 480, when providing massage services in an
establishment licensed under F.S. Ch. 480;
         (b)   Persons licensed under the laws of the state to practice
medicine, surgery, osteopathy, chiropody, naturopathy or podiatry;
         (c)   Persons licensed under the laws of the state as a physician’s
assistant or nurse;
         (d)   Persons holding a drugless practitioner’s certificate under the
laws of the state;
         (e)   Persons licensed as barbers or cosmetologists under the laws of
the state;
         (f)   Persons performing authorized services in a hospital, nursing
home, sanitarium, adult congregate living facility, group home, day care center
or similar place of business when owned and operated in accordance with the
laws of the state;
         (g)   Persons who are instructors, coaches or athletic trainers
employed by, or on behalf of, any professional, amateur, Olympic or similar
athletic team engaging in bona fide athletic events, or when employed by a
governmental entity or a bona fide educational institution; and
         (h)   Persons licensed as physical therapists under the laws of the
state.
   COMMERCIAL BODILY CONTACT ESTABLISHMENT. Any establishment, business or
place operated for commercial or pecuniary gain or where for any form of
consideration workers or customers engage in commercial bodily contact or any
establishment, business or place any portion of which is set aside, advertised,
promoted or used as a place where commercial bodily contact occurs or which is
described or depicted as a “body scrub salon,” “body wash salon” or “body
relaxation salon.”
   COMMERCIAL OR PECUNIARY GAIN. Operated for commercial or pecuniary gain
shall be presumed for any establishment which has received a business tax
receipt. For the purposes of this chapter, operation for COMMERCIAL OR
PECUNIARY GAIN shall not depend on actual profit or loss. An establishment
which has a business tax receipt or an establishment which advertises itself as
a type of adult entertainment establishment shall be presumed to be operated
for COMMERCIAL OR PECUNIARY GAIN.
   COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT. Any business, location or place which conducts or
allows to be conducted on its premises any activity for commercial or pecuniary
gain.
   CONVICTION. A determination of guilt resulting from plea or trial,
regardless of whether adjudication was withheld or whether imposition of
sentence was suspended.
   CUSTOMER.
      (1)   Any person present at an adult entertainment establishment or
sexually-oriented business, other than operators or workers, regardless of
whether the person has given or paid any consideration to be present at the
adult entertainment establishment or sexually-oriented business and regardless
of whether the person has paid any money for goods or services at or to the
adult entertainment establishment or sexually-oriented business; or
      (2)   Any person, excluding a worker or operator, who has paid, or has
offered, agreed, been solicited, or had someone else offer or agree on that
person’s behalf to pay any consideration, fee, or tip to an operator or worker
of an adult entertainment establishment or sexually-oriented business.
   EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION. A premises or site upon which there is an
institution of learning for minors, whether public or private, which conducts
regular classes and/or courses of study required for eligibility to
certification by, accreditation to or membership in the State Department of
Education of Florida, Southern Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools or
the Florida Council of Dependent Schools. The term EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION
includes a premises or site upon which there is a nursery school, kindergarten,
elementary school, junior high school, senior high school, Charter school or
any special institution of learning, a vocational institution, professional
institution, an institution of higher education, a community college, junior
college, four-year college or university.
   ENTITY. Any proprietorship, partnership, corporation, limited liability
company, association, business trust, joint venture, joint-stock company or
other for profit and/not for profit organization by whatever name, title or
description.
   ESCORT.
      (1)   Any person who, for commercial or pecuniary gain, compensation or
tips, agrees to, offers to go, or goes to any place, including, but not limited
to, a business, hotel, motel, residence, boat, vessel, motor vehicle or other
mode of transportation to do any of the following acts:
         (a)   Act as a companion or date for, or converse with a customer;
         (b)   Engage in commercial bodily contact with another person;
         (c)   Engage in a private performance;
         (d)   Engage in adult modeling or act as an adult model;
         (e)   Display specified anatomical areas, strip naked or go topless;
or
         (f)   Engage in any specified sexual activity.
      (2)   Nothing in this definition shall be construed to legalize
prostitution or other conduct prohibited by this code or other law. Workers of
a licensed adult-performance establishment for whom worker records are
maintained pursuant to this chapter are excluded from the definition of ESCORT
when engaged in the expressive display of specified anatomical areas at a
licensed adult-performance establishment.
      (3)   An ESCORT who is a paid employee type worker of an escort service
for whom taxes and Social Security payments are withheld and paid by the escort
service, and who is not an independent contractor, is not required to obtain
his or her own sexually-oriented business license for activities conducted
pursuant to employment with the escort service.
   ESCORT SERVICE. A person, business, establishment or place operated for
commercial or pecuniary gain, which advertises as an “escort,” “escort service”
or “escort agency” or otherwise offers or advertises that it can furnish
escorts, a private performance, or adult models; or offers or actually
provides, arranges, dispatches, or refers workers or themselves to act as an
escort or engage in a private performance for a customer. An affirmative
defense to an allegation that any person, business or establishment or entity
is acting as an ESCORT SERVICE is that it is a bona fide dating or matching
service which arranges social matches or dates for two persons who each wish to
meet a compatible companion when neither of the persons solicits, accepts or
receives any financial gain or any monetary tip, consideration or compensation
for the meeting or date is not an ESCORT SERVICE.
   ESTABLISHMENT. Any place, site or premises, or portion thereof, upon which
any person, corporation or business entity of any type conducts activities or
operations for commercial or pecuniary gain including, but not limited to, any
place, site or premises from where an escort service dispatches or refers
workers to other locations or at which an escort service receives business
calls from customers.
   LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. An officer who is on official duty for any law
enforcement agency.
   LICENSEE. Any person, corporation, partnership or other entity whose
application for an adult entertainment establishment or sexually-oriented
business license has been granted and any person, corporation, partnership or
other entity who owns or operates or controls the establishment or business.
   OPERATOR. Any person who engages in or performs any activity which is
necessary to or which facilities the operation of a sexually-oriented business
or an adult entertainment establishment including, but not limited to, the
licensee, manager, owner, doorman, bouncer, bartender, disc jockey, sales
clerk, ticket taker, movie projectionist, DVD operator, dispatcher,
receptionist, attendant or supervisor.
   PARK. A tract of land within any jurisdiction which is kept for ornament or
recreation and which is maintained as public property including, but not
limited to, a playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic
field, basketball or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths, wilderness areas
or other similar public land.
   PERSON. Includes, but is not limited to, an individual, associations, joint
ventures, partnerships, estates, trusts, business trusts, syndicates,
fiduciaries, corporations, limited liability companies and any and all other
similar entities and all officers, directors and principal stockholders of the
associations, joint ventures, partnerships, estates, trusts, business trusts,
syndicates, fiduciaries, corporations or other similar entities.
   PRIVATE PERFORMANCE. Modeling, posing or the display or exposure of any
specified anatomical area by a worker to a customer while the customer is in an
area not accessible during the display to all other persons in the
establishment or, while the customer or worker is in an area which is not on
the premises of the establishment, or in which the customer or worker is
totally or partially screened or partitioned during the display from the view
of persons outside of the area.
   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER BUSINESS.   
      (1)   Any person or entity which for any form of consideration or
remuneration or which charges an admission fee and provides a place for the
purpose of providing, encouraging or allowing three or more persons to engage
in any specified sexual activity among themselves or with other persons.
      (2)   The following shall be presumed not to be a sexual encounter
business:
         (a)   A bona fide private club whose membership as a whole engages in
social nudism or naturalism as in a nudist resort or camp and at which
specified sexual activities do not occur;
         (b)   A state licensed sexual therapist; or
         (c)   A bona fide hotel or motel licensed by the state.
   SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS. A commercial bodily contact establishment,
escort service or sexual encounter business. A business shall be a SEXUALLY-
ORIENTED BUSINESS, whether services are provided on the premises of an
establishment or on an out call basis at any other place and regardless of
whether the business is licensed under this chapter. A business with a
sexually-oriented business license shall be presumed to be a SEXUALLY-ORIENTED
BUSINESS. An individual operating a sexually-oriented business is subject to
the provisions of this chapter notwithstanding the fact that services are being
provided at or from a residence, motor vehicle, vessel or any other location
and a license pursuant to this chapter is required unless the individual is a
paid employee for whom taxes and Social Security payments are withdrawn and
paid by the licensed establishment, worker records are maintained, and the
individual is not an independent contractor.
   SHERIFF. The Sheriff of Brevard County, Florida.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.   
      (1)   Any of the following:
         (a)   The male or female genitals;
         (b)   The male or female pubic area;
         (c)   The vulva;
         (d)   The anus;
         (e)   The penis;
         (f)   The scrotum;
         (g)   The cleavage of the buttocks;
         (h)   The buttocks;
         (i)   The anal cleft;
         (j)   The anal cleavage;
         (k)   The areola on the breast of a female;
         (l)   The nipple on the breast of a female; or
         (m)   The female breast below a line immediately above the top of the
areola the line running horizontal across the top of the entire breast, but
shall not include any portion of the cleavage between the human female breasts
typically exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit or other
wearing apparel, provided that the areola is not exposed.
      (2)   Body paint, body dyes, tattoos, liquid latex whether wet or dried,
dental floss, g-strings, thongs and similar coverings shall not be considered
an opaque covering.
   SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACT.  
      (1)   A violation of this chapter;
      (2)   Any felony not otherwise specified in this definition;
      (3)   An offense under F.S. Ch. 794, (Sexual Battery);
      (4)   An offense under F.S. Ch. 796, (Prostitution);
      (5)   An offense under F.S. Ch. 800, (Lewdness; Indecent Exposure);
      (6)   An offense under F.S. Ch. 826, (Bigamy; Incest);
      (7)   An offense under F.S. Ch. 847, (Obscene Literature; Profanity);
      (8)   An offense under F.S. Ch. 775, §§ 775.21 et seq. (Sexual Predators
Act); or
      (9)   An offense against an analogous federal statute.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.
      (1)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or
tumescence;
      (2)   Acts of human anilingus, bestiality, buggery, cunnilingus,
coprophagy, coprophilia, fellatio, flagellation, masochism, masturbation,
necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, sadism, sadomasochism, sapphism, sexual
intercourse, sodomy, urolagnia or zooerasty;
      (3)   Fondling or other touching of human genitals, pubic region, any
part of the buttocks, anus or female breast;
      (4)   Oral, anal or vaginal penetration by, or union with, the sexual
organ or any other part of the body of another;
      (5)   Anal or vaginal penetration of another or oneself with any object;
      (6)   The handling or fondling of the sexual organ of another for the
purpose of masturbation directly or through a medium; or
      (7)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in divisions (1) through (6) above.
   STRADDLE DANCE.
      (1)   The use by a worker of any part of his or her body to touch the
genital or pubic area of another person, or the touching of the genital or
pubic area of any worker by another person; or the straddling of the legs of a
worker over any part of the body of a customer at the establishment, regardless
of whether there is a touch or touching; or the use by a worker, of any part of
his or her body to touch the genital, pubic region, buttock, anus or female
breast of another person while at the establishment, or the touching of the
genital, pubic region, buttock, anus or female breast of any worker by a
customer while at the establishment.
      (2)   Conduct shall be a STRADDLE DANCE regardless of whether the touch
or touching occurs while the worker is displaying or exposing any specified
anatomical area.
      (3)   Conduct shall also be a STRADDLE DANCE regardless of whether the
touch or touching is direct or through a medium.
      (4)   The terms LAP DANCE, TABLE DANCE and FACE DANCE are included within
the term STRADDLE DANCE.
   TOWN COUNCIL. The Town Council of Palm Shores, Florida.
   WORKER. A person who works, performs or provides services at an adult
entertainment establishment or at or for a sexually-oriented business,
irrespective of whether the person is paid a salary or wage and shall include,
but is not limited to, employees, independent contractors, subcontractors,
lessees or sub-lessees who work or perform at an adult entertainment
establishment or at or for a sexually-oriented business. An operator is a type
of WORKER.
(Ord. 2007-11, passed 6-26-2007)
Editor’s note:
   The source of definitions of term specified anatomical areas above is The
New Webster’s Medical Dictionary (Bolander, 1991). The definitions of terms are
a material part of this chapter and apply to the use of the term each time it
is used in this chapter.
   The sources of definitions of term specified sexual activities used above
are (1) Taber’s Cyclopedic Medical Dictionary, T.A. Davis Co., Philadelphia,
1997 (ed. 18); (2) Oxford Dictionary of the English Language (multi-volume);
and (3) Florida Statutes. The definitions of terms are a material part of this
chapter and apply to the use of the term each time it is used.
§ 113.005 NOTICE.
   Any notice required under this chapter shall, unless otherwise provided in
this chapter, be accomplished by posting upon the subject premises and sending
a written notification by certified mail to the mailing address set forth on
the application for the license or a permit. This mailing address shall be
considered the correct mailing address unless the Mayor or his or her designee
has been otherwise notified in writing.
(Ord. 2007-11, passed 6-26-2007)
§ 113.006 BUSINESS TAX RECEIPT; HOME OCCUPATIONS.
   (A)   The Mayor may take steps as may be necessary to ensure that the
business tax is paid by only individuals and entities that are lawfully
permitted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Adult entertainment establishments and sexually-oriented businesses
shall not be approved as home occupations.
(Ord. 2007-11, passed 6-26-2007)
§ 113.007 IMMUNITY FROM PROSECUTION.
   The town and any and all of its officers, departments or agents and any law
enforcement officer shall be immune from prosecution, civil or criminal, for
the reasonable, good-faith trespass upon an adult entertainment establishment
or sexually-oriented business while acting within the scope of the authority
set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 2007-11, passed 6-26-2007)
LICENSING PROVISIONS
§ 113.020 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Requirement. It is unlawful for any person to operate or to be an
operator of or worker at a sexually-oriented business or an adult entertainment
establishment which has not first obtained a license which is applicable for
the establishment or business pursuant to this chapter; or to continue to
operate or be an operator of or worker at a sexually-oriented business or an
adult entertainment establishment where that person knows or has reason to know
that the license of the establishment or business is under suspension, has been
revoked or has lapsed. The operation of a sexually-oriented business or an
adult entertainment establishment without a valid license, where applicable, is
unlawful and shall be grounds for the closing of the establishment or business
upon a finding of fact by a court or other body with proper jurisdiction that
the establishment does not have a valid license.
   (B)   Licensing office. Unless the Mayor designates in writing an office to
administer the provisions of this chapter, he or she shall serve as the
licensing office. The Mayor may modify his or her designation from time to time
in writing. When the phrase “Mayor or his or her designee” is used in this
chapter, the designee referred to shall be the office designated in writing
pursuant to this division.
   (C)   Classifications. Adult entertainment establishment and sexually-
oriented business licenses referred to in this chapter shall be classified as
follows:
      (1)   Adult bookstore/adult video store;
      (2)   Adult performance establishment;
      (3)   Adult motel;
      (4)   Adult theater;
      (5)   Commercial bodily contact establishment; or
      (6)   Escort service.
   (D)   Single license/single classification of license. Only one license may
be issued for a location and only under a single classification.
(Ord. 2007-11, passed 6-26-2007) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.021 LOCATION GENERALLY.
   Locations of all sexually-oriented businesses and adult entertainment
establishments within the town shall comply with the provisions of this
chapter, the town code of ordinances and all sexually-oriented businesses and
adult entertainment establishments shall be subject to the restrictions
enumerated in this code.
(Ord. 2007-11, passed 6-26-2007) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.022 RESPONSIBILITIES OF OTHER OFFICES AND DEPARTMENTS.
   (A)   The Town Council is the legislative branch of the town government.
Ultimate responsibility for the administration of this chapter is vested in the
Mayor or his or her designee as set forth in this chapter.
   (B)   Other departments having responsibility under this chapter are as
follows:
      (1)   The Mayor is responsible for granting, denying, revoking, renewing,
suspending and canceling business tax receipts in accordance with state law;
      (2)   The Brevard County Sheriff Department is responsible for verifying
information contained on applications for inspecting proposed or existing adult
entertainment establishments and sexually-oriented businesses in order to
ascertain compliance with applicable criminal statutes and ordinances
including, but not limited to, those set forth in this chapter, for determining
whether license applicants have been convicted of a felony or a specified
criminal act within the previous five years and for enforcing applicable
criminal statutes and ordinances including, but not limited to, those set forth
in this chapter. The Mayor is responsible for keeping all information processed
by each application and his or her department will serve as a document
repository for inspection of any information by any applicant;
      (3)   The Building Official is responsible for inspecting establishments
in order to ascertain compliance with all applicable building codes, statutes,
ordinances and regulations;
      (4)   The Brevard County Fire Chief is responsible for inspecting
establishments and businesses in order to ascertain compliance with all
applicable fire codes, statutes, ordinances and regulations; and
      (5) The Building Official is responsible for ascertaining whether the
location of proposed sexually-oriented businesses or adult entertainment
establishments comply with all separation, distance, zoning and location
requirements of the land development regulations of the town and whether
compliance with all applicable zoning regulations and land use laws is
maintained.
(Ord. 2007-11, passed 6-26-2007)
§ 113.023 LICENSE APPLICATION AND APPLICATION FEE.
   Any person desiring to engage in the business of operating an adult
entertainment establishment or a sexually-oriented business shall file with the
Mayor or his or her designee a sworn application on forms supplied by the town.
The application shall contain the information and documents as provided in this
chapter and shall be accompanied by an application fee as established in this
chapter. The application shall be signed by the applicant and verified by the
applicant before an officer authorized to take oaths and acknowledgments.
(Ord. 2007-11, passed 6-26-2007) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.024 ADVERTISING.
   (A)   Advertisements, displays or other promotional materials for any adult
entertainment establishments, except as authorized and described within this
section, shall not be shown or exhibited so as to be visible to the public from
any street, sidewalk or other public place.
   (B)   This shall not prohibit the use of a sign displaying the name of the
business on the business premises as regulated by this section.
   (C)   Except as provided in this section, signs shall be subject to any sign
ordinance currently existing in the town.
   (D)   A sign shall not contain any flashing lights, photographs,
silhouettes, drawings or pictorial representations of any type or manner and
shall be limited in content as follows:
      (1)   The name of the establishment;
      (2)   One or more of the following applicable phrases:
         (a)   Adult bookstore;
         (b)   Adult theatre;
         (c)   Adult dancing establishment;
         (d)   Adult motel;
         (e)   Adult entertainment;
         (f)   Movie titles posted within premises; and/or
         (g)   Food or drink specials, show times, welcome notices and names of
entertainers.
      (3)   No sign shall include the words “nude,” “nudity,” “naked,”
“topless,” “go-go” or “dancers,” or words including slang substitutes or
materials depicting, describing or relating to “specified anatomical areas of
the human body” or “specified sexual activities” as defined in this chapter;
      (4)   Each letter forming a word on a sign shall be of a solid color, and
each letter shall be the same print type, size and color. The background behind
the lettering on the display surface shall be of a uniform solid color;
      (5)   Any changeable copy sign or portable or temporary advertisement for
an adult entertainment establishment shall be brought into immediate compliance
with the restrictions of this section; and/or
      (6)   Any licensee under this chapter shall have no off-site advertising.
(Ord. 2007-11, passed 6-26-2007) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.025 CONTENTS OF APPLICATION.
   (A)   The completed application shall be accompanied by the following
documents and shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee of $500
which shall be used to defray the costs of the application review process by
various offices and departments; provided, however, that the unused portion of
the fee after deducting the costs associated with processing the fee shall be
applied as a credit toward the annual license fee for licensing under this
chapter.
   (B)   If the applicant is:
      (1)   An individual, the individual shall state his or her legal name to
include any and all aliases, residential street address, residential telephone
number, an address where all correspondence from the town should be mailed, and
submit proof that he or she is 18 years of age or older by providing a copy of
a valid driver’s license, voter’s registration card or another state issued
identification card; or a certified copy of a birth certificate;
      (2)   A partnership or trust, the partnership or trust shall state its
complete name, and the names, residential street addresses and telephone
numbers of all partners, whether the partnership is general or limited or
trustees, the name and residential street address of at least one person
authorized to accept service of process and, if in existence, a copy of the
partnership agreement;
      (3)   A corporation, the corporation shall provide a copy of its articles
of incorporation stating its complete name, the date of its incorporation,
evidence that the corporation is in good standing, the names, residential
street addresses, telephone numbers and capacity of all officers, directors and
principal stockholders, and the name of the registered corporate agent and the
legal street address of the registered office for service of process;
      (4)   A limited liability company, the company shall provide a copy of
its articles of organization and operating agreement stating its complete name,
the date of its organization, evidence that the company is in good standing,
the names, residential street addresses, telephone numbers and capacity of all
members, including its managing member(s), and the name of the registered
corporate agent and the legal street address of the registered office for
service of process; or
      (5)   Any other entity, the entity shall state its complete name, the
date of formation, the names, residential address, telephone numbers and
capacity of all principal owners, and the name and residential street address
of one person authorized to accept service of process.
   (C)   If the applicant intends to conduct activities in the establishment or
business under a name other than that of the applicant, the applicant shall
state the establishment’s or business’ fictitious name or names and the county
of registration under F.S. § 865.09, or its successor and all business names
and telephone numbers to be used by the establishment or business.
   (D)   The applicant shall state whether the applicant or any of the other
individuals listed on the application has, within the five-year period
immediately preceding the date of the application, been convicted of a
specified criminal act, and, if so, the specified criminal act involved, the
date of conviction and the place of conviction.
   (E)   The applicant shall state whether the applicant or any of the other
individuals listed pursuant to division (B) above has had a previous license
under this chapter suspended or revoked including the name and location of the
establishment for which the license was suspended or revoked, the date of the
suspension or revocation, and whether the applicant or any other individuals
listed pursuant to division (B) above has been a partner in a partnership or an
officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation, or a managing
member or member of a limited liability company whose license under this
chapter has previously been suspended or revoked including the name and
location of the establishment for which the license was suspended or revoked,
or has been a member, officer, director or managing member of a limited
liability company whose license under this chapter has previously been
suspended or revoked including the name and location of the establishment for
which the license was suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the
suspension or revocation.
   (F)   The applicant shall state whether the applicant or any other
individuals listed pursuant to division (B) above holds any other licenses
under this chapter and, if so, the names and locations of other licensed
establishments.
   (G)   The applicant shall state the single classification of license for
which the applicant is filing. No applicant shall apply for more than one
classification in one location.
   (H)   The applicant shall state the location of the proposed establishment
or business including a street address, the name and address of the real
property owner of the site, a notarized statement of consent from the real
property owner authorizing a sexually-oriented business or adult entertainment
establishment on the site, and a legal description of the property on which the
establishment is to be located.
   (I)   The applicant shall provide the names of the workers for the proposed
establishment or business, if known, or, if presently unknown a statement to
that effect.
   (J)   The applicant shall submit a plan drawn to appropriate scale of the
proposed licensed premises indicating the areas to be covered by the license,
all windows, doors, entrances and exits and the fixed structural features,
walls, stages, partitions, projection booths, admission booths, adult booths,
concession booths, stands, counters and similar structures of the establishment
or business to which the proposed license pertains. The term FIXED STRUCTURAL
FEATURES shall include immovable partitions and counters and similar structures
that are intended to be permanent.
   (K)   The applicant shall provide a mailing address, and, if different, a
designated return address where all future correspondence from the town may be
sent and the applicant’s telephone number where communications and inquiries
can be made.
   (L)   The applicant shall provide a recent color photograph of the applicant
in passport size if an individual and of each officer, director and principal
stockholder if a partnership, corporation or other similar entity.
   (M)   The applicant shall provide the weight, height, color of eyes, date of
birth and gender of the applicant if an individual and of each officer,
director and principal stockholder or owner if a partnership, corporation or
other similar entity.
   (N)   The applicant shall provide the applicant’s Social Security account
number or employer’s tax identification number and either the applicant’s
drivers license number or the number of a federal- or state-issued
identification card if an individual and of each officer, director and
principal stockholder or owner if a partnership, corporation or other similar
entity.
   (O)   The applicant shall provide a complete set of the applicant’s
fingerprints if an individual and of each officer, director and principal
stockholder or owner if a partnership, corporation or other similar entity.
   (P)   The applicant shall provide a copy of the most recent lease or deed of
conveyance, whichever is applicable, indicating the applicant’s interest in the
proposed establishment.
   (Q)   The applicant shall provide a statement of the hours of operations of
the establishment or business.
   (R)   The applicant shall provide a notarized statement that the applicant
has complied with the applicable laws of the state relating to corporations,
partnerships and fictitious names.
   (S)   It is unlawful for any person applying for an adult entertainment
establishment or sexually-oriented business license to make a false statement
which is intended to facilitate the issuance of a license or to provide false
information which is intended to facilitate the issuance of a license.
(Ord. 2007-11, passed 6-26-2007) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.026 CONTINUING DUTY; FALSE OR MISLEADING INFORMATION.
   (A)   Each applicant shall be under a continuing duty and obligation to
disclose to the Mayor or his or her designee any and all changes or alterations
in the information or disclosures required by this chapter. It is the duty of
each applicant to correct changed, false or erroneous information provided in
an application. It is unlawful for an applicant to fail to disclose changes in
information provided or to fail to correct false or erroneous information given
in an application immediately upon the applicant knowing or being in a position
that he or she should have known that the information provided has changed or
was false or erroneous when provided.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person applying for an adult entertainment
establishment or sexually-oriented business license to make a false or
misleading statement or provide false or misleading information which is
intended to facilitate the issuance of a license.
(Ord. 2007-11, passed 6-26-2007) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.027 CONSENT.
   By applying for a license under this chapter, the applicant shall be deemed
to have been provided a copy of this chapter, to understand it by having the
opportunity to have consulted with counsel or otherwise, and to have consented
to the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2007-11, passed 6-26-2007)
§ 113.028 INVESTIGATION OF APPLICATION.
   Upon receipt of an application properly filed with the Mayor or his or her
designee and upon payment of the non-refundable application fee, the
application shall be time and date stamped and a copy of the application shall
be forwarded to the Mayor, the Brevard County Sheriff’s Department, the Brevard
County Fire Chief and the Building Official. Each recipient entity shall
promptly conduct an investigation of the applicant, application and the
proposed establishment within 15 days from the date that the application was
filed. At the conclusion of its investigation, each recipient entity shall
indicate to the Mayor or his or her designee its investigative findings
relating to the application and the reasons therefor.
(Ord. 2007-11, passed 6-26-2007)
§ 113.029 ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Upon the completion of the investigation and a review of the
application as required, upon determination that the applicant meets the
requirements of this chapter, and upon payment of the appropriate license fee
by the applicant, the Mayor or his or her designee shall within 30 days of the
application being filed issue the license.
   (B)   If after review and investigation as provided herein the Mayor or his
or her designee determines that one or more of the reasons for denial set forth
in §
113.030 exist, the application shall be denied, within 30 days of the date that
the application is filed, and the Mayor or his or her designee shall issue a
written and dated notice of the denial and the reasons therefor. A copy of the
notice shall be sent to the applicant by certified mail to the designated
return address on the application within five days of the date of denial.
   (C)   The denial of an application shall be final. No further exhaustion of
administrative remedies shall be necessary for judicial review of the
administrative action.
   (D)   An applicant whose application is denied may immediately appeal as a
matter of right to a court of competent jurisdiction, which court shall
promptly review the application.
(Ord. 2007-11, passed 6-26-2007)
§ 113.030 REASONS FOR DENIAL OF APPLICATION OR LICENSE.
   The application for a license shall be denied if one or more of the
following reasons is found:
   (A)   The application does not comply with the requirements of this chapter
and/or statutes expressly made applicable to adult entertainment establishments
and sexually-oriented businesses such as F.S. § 847.0134;
   (B)   The application contains material false information;
   (C)   The applicant or any of the individuals stated in §
113.025 of this chapter has a license under this chapter which is under
suspension;
   (D)   The applicant or any of the individuals stated in §
113.025 of this chapter is or was at the time of suspension an officer,
director, managing member or majority stockholder in an entity who has a
license under this chapter which is under suspension;
   (E)   The applicant or any of the individuals stated in §
113.025 of this chapter had a license under this chapter which had been revoked
within the preceding two years; and/or
   (F)   The applicant or any of the individuals stated in §
113.025 of this chapter is or was at the time of suspension an officer,
director, managing member or principal stockholder in an entity who had a
license under this chapter which had been revoked within the preceding two
years.
(Ord. 2007-11, passed 6-26-2007)
§ 113.031 REAPPLICATION AFTER DENIAL.
   The applicant may not reapply for a license for a period of nine months from
the date of denial unless there has been an intervening change in the
circumstances which may lead to a difference decision regarding the former
reason(s) for denial.
(Ord. 2007-11, passed 6-26-2007)
§ 113.032 ANNUAL LICENSE FEE.
   (A) There shall be collected under this chapter annual license fees for the
following classifications of adult entertainment establishments and sexually-
oriented businesses:
 
Classification                          Fee
Adult bookstore/adult video store       $300
Adult theater                           $300
Adult performance establishments        $350
Adult motel                             $300
Commercial bodily contact establishment $300
Escort service                          $300
 
   (B)   The annual license fees are declared regulatory in nature, collected
for the purpose of examination and inspection of adult entertainment
establishments and sexually-oriented businesses under this chapter and the
administration thereof. These regulatory fees are in addition to, and not in
lieu of, the business taxes imposed by the town code or state law and other
land development regulations or regulatory fees associated with general
commercial activities and locations.
(Ord. 2007-11, passed 6-26-2007) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.033 CONTENTS OF LICENSE, TERMS OF LICENSE, RENEWALS, EXPIRATION LAPSE.
   (A)   Contents. An adult entertainment establishment or sexually-oriented
business license shall state on its face the name of the licensee, the name of
the establishment, the street address of the establishment, the classification
of the license, the date of issuance and the date of expiration.
   (B)   Term. All licenses issued under this chapter shall be annual licenses
which shall commence running on October 1, on which date they shall have been
paid for, and shall expire on September 30 of the following year. If a license
is issued after October 1, but by March 31 of the following year, the applicant
shall pay the appropriate license fee in full. If a license is issued after
March 31, but by October 1 of the same year, the applicant shall pay one-half
the appropriate license fee.
   (C)   Expiration/renewal/lapse. Each license shall expire on September 30 of
each year and may be renewed only by making an application for a license in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Applications for renewal shall
be made at least 30 days before the expiration date of the license. Failure to
make application at least 30 days before the expiration date will not suspend
the expiration of the license. If the application for a renewal is denied, the
applicant may immediately appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction, which
court shall provide prompt judicial review of the appeal.
(Ord. 2007-11, passed 6-26-2007) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.034 RECORDS AND REPORTS.
   Each licensee shall keep records and make reports as may be required by this
chapter.
(Ord. 2007-11, passed 6-26-2007) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.035 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   It is unlawful for a licensee to transfer his, her or its license to another
person or entity or surrender possession, control and operation of the licensed
establishment to another person or entity unless the licensee and the
transferee have fully complied with the licensing and all other provisions of
this chapter.
(Ord. 2007-11, passed 6-26-2007) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.036 ESTABLISHMENT NAME CHANGE.
   It is unlawful for a licensee to change the name of an adult entertainment
establishment or sexually-oriented business unless and until the following
requirements are satisfied:
   (A)   The Mayor or his or her designee is given 30 days’ notice in writing
of the proposed name change;
   (B)   The change of name fee in the amount of $3 is paid;
   (C)   The licensee has complied with F.S. § 865.09;
   (D)   The licensee has complied with the provisions of F.S. Ch. 607; and
   (E)   The licensee has complied with the provisions of F.S. Ch. 620.
(Ord. 2007-11, passed 6-26-2007) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.037 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   The Mayor or designee shall suspend a license when he or she or designee
determines that any one of the following has occurred:
   (A)   Definition. For purposes of this section, the term VIOLATION shall
mean an incident having occurred at, or by, an adult entertainment
establishment or sexually-oriented business which is prohibited by the
provisions of this chapter or made unlawful by F.S. Chs. 561, 562, 563, 564,
565, 775.21, 794, 796, 800, 826, 827, 847, 893 or 895, or an analogous federal
statute.
   (B)   Inspection of records and premises. In the event that the Mayor or his
or her designee determines that the licensee or an operator at or of the
licensee has refused to allow any inspection of records or premises as required
by this chapter, the Mayor or his or her designee may suspend the license for a
period not to exceed 30 days.
   (C)   Illegal activity/suspension.
      (1)   In the event three or more violations occur within a two-year
period, and convictions result from at least three of the violations, the Mayor
or his or her designee shall, upon the date of the third conviction, notify the
licensee that the license shall be suspended for a period of 30 days unless
good cause is shown in accordance with this chapter, that the violations have
not occurred. For purposes of calculating this two-year period, the two-year
period shall be deemed to be those 24 months occurring immediately prior to the
violation occurrence date for which the 30-day suspension is sought.
      (2)   In the event one or more violations occur within a two-year period
from the date of the last violation occurrence date from which the conviction
resulted in a 30-day suspension pursuant to division (C)(1) above, but not
including any time during which the license was effectively suspended, and a
conviction results from one or more of the violations, the Mayor or his or her
designee shall, upon the date of the latest conviction, provide notice to the
licensee that the license shall be suspended for a period of 90 days unless
good cause is shown in accordance with this chapter that the violation has not
occurred.
      (3)   In the event one or more violations occur within a two-year period
from the date of the last violation occurrence date from which the conviction
resulted in a 90-day suspension pursuant to division (C)(2) above, but not
including any time during which the license was effectively suspended, and a
conviction results from one or more of the violations, the Mayor or his or her
designee shall, upon the date of the latest conviction, provide notice to the
licensee that the license shall be suspended for a period of 180 days unless
good cause is shown in accordance with this chapter that the violation has not
occurred.
   (D)   Revocation. The Mayor or his or her designee shall revoke a license
when he or she or designee determines that any one of the following has
occurred.
      (1)   There has been one or more violations that have occurred within a
two-year period from the date the last violation occurrence date from which the
conviction resulted in a 180-day suspension pursuant to division (C)(3) above,
but not including any time during which the license was effectively suspended,
and a conviction results from one or more of the violations, the Mayor or his
or her designee shall, upon the date of the latest conviction, provide notice
to the licensee that the license shall be revoked unless good cause is shown in
accordance with this part that the violation has not occurred.
      (2)   The licensee or any person on its or his or her behalf or any
person listed on the application pursuant to §
113.025 of this chapter gave false or misleading information in the material
submitted during the application process.
      (3)   The licensee or any person on its or his or her behalf or any
person listed on the application pursuant to §
113.025 of this chapter has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of
controlled substances on the premises of the establishment or business or when
with a customer.
      (4)   The licensee or any person on its or his or her behalf or any
person listed on the application pursuant to §
113.025 of this chapter has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises of
the establishment or business or when with a customer.
      (5)   The licensee or any person on its or his or her behalf or any
person listed on the application pursuant to §
113.025 of this chapter knowingly operated the adult entertainment
establishment or sexually-oriented business during a period when the licensee’s
license was suspended.
      (6)   Except in the case of an adult motel, the licensee or any person on
its or his or her behalf or any person listed on the application pursuant to §
113.025 of this chapter has knowingly allowed any specified sexual activities
to occur on the premises of the establishment or business.
   (E)   Effective dates of suspensions and revocations. 
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, all periods of
suspension and revocation shall become effective 15 days after the Mayor or his
or her designee posts the notice of suspension or revocation at the licensee’s
establishment, or on the date that the licensee turns in his, her or its
license, whichever happens first.
      (2)   The suspension or revocation shall be abated in the event that the
licensee files a timely challenge to the suspension or revocation in accordance
with the procedures set forth in this chapter or upon order of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
      (3)   If an adult entertainment establishment or sexually-oriented
business license is revoked for the first time, the licensee shall not be
issued another adult entertainment establishment or sexually-oriented business
license for a period of two years running from the date the revocation actually
takes effect after all abatement periods have lapsed.
      (4)   If an adult entertainment establishment or sexually-oriented
business license held by any of the entities or individuals listed in §
113.025 of this chapter is revoked for the second time and the license is held
by any one or more of the entities or individuals holding the prior license,
the licensee shall not be issued another adult entertainment establishment or
sexually-oriented business license for a period of four years running from the
date the revocation actually takes effect after all abatement periods have
lapsed.
      (5)   If an adult entertainment establishment or sexually-oriented
business license held by any of the entities or individuals listed in §
113.025 of this chapter is revoked for a third time and the license is held by
any one or more of the entities or individuals holding the prior license, the
licensee shall not be issued another adult entertainment establishment or
sexually-oriented business license for a period of six years running from the
date the revocation actually takes effect after all abatement periods have
lapsed.
   (F)   Other remedies. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the
town may pursue any and all other available remedies through any and all other
available processes and procedures available to correct violations of town
codes. Included within the remedies are the enforcement actions set forth in
this chapter, actions in a court of competent jurisdiction for injunctive or
other appropriate relief, criminal prosecution, code enforcement proceedings,
the issuance of citations, the suspension or revocation of permits relating to
health or safety matters, and any and all other remedies available under the
laws of the state and the United States.
(Ord. 2007-11, passed 6-26-2007) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.038 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION PROCEEDINGS.
   (A)   Challenge to suspension or revocation. If the Mayor or his or her
designee notifies a licensee in writing of the pending suspension or revocation
of a license as provided in §
113.029 of this chapter, then the suspension or revocation shall become final
and effective 15 days after mailing to the licensee’s record address, posting
at the licensed establishment, or actual delivery of the notice to the
licensee, unless within 15 days of the date of the notice of suspension or
revocation the licensee first files with the Mayor or his or her designee a
written response stating the reasons why the suspension or revocation is
alleged to be in error or inappropriate and a written notice of intent to
challenge the suspension or revocation requesting a hearing to determine
whether the suspension or revocation will become effective. The suspension or
revocation shall be abated in the event that a licensee files a timely
challenge to the suspension or revocation in accordance with the procedures of
this chapter or upon an order of a court of competent jurisdiction. A
suspension or revocation already in effect, but not previously challenged in a
suspension or revocation hearing, may be challenged in the same manner but is
not abated during the proceedings.
   (B)   Hearing on suspension or revocation. When a licensee files a written
response and notice of intent to challenge a pending or existing suspension or
revocation then a public hearing to determine if the pending suspension or
revocation will become effective and final shall be held by a hearing officer
appointed by the Town Council. The Mayor or his or her designee shall notify
the Town Attorney and any appropriate town officers who shall schedule and
provide notice of the hearing date and time.
      (1)   Appointment, term and compensation of hearing officer.
         (a)   Three hearing officers shall be appointed by the Town Council,
and they shall be attorneys duly licensed to practice law in the state, who
have practiced in the state for at least five years.
         (b)   Hearing officers shall be subject to removal with or without
cause, by the Town Council. Hearing officers shall not be considered to be town
employees, although they may receive compensation for their services and also
may be reimbursed for travel, mileage and per diem expenses as may be
authorized.
         (c)   Because only attorneys may hold the position of hearing officer,
the Town Council shall not be required to retain an attorney to represent the
hearing officer.
         (d)   It shall be unlawful for a hearing officer to act as an agent or
an attorney for a party involved in a determination under the provisions of
this section or to be otherwise involved with any matter arising under this
section which will come before the town during the term of the hearing
officer’s appointment. Further, a hearing officer shall not initiate or
consider ex parte communications or other communications with any party of
interest to a hearing officer concerning the substance of any proceeding to be
heard by a hearing officer. However, the foregoing does not prohibit
discussions between the hearing officer and town staff that pertain solely to
scheduling and other administrative matters unrelated to the merits of the
application. If a person engages in an ex parte communication with the hearing
officer, the hearing officer shall place on the record of the pending case all
ex parte written communications received, all written responses to the
communications, a memorandum stating the substance of all oral communications
received, and all oral responses made, and shall advise all parties that the
matters have been placed on the record. Any party desiring to rebut the ex
parte communication shall be entitled to do so but only if the party requests
the opportunity for rebuttal within ten days after notice of the communication.
If he or she deems it necessary due to the effect of an ex parte communication
received by him or her, the hearing officer may withdraw from the case and the
Town Council shall appoint another hearing officer to handle the case.
         (e)   Selection of hearing officer. The Mayor and licensee shall each
have the right to eliminate one of the three hearing officers selected by the
Town Council. The one hearing officer not eliminated by either party shall act
as the hearing officer for the license revocation hearing. In the event
licensee objects to all three hearing officers, then the Town Council shall
choose the hearing officer from the list of three hearing officers absent a
showing of clear prejudice by the licensee.
      (2)   Powers of hearing officer. The hearing officer shall have the power
to:
         (a)   Adopt rules for the conduct of the hearing;
         (b)   Subpoena licensees and witnesses to its hearings. Subpoenas may
be served by any law enforcement agencies or private process servers with
jurisdiction to serve subpoenas;
         (c)   Subpoena evidence to its hearings;
         (d)   Administer oaths and take testimony under oath; and
         (e)   Issue an order having the force of law suspending or revoking
the license.
      (3)   Suspension or revocation hearing. The suspension or revocation
hearing shall be held within 30 days of the Mayor’s receipt of a written
challenge and request for a hearing by the aggrieved licensee.
      (4)   Participants. The participants before the hearing officer shall be
the licensee, any witnesses of the licensee, the Mayor or his or her designee
and any witnesses of the Mayor or his or her designee. All witnesses shall
provide their legal name, mailing addresses and telephone number.
      (5)   Procedures used. The procedures used shall be those typically used
in a civil case with the Mayor or his or her designee having the burden of
proof by clear and convincing evidence.
      (6)   Testimony submitted. Testimony and evidence may be submitted by any
witness but shall be limited to matters directly relating to the grounds for
suspension or revocation. Irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious
testimony or evidence shall be excluded.
      (7)   Testimony under oath. All testimony shall be under oath. The
hearing officer shall decide all questions of evidence, procedure and standing.
All hearings shall be open to the public. Minutes shall be kept at all
hearings. Unless otherwise mutually agreed to between the licensee and the
Mayor or his or her designee, the order of presentation of testimony and
evidence shall be as follows:
         (a)   The Mayor or his or her designee and any witnesses of the Mayor
or his or her designee;
         (b)   The licensee and any witnesses of the licensee;
         (c)   Rebuttal witnesses from the Mayor or his or her designee;
         (d)   Rebuttal witnesses from the licensee;
         (e)   Summation by the Mayor or his or her designee; and
         (f)   Summation by the licensee.
      (8)   Hearing officer. The hearing officer may also call and question
witnesses or request additional evidence as the hearing officer deems necessary
and appropriate.
      (9)   Room and staff provided. The town shall provide a hearing room and
clerical staff as may be reasonably required by the hearing officer to conduct
hearings and perform his or her duties.
      (10)   Witnesses and evidence. Each party to the hearing shall have the
right to call and examine witnesses, introduce exhibits, cross-examine opposing
witnesses, impeach witnesses and rebut evidence.
      (11)   Representation. The licensee has the right, at his or her own
expense, to be represented by an attorney at any hearing.
      (12)   Record. All testimony before the hearing officer shall be under
oath and shall be recorded. The licensee or the town may cause a verbatim
record of the proceedings to be made.
      (13)   Hearing continued. If the hearing officer comes to believe that
any facts, claims or allegations necessitate additional review or response by
either the licensee or the Mayor or his or her designee, then the hearing
officer may order the hearing continued until an announced date certain, not to
exceed 30 days from the date of continuance. The hearing officer shall render a
final decision on the appeal within 60 days of the Mayor’s receipt of
licensee’s written notice of challenge.
      (14)   Submittal of written proposed findings. Hearing officers may allow
the parties to submit written proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law
following the hearing and shall advise the parties of the timetable for so
doing, if allowed.
      (15)   Order issued. At the conclusion of the hearing within the time
prescribed herein, the hearing officer shall issue an order setting forth
findings of fact, based on evidence of record, and issue conclusions of law
regarding whether the suspension or revocation will become or remain effective,
and shall render relief in the order affording the proper relief consistent
with powers granted in this section.
   (C)   Filing of decision. The original of the written decision of the
hearing officer shall be filed with the Town Clerk and copies shall be
delivered or mailed to the licensee, the Mayor or his or her designee and the
Brevard County Sheriff’s Department.
   (D)   Judicial review. Any person who participated in a suspension or
revocation hearing before the hearing officer and who is aggrieved by the
decision of the hearing officer may immediately challenge the decision in any
court of competent jurisdiction pursuant to the rules of procedure of that
court. The record of the hearing shall consist of the complete record of the
proceedings before the hearing officer. The hearing officer’s decision shall be
promptly reviewed by the court.
   (E)   Requirement of exhaustion procedures. Judicial review of a suspension
or revocation, or related hearing or appeal proceedings, shall be available
only after the administrative procedures and remedies set forth in this section
have been exhausted.
   (F)   Notice of final suspension or revocation. If no response or request
for a suspension or revocation hearing is filed within 15 days of the notice of
a pending suspension or revocation, or if the licensee who requested the
hearing does not appear at the suspension or revocation hearing after notice,
or if the hearing officer decides after a hearing that a pending suspension or
revocation will become final, then the Mayor or his or her designee shall issue
to the licensee notice of final suspension or revocation of the adult
entertainment license and mail or arrange delivery of the notice to the
licensee’s record address.
   (G)   Effective date of suspension or revocation. The suspension or
revocation of a license shall take effect the day after delivery of a notice of
final suspension or revocation to the licensee in person, by posting on the
licensed establishment, or by mail to the licensee’s record address, or on the
date the licensee surrenders the license, whichever happens first. The licensee
shall immediately return and surrender a revoked license to the Mayor or his or
her designee or surrender the revoked license, upon demand, to a member of the
Brevard County Sheriff Department.
(Ord. 2007-11, passed 6-26-2007)
§ 113.039 WORKER RECORDS.
   (A)   Each adult entertainment establishment and sexually-oriented business,
regardless of whether it is licensed under this chapter, shall create,
establish and maintain a record of all workers of the establishment or
business. The record shall contain the worker’s full legal name and any aliases
and all past or current aliases of the worker; his or her date of birth; his or
her residential address; his or her e-mail address; his or her residential
telephone number (if any) and all pager numbers, cell phone numbers, and other
similar numbers used; his or her driver’s license number and a photocopy of the
license; his or her state or federally issued identification card number
including the worker’s Social Security account number; the employment status of
the worker including, but not limited to, whether the worker is a salaried
employee, an independent contractor, a lessee, a sub-lessee, a subcontractor
allowed to work at the establishment, or another arrangement as may be in
place; whether income taxes are withheld for the worker; and a recent passport
type photograph of the worker as of the date of association with the
establishment which accurately reflects the date on which the photograph was
taken. The records shall be maintained for a period of no less than two years
from the date the worker is separated from employment.
   (B)   The original records required by division (A) above or true and exact
photocopies thereof, shall be kept at the adult entertainment establishment or
sexually-oriented business at all times including clear photographs.
   (C)   All operators of an adult entertainment establishment or sexually-
oriented business shall be responsible for knowing the location of the original
records, or the true and exact photocopies thereof.
   (D)   All operators of an adult entertainment establishment or sexually-
oriented business shall, upon request by a law enforcement officer or the Mayor
or his or her designee, make available for immediate inspection the original
records or the true and exact photocopies thereof at any time when the
establishment or business is open for business.
(Ord. 2007-11, passed 6-26-2007)
REQUIREMENTS
§ 113.050 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS AND
SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES.
   Each adult entertainment establishment and sexually-oriented business,
regardless of whether it is licensed under this chapter, shall observe the
following general requirements:
   (A)   Conform to, comply with and abide by all applicable safety, employer
related, building, fire, health, zoning or land use statutes, codes,
ordinances, rules and regulations, whether federal, state or local;
   (B)   Keep the adult entertainment establishment or sexually-oriented
business license posted and prominently displayed in a conspicuous place at the
establishment or business at all times, which license shall be available for
inspection upon request at all times by the public, any law enforcement officer
and the Mayor, or his or her designee, when the establishment or business is
open for business;
   (C)   Opaquely cover each non-opaque area where a person outside the adult
entertainment establishment or sexually-oriented business may otherwise see
inside the establishment or business;
   (D)   Provide to any law enforcement officer and the Mayor or his or her
designee, during all hours of operation or when an operator is present at the
establishment, access through the main entrance and into all areas of the
establishment where customers are permitted without the necessity of using a
key, computer entry, password or seeking clearance from a worker or customer to
obtain entry through an electronically operated door or entryway;
   (E)   Install, construct, keep, maintain or allow only those signs at the
establishment or building exterior which comply with the provisions relating to
signage in the land development regulations of the town;
   (F)   Not allow any person under 18 years of age to be present when services
are provided to or performed for a customer or when the establishment or
business is open for business;
   (G)   Not employ or provide goods or services to any person under 18 years
of age;
   (H)   Not provide, offer or engage in any services to any person when not
licensed to do so under this chapter;
   (I)   Not operate when a license issued pursuant to this chapter has been
suspended, revoked or canceled or when the license is expired;
   (J)   Not permit any animal except seeing-eye dogs accompany a worker or
customer when services are provided or performed;
   (K)   Not place, operate or contain video cameras, transmitting or taping
equipment anywhere on the premises except where customers are advised in
advance by posted notice;
   (L)   Not advertise the presentation of any activity prohibited by any law,
rule or regulation whether federal, state or local;
   (M)   Ensure that the view areas specified in this chapter remain
unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials
at all times that any customer is present in the premises so as to ensure that
no customer is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been
designated as an area in which non-workers will not be permitted;
   (N)   Ensure that at least one operator is on duty and present at the
establishment or business when the establishment or business is open for
business who is responsible and knows the whereabouts of all records required
by this chapter. The operator’s name shall be conspicuously posted on the
premises at all times the business or establishment is open for business;
   (O)   Ensure that at least one operator is situated in each manager’s
station, when required by this chapter, at all times that any customer is
present inside the premises;
   (P)   Ensure that the premises are equipped with overhead lighting fixtures
of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which customers are
permitted access at an illumination of not less than 15 to 20 average
maintained foot candles as measured 35 inches above the floor level. The light
shall be maintained at all times any customer is present in the premises;
    (Q)   Not alter or otherwise change the contents of an adult entertainment
establishment or sexually-oriented business license;
   (R)   Ensure that each exterior entrance and exit door for use by customers
and interior doors which permit entrance to the interior and exit to the
interior from any interior foyer area shall remain unlocked when any person who
is not a worker is inside the establishment;
   (S)   Establish, create and maintain worker records as required by this
chapter; and
   (T)   Ensure that no alcoholic beverages shall be bought, sold, given away
or consumed on the premises of any adult entertainment establishment or
sexually-oriented business.
(Ord. 2007-11, passed 6-26-2007) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.051 SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS REGULATIONS.
   In addition to the general requirements for adult entertainment
establishments and sexually-oriented businesses contained in this chapter, a
sexually-oriented business shall, regardless of whether it is licensed
thereunder, comply with the following general requirements:
   (A)   Post in an open and conspicuous place a list of services provided by
the sexually-oriented business which services shall be described clearly in the
English language along with a specification as to the cost of each service;
   (B)   Provide each customer, in advance of any service being provided, with
a written customer contract, written clearly in the English language, setting
forth the service or services to be rendered, the cost of the service or
services, the actual full name of the worker providing the service and actual
full name, address and date of birth of the customer as reflected on a state or
federally issued identification card or drivers license and the customer’s
telephone number;
   (C)   Create, establish and maintain a daily register in a format provided
by the Mayor, or his or her designee, containing the actual full names and
addresses of all customers as reflected on a state or federally issued
identification card or drivers license, the services performed, the time
expended, the mode of payment and the full name of the worker providing the
service;
   (D)   Not allow any worker of the sexually-oriented business to accept any
tip or gratuity, directly or indirectly, from a customer in addition to the
service fee specified in the customer contract; and
   (E)   Maintain all customer contracts and daily registers for a period of
two years following the customer’s date of service.
(Ord. 2007-11, passed 6-26-2007) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.052 ADULT THEATER REGULATIONS.
   In addition to the general requirements relating to adult entertainment
establishments and sexually-oriented businesses contained in this chapter, an
adult theater, regardless of whether it is licensed under this chapter, shall:
   (A)   If the adult theater contains an auditorium or hall, comply with each
of the following provisions:
      (1)   Have individual and separate seats (not couches, benches or other
seating configurations allowing or providing for the seating of multiple
persons on the same item of furniture) to accommodate the maximum number of
persons who may occupy the area;
      (2)   Have a continuous main aisle alongside of the seating areas in
order that each person seated in the areas shall be visible from the aisle at
all times;
      (3)   Have a sign posted in a conspicuous place at or near each entrance
to the auditorium or hall which lists the maximum number of persons who may
occupy the auditorium or hall area, which number shall not exceed the number of
seats within the hall or auditorium area; and
      (4)   Be illuminated at an illumination of not less than 15 to 20 foot
candles average maintained as measured at 35 inches above the floor level and
shall maintain the light at all times so that any customer present in the hall
or auditorium may be seen.
   (B)   If the adult theater contains adult booths, each adult booth shall
comply with each of the following provisions:
      (1)   Have a sign posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance
which states the maximum number of persons who may occupy the booth, which
number shall correlate with the number of seats in the booth;
      (2)   Have a permanently open entrance not less than three-feet wide and
not less than six feet high, not capable of being closed or partially closed by
any curtain, door, or other partition which would be capable of wholly or
partially obscuring any person situated in the booth; provided, however, that
the requirements of all building and related codes shall also be complied with;
      (3)   Have individual, separate seats (which are not couches, benches or
other seating configurations allowing or providing for the seating of multiple
persons on the same item of furniture) which correlate with the maximum number
of persons who may occupy the booth;
      (4)   Have a continuous main aisle alongside the booth in order that each
person situated in the booth shall be visible from the aisle at all times;
      (5)   Have an illuminated and continuous main aisle in which workers and
customers can be seen from one end to the other; and
      (6)   Have, except for the entrance, walls or partitions of solid
construction without any holes or openings in the walls or partitions.
   (C)   Have one or more manager’s stations;
   (D)   Configure the interior of the premises in a manner that there is an
unobstructed view from a manager’s station of every area of the premises to
which any customer is permitted access for any purpose excluding restrooms;
   (E)   If the premises have two or more manager’s stations designated,
configure the interior of the premises in a manner that there is an
unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any customer is
permitted access for any purposes from at least one of the manager’s stations.
The view required in this division shall be by direct line of sight from the
manager’s station;
   (F)   If the adult theater is designed to permit outdoor viewing by persons
seated in automobiles, cause the motion picture screen so situated, or the
perimeter of the establishment so fenced, so that the material to be seen by
those persons may not be seen from any public right-of-way, property assigned a
residential zoning classification or assigned a residential land use
designation, any religious institution or church, any educational institution
or school, or from a park;
   (G)   Cover the floors of areas accessible to customers with smooth and non-
permeable flooring material which can withstand frequent effective cleaning
with industrial strength cleaning agents. Carpeting of any type is prohibited;
   (H)   Use smooth and non-permeable upholstery material, which can withstand
frequent cleaning with industrial strength cleaning agents, to cover furniture
permitted by this chapter for the use of customers;
   (I)   Have, in areas accessible to customers, interior wall surfaces which
can withstand frequent cleaning with industrial strength cleaning agents;
   (J)   Use only those shades and blinds which can withstand frequent cleaning
with industrial strength cleaning agents. Draperies are prohibited;
   (K)   Maintain areas accessible to customers in a clean and sanitary
condition;
   (L)   Keep all furniture upholstery material free from holes and rips; and
   (M)   Utilize an appropriate and effective adaptation of the United States
Center for Disease Controls universal precautions for the storage and
transmission of the HIV virus and other diseases when cleaning or sanitizing
the establishment.
(Ord. 2007-11, passed 6-26-2007) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.053 ADULT PERFORMANCE ESTABLISHMENT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   In addition to the general requirements for adult entertainment
establishments and sexually- oriented businesses contained in this chapter, an
adult performance establishment shall, regardless of whether it is licensed
under this chapter, have a stage provided for the expressive display or
exposure of any worker’s specified anatomical areas to a customer consisting of
a permanent platform (or other similar permanent structure) raised a minimum of
18 inches above the surrounding floor and encompassing an area of at least 100
square feet. The stage shall be located at least three feet from the nearest
table, chair, area or other accommodation where customers are seated or
otherwise located; provided, however, that a table at which any customer is
seated or served shall not be used as a stage.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the stage requirement in division (A) above, an adult
performance establishment may also have smaller stages for the expressive
display or exposure of a worker’s specified anatomical areas to a customer
consisting of permanent or removable platforms raised a minimum of 18 inches
above the surrounding floor from where customers are seated or located;
provided, however, that a table at which any customer is seated or served shall
not be used as a stage.
   (C)   In addition to the general requirements for adult entertainment
establishments and sexually-oriented businesses contained in this chapter, an
adult performance establishment shall, regardless of whether it is licensed
under this chapter:
      (1)   In any area in which a private performance occurs, have a
permanently open entrance not less than three feet wide and not less than six
feet high, which entrance shall not have any curtain rods, hinges, rails or the
like which would allow the entrance to be closed or partially closed by any
curtain, door, or other partition; provided, however, that the requirements of
all building and related codes shall also be complied with;
      (2)   In any area in which a private performance occurs, have a wall to
wall, floor to ceiling partition of solid construction without any holes or
openings, which partition may be completely or partially transparent, and which
partition separates the worker from the person viewing the displays;
      (3)   Post a sign which is clearly legible and located in a conspicuous
place setting forth that straddle dancing is strictly prohibited; and
      (4)   Not place or permit the placement of a bed or mattress in the
establishment.
(Ord. 2007-11, passed 6-26-2007) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.054 COMMERCIAL BODILY CONTACT ESTABLISHMENT REGULATIONS.
   In addition to all general requirements of this chapter pertaining to adult
entertainment establishments and sexually-oriented businesses, a commercial
bodily contact establishment, regardless of whether it is licensed under this
chapter, shall:
   (A)   Operate only from a fixed physical location which is set forth on its
sexually-oriented business license and all required business tax receipts;
   (B)   Not advertise, offer or provide any other service other than services
which are posted;
   (C)   Provide clean linen and towels for each customer when towels and
linens are used during the course of providing services to a customer;
provided, however, that heavy white paper may be substituted for sheets if the
paper is used for only one customer and then discarded into a sanitary
receptacle;
   (D)   Store clean linen, towels and other materials used in connection with
providing commercial bodily contact in closed cabinets;
   (E)   Disinfect and sterilize non-disposable instruments after each use on a
customer;
   (F)   Cause all workers to conceal their specified anatomical areas with an
opaque covering at all times when on the premises of the business by wearing an
opaque surgical type gown;
   (G)   Not encourage, allow or permit any customer to consume food or
beverages in the business;
   (H)   Provide commercial bodily contact in an area wherein the area is
visible at all times from common areas in the establishment. No contact may
occur in a separate or individual cubicle, room, booth or area which is not
visible from common areas of the establishment and a receptionist area;
provided, however, that if male and female customers are provided services at
the same time, separate work areas shall be established for each gender;
   (I)   Not advertise, display, publish, exhibit, place, distribute or promote
on any advertising matter or signage services that are not posted or a
suggestion that services not posted will be provided;
   (J)   Not advertise, display, publish, exhibit, place, distribute or promote
on any advertising matter or signage any suggestion that workers will be
dressed in any manner other than as required in this chapter;
   (K)   Not begin a meeting or service with a customer between 10:00 p.m. of
any day of the week and 9:00 a.m. the following day;
   (L)   Not provide services at any place other than a physical location
licensed to provide commercial bodily contact under the provisions of this
chapter; and
   (M)   Not place or permit the placement of any bed, mattress or sofa at the
business; provided, however, that a sofa may be placed in the reception area
open to the public at the main entrance of the business and cots or padded mats
may be used when providing commercial bodily contact.
(Ord. 2007-11, passed 6-26-2007) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.055 ESCORT SERVICE REGULATIONS.
   In addition to all general provisions of this chapter pertaining to adult
entertainment establishments and sexually-oriented businesses, an escort
service, regardless of whether licensed under this chapter, shall:
   (A)   Not advertise, offer or perform any other service than services which
are posted;
   (B)   Cause all workers and escorts to conceal their specified anatomical
areas with an opaque covering at all times when on the premises of the escort
service;
   (C)   Not advertise, display, publish, exhibit, place, distribute or promote
on any advertising matter or signage services that are not posted or a
suggestion that services not posted will be provided;
   (D)   Not begin a meeting or service with a customer between 10:00 p.m. of
any day of the week and 9:00 a.m. the following day;
   (E)   If offering or providing escorts or escort service within the town,
each escort service shall notify the Brevard County Sheriff’s Department and
the Mayor or his or her designee of an authorized physical location, which may
or may not be within the town, from where the escort service operates and
dispatches escorts;
   (F)   Include in all advertising or promotional literature posted, placed,
published or distributed within the town the number of a valid sexually-
oriented business license issued by the town unless the escort service does not
refer, send or dispatch escorts to any location within the jurisdictional
limits of the town;
   (G)   Each escort service shall ensure that every escort and worker of the
escort service is provided with a copy of the escort service’s license and
carries it while working as an escort for the service, and displays the license
upon the request of any law enforcement officer or the Mayor or his or her
designee. In addition to a copy of the escort service’s license, each escort
service shall ensure that each escort has obtained a business tax receipt to
engage in the occupation of escort within the town and that they carry the
license while working, and displays the license upon the request of any law
enforcement officer or the Mayor or his or her designee. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, an escort or worker of an escort service who is a paid employee for
whom taxes and Social Security payments are withheld and paid by the licensed
escort service and who is not an independent contractor may substitute and
carry a copy of the sexually-oriented business/escort service license of the
employing escort service only, provided that worker records as required by this
chapter are created and maintained by the licensed escort service; and
   (H)   If a meeting with or the service of a customer occurs at a location
not open to the public, then the escort shall check in with the on duty manager
of the premises in person where the meeting or service occurs or begins prior
to meeting or servicing a customer and advise the manager of the following:
names of the escort(s); the escort service and customer(s); the escort’s time
of arrival and estimated time of departure; and a copy of the escort service’s
sexually-oriented business license and the escort’s own business tax receipt,
if applicable, and the location of the meeting within the structure.
(Ord. 2007-11, passed 6-26-2007) Penalty, see §
113.999
ENGAGING IN PROHIBITED ACTIVITY
§ 113.070 CUSTOMERS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any customer in or for an adult entertainment
establishment or sexually-oriented business regardless of whether licensed
pursuant to this chapter to do any of the following acts:
      (1)   To engage or participate in a straddle dance at the establishment
or business;
      (2)   To offer, contract or otherwise agree to engage or participate in a
straddle dance with a person at the establishment or business;
      (3)   To engage or participate in any specified sexual activity at the
establishment or business or while in the presence of a worker;
      (4)   To display or expose while in the presence of a worker or when at
the establishment or business any specified anatomical area except in
accordance with
Chapter 131, Public Nudity, as codified;
      (5)   To offer or deliver a tip or gratuity to any worker of an
establishment or business before, during or after the provision of services
except at an adult performance establishment;
      (6)   If a worker is a female, to intentionally touch, fondle or
manipulate her on her clothed or unclothed breast(s), either directly or
through a medium;
      (7)   To intentionally touch, fondle, massage or manipulate any specified
anatomical area of a worker, a customer, or himself or herself, whether clothed
or unclothed, on the premises of the establishment or business;
      (8)   To intentionally touch, fondle, massage or manipulate a worker on
any specified anatomical area when at or receiving services from the adult
entertainment establishment or sexually-oriented business;
      (9)   To intentionally touch, fondle, massage or manipulate the clothed
or unclothed breast(s) of a female worker, or to touch the clothed or unclothed
body of a worker at any point below the waist and above the knee of the worker
when at an adult entertainment establishment or sexually-oriented business;
      (10)   To occupy an adult booth in which booth there are more people than
that specified on the posted sign required by this chapter;
      (11)   To otherwise violate or aid or abet a violation of this chapter;
      (12)   To encourage or solicit any worker to engage in any specified
sexual activity; or
      (13)   To consume or purchase alcoholic beverages on the premises of any
adult entertainment establishment or sexually-oriented business.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any customer at or of a sexually-oriented business
to do any of the following acts regardless of whether the establishment is
licensed pursuant to this chapter:
      (1)   To intentionally touch, massage or manipulate, directly or
indirectly or through a medium while on the premises of the establishment or
when with a worker, the customer’s specified anatomical areas;
      (2)   To solicit any worker to provide a service not posted;
      (3)   To solicit or receive any service not indicated and contracted for
in the written customer contract;
      (4)   To provide to the worker providing the service either directly,
indirectly or through a medium, any tip, gratuity or other consideration beyond
the fee specified in the customer contract; and
      (5)   To expose any specified anatomical area except in accordance with
Chapter 131, Public Nudity, as codified, to the view of a worker.
(Ord. 2007-11, passed 6-26-2007) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.071 WORKERS; OPERATORS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any worker of an adult entertainment establishment
or sexually-oriented business, regardless of whether licensed under this
chapter, to do any of the following acts or for an operator of an adult
entertainment establishment or sexually-oriented business, regardless of
whether licensed hereunder, to knowingly permit, suffer, aid, allow or
encourage any worker to do any of the following acts:
      (1)   To engage or participate in a straddle dance with a customer at the
establishment or business;
      (2)   To offer, contract or otherwise agree with a customer to engage or
participate in a straddle dance with a person at the establishment or business;
      (3)   To engage or participate in any specified sexual activity or
activities at the establishment or business with a customer, himself or herself
or a worker;
      (4)   To display or expose at the establishment or business specified
anatomical areas except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and
other applicable law;
      (5)   To request or accept a tip or gratuity from a customer except at an
adult performance establishment;
      (6)   To work in an adult entertainment establishment or sexually-
oriented business that he or she knows or should know is not licensed under
this chapter, or which has a license which is under suspension, has been
revoked or canceled, or has expired, regardless of whether he, she or it has
applied for and obtained a license under this chapter;
      (7)   To display or expose specified anatomical areas except in
accordance with
Chapter 131, Public Nudity, as codified, while engaging in personal
advertising, pandering or solicitation, whether passive or otherwise, on behalf
of the worker, any other worker, or the establishment or business while
situated outside any structure at the establishment or business, or at a place
at the establishment or business where the worker is visible from any public
right-of-way or sidewalk. PERSONAL ADVERTISING means encouraging or enticing,
by whatever direct or indirect means, potential customers outside the doors of
the establishment or business to enter the establishment or business;
      (8)   To suffer, permit or allow any door of the business or
establishment that is visible from a public right-of-way or sidewalk to be
opened or remain opened except when a person is entering or exiting the
establishment or business;
      (9)   To allow or encourage a customer to intentionally touch or fondle,
either directly or through a medium, any specified anatomical area of the
customer, a worker or another customer;
      (10)   If the worker is a female, to allow herself to be intentionally
touched on her clothed or unclothed breast(s) by a customer;
      (11)   If a worker is a female, to allow herself to be intentionally
touched by a customer on any portion of her body below the waist and above the
knee;
      (12)   To display or expose any specified anatomical area unless and only
to the extent permitted by
Chapter 131, Public Nudity, as codified, and the stage on which the worker is
located is not located between the legs of a customer;
      (13)   To provide or engage in any private performance unless and only to
the extent permitted by this chapter;
      (14)   To remain in the presence of a customer who is exposing specified
anatomical areas less covered than permitted by
Chapter 131, Public Nudity, as codified, at the establishment or in the
presence of a worker or another customer;
      (15)   To violate or aid or abet in a violation of the provisions of this
chapter;
      (16)   To encourage or knowingly permit any customer to intentionally
touch, fondle, massage or manipulate, either directly or indirectly through a
medium, any of the customer’s specified anatomical areas on the premises of the
establishment or when in the presence of another customer or worker;
      (17)   To encourage or solicit any customer to engage in any specified
sexual activity;
      (18)   To intentionally touch, fondle, massage or manipulate any customer
on the customer’s clothed or unclothed body between the waist and above the
knee; or
      (19)   To provide or serve alcoholic beverages to any customer or worker
for consumption on the premises of any adult entertainment establishment or
sexually-oriented business.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any worker of a sexually-oriented business,
regardless of whether it is licensed under this chapter, to do any of the
following acts, or for an operator of a sexually-oriented business, regardless
of whether it is licensed under this chapter, to knowingly or with reason to
know permit suffer or allow any worker to commit any of the following acts:
      (1)   To accept a tip or gratuity from or on behalf of a customer in
addition to the service fee stated in the written customer contract;
      (2)   To begin a meeting or service, continue a meeting or service,
solicit a meeting or service or make or solicit a sale between the hours of 10:
00 p.m. of any particular day and 9:00 a.m. the following day;
      (3)   Provide commercial bodily contact except at the physical structure
of the establishment which has a commercial bodily contact establishment
license;
      (4)   To provide any service not posted as required by this chapter; or
      (5)   To provide any service without first executing a customer contract.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any worker of an adult entertainment establishment
or sexually-oriented business, regardless of whether licensed pursuant to this
chapter, to knowingly permit, suffer, aid, allow or encourage any customer to
do any of the following acts:
      (1)   To intentionally touch, fondle, massage or manipulate, either
directly or indirectly through a medium, any of the customer’s specified
anatomical areas when at the establishment or business or while in the presence
of a worker or another customer;
      (2)   To intentionally touch, fondle, massage or manipulate, either
directly or indirectly through a medium, any specified anatomical area of
another customer or a worker when at the establishment or business or while in
the presence of a worker or customer;
      (3)   To engage in any specified sexual activities at the establishment
or business with a worker, customer, himself or herself or with another
customer;
      (4)   To expose the customer’s specified anatomical areas at the
establishment or business or when receiving services or when in the presence of
a worker or another customer;
      (5)   To engage or participate in a straddle dance;
      (6)   To intentionally touch, fondle, massage or manipulate a worker at
any point below the waist and above the knee; or
      (7)   To intentionally touch a female worker on the clothed or unclothed
breast.
(Ord. 2007-11, passed 6-26-2007) Penalty, see §
113.999
OPERATION
§ 113.085 OPERATION WITHOUT A LICENSE.
   It is unlawful for any person to be an operator of or at or to be a worker
for an adult entertainment establishment or sexually-oriented business where
the person knows or should know:
   (A)   The establishment or business does not have an adult entertainment
establishment or sexually-oriented business license for the applicable
classification;
   (B)   The establishment or business has a license which is under suspension;
and
   (C)   The establishment or business has a license which has been revoked,
canceled or has expired.
(Ord. 2007-11, passed 6-26-2007) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.086 OPERATION CONTRARY TO OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to be an operator of an adult
entertainment establishment or sexually-oriented business which does not
satisfy all of the general requirements of this chapter, regardless of whether
the establishment is licensed thereunder.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to be an operator of a sexually-oriented
business which does not satisfy all of the general requirements of §§
113.050 and
113.051 of this chapter regardless of whether the establishment is licensed
thereunder.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to be an operator of an adult
performance establishment which does not satisfy all of the special
requirements of §§
113.050 and
113.053 of this chapter regardless of whether licensed thereunder.
   (D)   It is unlawful for any person to be an operator of an adult theater
which does not satisfy all of the special requirements of §§
113.050 and
113.052 of this chapter regardless of whether the establishment is licensed
thereunder.
   (E)   It is unlawful for any person to be an operator of an escort service
which does not satisfy all of the special requirements of §§
113.050,
113.051 and
113.055 of this chapter regardless of whether licensed thereunder.
   (F)   It is unlawful for any person to be an operator of a commercial bodily
contact establishment which does not satisfy all of the special requirements of
§§
113.050 and
113.054 of this chapter regardless of whether the establishment is licensed
thereunder.
(Ord. 2007-11, passed 6-26-2007) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.087 USE OF RESTROOMS OR DRESSING ROOMS.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any provision in this chapter indicating to the
contrary, it is not unlawful for any worker of an adult entertainment
establishment or sexually-oriented business, regardless of whether it is
licensed under this chapter, to expose any specified anatomical area during the
worker’s bona fide use of a dressing room or bathroom which is occupied at the
time only by workers of the same sex.
   (B)   Notwithstanding any provision in this chapter indicating to the
contrary, it shall not be unlawful for any customer of an adult entertainment
establishment or sexually-oriented business, regardless of whether it is
licensed under this chapter, to expose any specified anatomical area during the
customer’s bona fide use of a bathroom which is occupied at the time only by
customers of the same sex.
   (C)   It is unlawful to be an operator of an adult performance establishment
that has a dressing room for use by its workers that is also accessible to
customers.
   (D)   It is unlawful to be an operator of a sexually-oriented business which
has a dressing room for use by its customers that is accessible to workers.
   (E)   Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, a
worker engaged in the work of a restroom attendant or valet may occupy a
restroom which is also occupied by customers provided that the valet or
attendant does not expose any specified anatomical area except in accordance
with
Chapter 131, Public Nudity, as codified, to the view of a customer and is of
the same sex of the customer occupying the restroom.
   (F)   Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, it is
not unlawful for a worker or customer to touch their own specified anatomical
areas during their bona fide use of a restroom, dressing room or bathroom when
the touching is necessary and inherent to the activity of changing clothes or
excretory functions.
(Ord. 2007-11, passed 6-26-2007) Penalty, see §
113.999
UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES
§ 113.100 MINORS.
   It is unlawful for an operator or worker of an adult entertainment
establishment or sexually-oriented business regardless of whether licensed
under this chapter, to knowingly or with reason to know, permit, suffer or
allow:
   (A)   Admittance to the establishment or business of a person under 18 years
of age when the establishment or business is open for business;
   (B)   A person under 18 years of age to remain at the establishment or
business when the establishment or business is open for business;
   (C)   A person under 18 years of age to purchase goods or services from the
establishment or a worker at the establishment or business; and
   (D)   A person under 18 years of age to be a worker at or for the
establishment or business.
(Ord. 2007-11, passed 6-26-2007) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.101 RECORDS.
   (A)   It is unlawful to be an operator or worker of an adult entertainment
establishment or sexually-oriented business, regardless of whether it is
licensed under this chapter, if the current and valid adult entertainment
establishment or sexually-oriented business license is not conspicuously
displayed on the premises of the establishment or business.
   (B)   It is unlawful to be an operator of an adult entertainment
establishment or sexually-oriented business, regardless of whether licensed
under this chapter, which does not create, establish and compile worker
records, maintain worker records or where the records are not produced for
inspection by a law enforcement officer upon request when the establishment or
business is open for business.
   (C)   It is unlawful to be an operator of a sexually-oriented business,
regardless of whether it is licensed under this chapter, at which customer
contracts, daily registers and a list of services have not been compiled,
maintained or are not produced for inspection by a law enforcement officer upon
request when the establishment or business is open for business.
   (D)   It is unlawful for a worker at or of an adult entertainment
establishment or sexually-oriented business, regardless of whether licensed
under this chapter, to fail to obtain, carry or produce for inspection by a law
enforcement officer upon request, a business tax receipt for the occupation in
which the worker is engaged; provided, however, that a worker of an adult
entertainment establishment or sexually-oriented business who is a paid
employee for whom income taxes and Social Security payments are withheld and
paid by the establishment and who is not an independent contractor shall not be
required to obtain a business tax receipt or their own adult entertainment
establishment/sexually-oriented business license.
   (E)   It is unlawful for an escort, regardless of whether they are a paid
employee for whom income taxes and Social Security payments are withheld and
paid by the escort service, to fail to carry and produce for inspection by a
law enforcement officer a copy of the sexually-oriented business license of the
employing escort service when working as an escort or providing the services of
escort.
   (F)   It is unlawful for any person or any person on their behalf applying
for a license under this chapter to make a false or misleading statement or
provide false or misleading information which is intended to facilitate the
issuance of a license.
   (G)   It is unlawful for any worker, customer or operator to provide false
or misleading information in any worker record, customer contract or daily
register required by this chapter.
   (H)   It is unlawful to be an operator or worker at an adult entertainment
establishment or sexually-oriented business which does not have conspicuously
posted the name of the operator on duty while the establishment is open for
business.
   (I)   It is unlawful for an operator of an adult entertainment establishment
to fail to produce for inspection any worker record required by this chapter,
when requested by a law enforcement officer or the Mayor or his or her designee
when the establishment or business is open for business.
   (J)   It is unlawful for an operator of a sexually-oriented business to fail
to produce for inspection any worker record, customer contract or daily
register required by this subchapter when requested by a law enforcement
officer or the Mayor or his or her designee when the establishment or business
is open for business.
(Ord. 2007-11, passed 6-26-2007) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.102 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any operator of an adult entertainment
establishment, regardless of whether licensed pursuant to this chapter, to
allow the establishment to remain open for business or to knowingly allow any
worker to engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit
a sale, provide a service or solicit a service between the hours of midnight
and 9:00 a.m. of any particular day.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any operator of a sexually-oriented business,
regardless of whether licensed pursuant to this chapter, to allow the business
to remain open for business or to permit any worker to engage in a performance,
solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, begin, continue or provide
a service or solicit a service between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. of
any particular day.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any worker of an adult entertainment establishment,
regardless of whether licensed pursuant to this chapter, to engage in a
performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a
service or solicit a service between the hours of midnight and 9:00 a.m. of any
particular day.
   (D)   It is unlawful for any worker of sexually-oriented business,
regardless of whether licensed pursuant to this chapter, to provide a service,
solicit a service, engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale,
solicit a sale, begin a service or continue a service between the hours of 10:
00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. of any particular day.
(Ord. 2007-11, passed 6-26-2007) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.103 SPECIAL PROHIBITIONS RELATING TO ESCORTS AND ESCORT SERVICES.
   It is unlawful for any escort, escort service or worker of an escort
service, regardless of whether licensed under this chapter, to commit any of
the following acts or for an operator of an escort service regardless of
whether licensed thereunder, to knowingly permit, suffer, aid, assist or allow
any escort or escort service worker to commit any of the following acts:
   (A)   To enter a hotel, motel or other place of temporary lodging for the
purpose of meeting or providing services to a customer without immediately upon
entering the hotel, motel or other place and prior to meeting the customer
making personal face-to-face contact with the on duty manager at the front desk
or reception area and providing that person with the following information:
      (1)   The time of arrival and estimated time of departure;
      (2)   A copy of the escort service’s sexually-oriented business license
and, if applicable, the escort’s business tax receipt;
      (3)   The name of the escort, the escort service and the customer being
met/served; and
      (4)   The location of the meeting or service within the structure
including the room number.
   (B)   To require, entice or solicit any customer to remove any article of
clothing;
   (C)   To display or expose any specified anatomical area to a customer;
   (D)   To begin a meeting or service without first meeting the customer in a
public place such as a bar or restaurant before accompanying the customer to
any place not open to the public such as a hotel room or residence;
   (E)   To meet with or provide services to a customer in any place not open
to the public such as a hotel room, motel room or residence without first
executing the customer contract as required by this chapter;
   (F)   To provide services to a customer even in a public place without first
executing the customer contract as required by this chapter, immediately
following the meeting of the customer;
   (G)   To solicit a tip or gratuity from a customer in exchange for a promise
or suggestion that any act or service not contracted for in the customer
contract will be performed; and
   (H)   To accept any compensation or payment except that which is provided in
the customer contract.
(Ord. 2007-11, passed 6-26-2007) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.104 SPECIAL PROHIBITIONS RELATED TO COMMERCIAL BODILY CONTACT.
   It is unlawful for a worker of a commercial bodily contact establishment,
regardless of whether licensed pursuant to this chapter, to commit any of the
following acts or for the operator of a commercial bodily contact
establishment, regardless of whether licensed thereunder, to knowingly or with
reason to know, permit, suffer, aid, assist or allow any worker to commit any
of the following acts:
   (A)   To provide commercial bodily contact or to be present at the premises
of the business when open for business unless covering their specified
anatomical areas by wearing an opaque surgical type gown;
   (B)   To display or expose any specified anatomical area except in
accordance with
Chapter 131, Public Nudity, as codified, to a customer.
   (C)   To allow a customer to expose or display the customer’s specified
anatomical areas except in accordance with
Chapter 131, Public Nudity, as codified, in the presence of a worker;
   (D)   To allow a customer to engage in any specified sexual activity with
himself or herself, another customer or with a worker;
   (E)   To perform or provide commercial bodily contact except at the premises
of a commercial bodily contact establishment licensed under this chapter;
   (F)   To engage in or offer to engage in private modeling or the activities
of an escort with any customer;
   (G)   To provide commercial bodily contact or service to a customer without
first executing a customer contract as required by this chapter;
   (H)   To intentionally touch, fondle, manipulate or massage the specified
anatomical area of any customer;
   (I)   To allow any customer to intentionally touch, fondle, manipulate or
massage any specified anatomical area of any worker or the body of any worker
below the waist and above the knee, directly, indirectly or through a medium;
   (J)   To remain in the presence of any customer who is displaying, exposing,
intentionally touching, fondling or manipulating any specified anatomical area;
   (K)   To allow any customer to intentionally touch, massage or manipulate
any specified anatomical area while on the premises of the business or when in
the presence of a worker;
   (L)   To solicit or require a customer to remove any item of clothing as a
prerequisite to providing commercial bodily contact;
   (M)   To accept or solicit any tip, remuneration, consideration or gratuity
in excess of the fee provided in the executed customer contract;
   (N)   To accept or solicit any tip, remuneration, consideration or gratuity
in exchange for any enhanced service;
   (O)   To fail to require a customer to cover the customers’ specified
anatomical areas with a towel, robe, undergarment, bathing suit or other
similar fully opaque material while on the premises of the business; and
   (P)   To engage in or offer to engage in any private performance or act as
an adult model.
(Ord. 2007-11, passed 6-26-2007) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.105 COMMERCIAL BODILY CONTACT ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED; SAVINGS
PROVISION.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, it is unlawful to
operate, or be a worker for or at a commercial bodily contact establishment
which engages in commercial bodily contact.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (A) above, in the event
that division (A), prohibiting commercial bodily contact establishments is
found to be unconstitutional, or otherwise invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction or should an injunction be issued relative to the enforcement of
division (A), then all provisions set forth this chapter applicable to
commercial bodily contact establishments and sexually-oriented business shall
apply to businesses and establishments engaged in commercial bodily contact.
(Ord. 2007-11, passed 6-26-2007) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.106 SEXUAL ENCOUNTER BUSINESSES PROHIBITED; PROHIBITED ACTS; UNLAWFUL
PROVISIONS.
   (A)   It is unlawful to be an operator of or be a worker at a sexual
encounter business.
   (B)   It is unlawful to cause, encourage or allow a person under 18 years of
age to be present at a sexual encounter business.
   (C)   It is unlawful to aid or abet a person causing, encouraging or
allowing a person under 18 years of age to be present at a sexual encounter
business.
(Ord. 2007-11, passed 6-26-2007) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.999 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
prosecuted in the same manner as misdemeanors are prosecuted. The violations
shall be prosecuted in the name of the state in a court having jurisdiction of
misdemeanors by the prosecuting attorney thereof and, upon conviction, shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $500 or by imprisonment in the county jail not
to exceed 60 days or by both fine and imprisonment as provided in F.S. §
162.22. Each incident or separate occurrence of any act that violates this
chapter shall be deemed a separate offense. In addition to the penalties
provided under this section, violators of this chapter shall be subject to any
other appropriate civil or criminal action provided by law in a court of
competent jurisdiction, including, but not limited to, injunctive relief.
(Ord. 2007-11, passed 6-26-2007)
CHAPTER 114: SOLICITORS, CANVASSERS AND PEDDLERS
Section
General Provisions
   
114.01   Purpose and intent
   
114.02   Definitions
   
114.03   Exemptions
   
114.04   Business tax receipt required if required by Chapter 34
Identification Cards and Applications
   
114.15   Identification card required
   
114.16   Card prerequisite to business tax receipt
   
114.17   Application for commercial solicitor, peddler
   
114.18   Application card for charitable solicitor
   
114.19   Fees
   
114.20   Investigation and action on application
   
114.21   Bond required
   
114.22   Contents of identification card
   
114.23   Expiration of business tax receipt and cards
Revocation
   
114.35   Revocation of business tax receipt and card authorized; grounds
   
114.36   Notice of hearing on revocation
   
114.37   Appeal from denial or revocation of business tax receipt or card
Prohibitions
   
114.50   Prohibited acts
   
114.51   Unauthorized use of business tax receipt or cards
   
114.52   Soliciting, peddling or vending from streets and other areas
prohibited
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 114.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to preserve public safety,
human life and convenience; to secure the comfort, health, welfare and
prosperity of town inhabitants; to ensure that the use of the streets and
sidewalks in the town does not become dangerous and that the free flow of
traffic thereon is not impeded; to preserve privacy and quiet to those in their
home; to protect town inhabitants against crime and undue annoyance; and to
protect those on the streets and at home against abusive behavior by
solicitors.
(Ord. 2009-03, passed 7-28-2009)
§ 114.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CANVASSER. Any person traveling either by foot, vehicle or other conveyance,
from place to place, in order to solicit opinions for a survey or solicit
political support.
   CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION. Any organization defined as a charitable
organization under F.S. Ch. 496 and holds a sales tax exemption certificate
under F.S. § 212.08.
   CHARITABLE SOLICITOR. Any person, whether a resident of the town or not,
traveling either by foot, wagon, automobile motor truck or any other type of
conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street,
requesting, receiving, or attempting to request or receive contributions of
goods, money, services or any other thing of value on behalf of a charitable
organization.
   COMMERCIAL AREA. Any area of the town which is not zoned for residential use
in the town’s zoning code.
   COMMERCIAL SOLICITOR. Any person, whether a resident of the town or not,
traveling either by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck or any other type of
conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street,
taking or attempting to take, orders for sale of goods, wares and merchandise,
personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services
to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not the individual has,
carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of the sale or not. The
definition shall include any person, who, for himself or herself, or for any
other person hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, tent,
railroad box car, boat, hotel room, lodging house, apartment, shop or any other
place within the town for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking
orders for future delivery. Nothing in this definition shall be construed to
include, any person who solicits or canvases on behalf of a community service
organization, a charitable organization as defined herein, or a political party
or political candidate.
   PEDDLER. Any person, whether a resident of the town or not, traveling by
foot, wagon, automotive vehicles, or any other type of conveyance, from place
to place, from house to house, or from street to street, carrying, conveying or
transporting goods, wares, merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden
truck, farm products or provisions, offering articles to purchasers, or who
without traveling from place to place, shall sell or offer the same for sale
from a wagon, automotive vehicle, or other vehicle or conveyance. Anyone who
solicits orders and, as a separate transaction, makes deliveries to purchasers
as a part of a scheme or design to evade the provisions of this chapter shall
be deemed a PEDDLER.
(Ord. 2009-03, passed 7-28-2009)
§ 114.03 EXEMPTIONS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to apply to the following:
   (A)   A local post, camp, chapter or similarly designated element, or a
county unit of elements of a bona fide veterans’ organization which issues
charters to local elements throughout this state, a bona fide organization of
volunteer firefighters, a bona fide ambulance association or bona fide rescue
squad, association or a bona fide auxiliary or affiliate of any organization,
provided all its fund raising activities are carried on by members of an
organization or an affiliate thereof, and the members receive no compensation
directly or indirectly therefore;
   (B)   Any nonprofit community club, civic club, garden club, women’s club or
other similar civic group organized and in existence for more than two years,
with no capital stock or salaried executive employees, officers, members or
agents, with at least 25 members with annual dues collected of not less than $5
per member, in which all of the funds collected, less reasonable expenses, are
disbursed pursuant to the directions of the membership or the board of
directors and with the membership being furnished at least one written report
each year by the directors as to its charitable activities; and
   (C)   Any commercial solicitor making a business visit to a commercial area
upon the express or implied invitation, oral or written, of an authorized
representative of the business premises located in the commercial area.
Provided; however, where an express or implied invitation has been revoked by
the owner of the commercial enterprise, then in that case this exemption shall
not apply.
(Ord. 2009-03, passed 7-28-2009)
§ 114.04 BUSINESS TAX RECEIPT REQUIRED IF REQUIRED BY CHAPTER 34.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any business or activity
regulated by this chapter without having first obtained a business tax receipt
as provided by
Chapter 34 of this code, if a business tax receipt is required by the chapter.
(Ord. 2009-03, passed 7-28-2009) Penalty, see §
10.99
IDENTIFICATION CARDS AND APPLICATIONS
§ 114.15 IDENTIFICATION CARD REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of commercial
solicitor or peddler or to act as a charitable solicitor within the corporate
limits of the town without first obtaining an identification card as provided
in this chapter.
(Ord. 2009-03, passed 7-28-2009) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.16 CARD PREREQUISITE TO BUSINESS TAX RECEIPT.
   The identification card required by §
114.15 shall be a prerequisite to the issuance of a business tax receipt to
engage in any business or activity regulated by this chapter, if the business
tax receipt is required by
Chapter 34 of this code.
(Ord. 2009-03, passed 7-28-2009) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.17 APPLICATION FOR COMMERCIAL SOLICITOR, PEDDLER.
   Any person may apply for an identification card to do business as a
commercial solicitor or a peddler by filing with, the Town Clerk a sworn
written application on forms to be furnished by the town giving the following
information:
   (A)   Name and description (height, hair color, sex, race and any other
identifying features) of the applicant and date of birth of the applicant;
   (B)   Permanent home address and full local address of the applicant;
   (C)   A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be
sold;
   (D)   If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with
credentials establishing the exact relationship;
   (E)   The length of time, not to exceed one year, for which the card is
desired to be effective;
   (F)   If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the same, together with
license number or other means of identification;
   (G)   The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold by order for
future delivery are manufactured or produced, where the goods or products are
located at the time the application is filed, and the proposed method of
delivery;
   (H)   The name of at least two reliable property owners of the county who
will certify as to the applicant’s good character and business respectability,
or, in lieu of the names of references, other available evidence as to the good
character and business responsibility;
   (I)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of
any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal or county ordinance; the
nature of the offense; and the punishment or penalty assessed therefore; and
   (J)   A complete set of fingerprints taken by an authorized law enforcement
agency.
(Ord. 2009-03, passed 7-28-2009) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.18 APPLICATION CARD FOR CHARITABLE SOLICITOR.
   Any person may apply for an identification card to act as a charitable
solicitor by filing with the Town Clerk a sworn written application on forms to
be furnished by the town, which gives the following information:
   (A)   Name and description of the applicant (height, hair color, sex, race
and any other identifying features) and date of birth of the applicant;
   (B)   Permanent home address and full local address of the applicant;
   (C)   The length of time, not to exceed one year; for which the card is
desired to be effective;
   (D)   Written evidence from the charitable organization which the applicant
represents, showing that the applicant has been engaged by the charitable
organization for the purpose of solicitation;
   (E)   Name and address of the charitable organization which the applicant
represents;
   (F)   Evidence that the charitable organization represented by the applicant
is registered with the state pursuant to F.S. Ch. 496 and hold a sales tax
exemption certificate from the state;
   (G)   The length of time for which the right to solicit on behalf of the
charitable organization is desired;
   (H)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of
any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any county municipal ordinance involving
moral turpitude;
     (I)   If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the same, together with
license number or other means of identification; and
   (J)   A complete set of fingerprints taken by an authorized law enforcement
agency.
(Ord. 2009-03, passed 7-28-2009) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.19 FEES.
   Each person filing an application for an identification card pursuant to the
terms of this chapter shall pay, at the time of filing the application, the
following fee to the Town Clerk to cover the cost of investigation of the facts
stated in the application and the cost of providing identification cards. The
fee shall be nonrefundable, and shall be in addition to any business tax
receipt required by
Chapter 34 of this code.
 
Commercial solicitor $250
Peddler              $100
Charitable solicitor $0
 
(Ord. 2009-03, passed 7-28-2009) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.20 INVESTIGATION AND ACTION ON APPLICATION.
   (A)   Upon receipt of each application, the Town Clerk shall have 14 days to
conduct an investigation through the Brevard County Sheriff’s office, Building
Department, Better Business entities, Chamber of Commerce as to the applicant’s
character and business responsibility for the protection of the public health,
safety and welfare.
   (B)   If, as the result of the investigation, the applicant’s character or
responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the Town Clerk shall so endorse
the application, stating the reasons for his or her endorsement. The Town Clerk
shall then notify the applicant in writing that the application has been
disapproved, stating the reasons for the disapproval. The Clerk shall not issue
a card to an applicant whose application is so disapproved. Any applicant whose
application is so disapproved shall have the appeal rights set forth in §
114.37.
   (C)   If, as a result of the investigation, the character and responsibility
of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the Town Clerk shall so endorse
the application. The Town Clerk shall notify the applicant that the application
has been approved and shall issue to the applicant an identification card. For
commercial solicitors and peddlers, the Town Clerk shall require, as a
prerequisite to issuing the identification card, a bond as specified in §
114.21.
(Ord. 2009-03, passed 7-28-2009)
§ 114.21 BOND REQUIRED.
   Every approved applicant for an business tax receipt or an identification
card as a commercial solicitor or peddler shall, prior to receiving a business
tax receipt or identification card therefore, file with the Town Clerk a surety
bond approved by the Town Clerk, payable to the town, in the amount of $1,000,
conditioned upon the applicant’s full compliance with all of the provisions of
the ordinances of the town and the laws and regulations of the state regulating
and concerning the business and activity aforesaid. The surety bond shall be
written to include the activities of each and every agent, employee or
representative of the holder under his or her direction, supervision and
control in regard to his or her business activity in the town, who shall be
named and, identified by specific enumeration therein. The surety bond shall be
conditioned upon the further requirement that all monies paid, in whole or in
part, toward the purchase or payment for any goods, merchandise, services,
subscriptions and orders will be accounted for and applied according to the
representations of the solicitor, canvasser or peddler both oral and written
and shall guarantee to all citizens of the town with whom he or she transacts
business that the property, goods and merchandise so purchased, paid for and
ordered will be delivered in all respects as represented.
(Ord. 2009-03, passed 7-28-2009) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.22 CONTENTS OF IDENTIFICATION CARD.
   Each identification card issued to a commercial solicitor, peddler or
charitable solicitor shall contain the signatures of the holder and the Town
Clerk, shall show the name, address and general description of the holder, and
shall state the expiration date of the card. For commercial solicitors and
peddlers, the identification card shall also contain a photograph of the
holder, which photograph shall be taken and supplied by the town.
(Ord. 2009-03, passed 7-28-2009)
§ 114.23 EXPIRATION OF BUSINESS TAX RECEIPT AND CARDS.
   Business tax receipts and identification cards issued pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter shall expire on September 30 next following the date
of issue unless an earlier expiration date is specified on the face of the
business tax receipt or identification card.
(Ord. 2009-03, passed 7-28-2009)
REVOCATION
§ 114.35 REVOCATION OF BUSINESS TAX RECEIPT AND CARD AUTHORIZED; GROUNDS.
   Business tax receipts and identification cards issued pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the Town Manager and after notice
and public hearing for any of the following causes:
   (A)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for a business tax receipt or card;
   (B)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on the business of commercial solicitor or peddler or made in the
course of acting as a charitable solicitor;
   (C)   Any violation of this chapter;
   (D)   Conviction of, or entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to any
felony or the conviction of, or entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to
a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, fraudulent or dishonest dealing, or
the illegal use or sale of a controlled substance; and
   (E)   Conducting a business of commercial solicitor or peddler, or acting as
a charitable solicitor, in an unlawful manner or in a manner as to constitute a
breach of the peace.
(Ord. 2009-03, passed 7-28-2009)
§ 114.36 NOTICE OF HEARING ON REVOCATION.
   Notice of the hearing for revocation of a business tax receipt or an
identification card shall be given by the town in writing, setting forth
specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the public
hearing. The notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, by certified mail, with
return receipt requested, to the holder at his or her last known address, at
least seven days prior to the date set for hearing. Notice of the public
hearing shall also be posted at Town Hall at least seven days prior to the date
set for hearing.
(Ord. 2009-03, passed 7-28-2009)
§ 114.37 APPEAL FROM DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF BUSINESS TAX RECEIPT OR CARD.
   Any person, aggrieved by the action of any town official in the denial or
revocation of a business tax receipt or identification card pursuant to the
terms of this chapter shall have the right to appeal to the Town Council.
Notice of the appeal shall be filed with the Town Clerk no later than 14 days
after notice of the action complained of has been mailed to the person’s last
known address containing a written statement setting forth the grounds for
appeal. The Town Council shall set a time and place for a hearing on the
appeal, with the date of hearing scheduled no later than 30 days next following
the date of filing the notice of appeal. Notice of the hearing shall be given
to the applicant in the same manner as provided for notice of hearing on
revocation of a card. The decision and order of the Town Council on the appeal
shall be final and conclusive.
(Ord. 2009-03, passed 7-28-2009)
PROHIBITIONS
§ 114.50 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person holding a business tax receipt or
identification card pursuant to the terms of this chapter to commit any of the
following acts:
   (A)   To enter into or go upon the premises of a private residence for the
purpose of acting as a commercial solicitor, peddler or charitable solicitor
when the private residence displays a sign having the words “No Soliciting,”
“No Peddling” or words of similar meaning;
   (B)   To stay and remain on the premises of a private residence for the
purpose of acting as a commercial solicitor, peddler or charitable solicitor,
or to return thereto for the same purpose after first departing, after having
been requested to leave by the occupant thereof;
   (C)   To make uninvited calls at any residence for the purpose of acting as
a commercial solicitor, peddler or charitable solicitor before 9:00 a.m. or
after 9:00 p.m. on any day;
   (D)   To approach the back or rear doors or the side or rear of residential
premises for the purpose of acting as a commercial solicitor, peddler or
charitable solicitor;
   (E)   To refuse or fail to exhibit the business tax receipt or
identification card required by this chapter upon the request of any law
enforcement officer or any other person;
   (F)   To represent to any person that the business tax receipt or
identification card issued by the town pursuant to this chapter is, or may be,
an official endorsement of the activities of the holder or the products sold by
the holder; and
   (G)   To allow or permit any person not permitted by the town pursuant to
this chapter to use the holder’s business tax receipt or identification card
for any purpose.
(Ord. 2009-03, passed 7-28-2009) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.51 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF BUSINESS TAX RECEIPT OR CARDS.
   It shall be unlawful for any business tax receipt or identification card
issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter to be used at any time by any
person other than the one to whom it was issued.
(Ord. 2009-03, passed 7-28-2009) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.52 SOLICITING, PEDDLING OR VENDING FROM STREETS AND OTHER AREAS
PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park any vehicle,
whether motorized or not, on an private or public street, road, right-of-way or
any public property, for the purpose of soliciting, peddling, vending,
displaying or advertising goods, wares, merchandise, food or drink and/or
services for sale or trade.
(Ord. 2009-03, passed 7-28-2009) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 115: SPECIAL ACTIVITY PERMITS
Section
   
115.01   Purpose
   
115.02   Mayor to issue permits
   
115.03   Definitions
   
115.04   Time for submitting application
   
115.05   Fees
   
115.06   Application processing procedure
   
115.07   Permit
   
115.08   Revocation or suspension of special activity permit
 
   
115.99   Penalty
§ 115.01 PURPOSE.
   The intent of the Town Council in adopting this chapter is to recognize that
there are certain special or unique activities not recognized in the code,
which provide for an economically viable community. Special activities have
been determined to be in the best interest of the public and may call for
temporary waivers from the town code.
(Ord. 2009-03, passed 7-28-2009)
§ 115.02 MAYOR TO ISSUE PERMITS.
   (A)   The Mayor, under the direction of the Town Council, is hereby
authorized to issue a special activity permit. The Town Council may grant
temporary waivers to the town code for special activities. The permits shall be
subject to all conditions imposed by the Town Council. Prior to any special
activity permit being issued, the Town Council shall first approve the issuance
of a permit to an applicant.
   (B)   Waivers may include but are not limited to: open container ordinance,
subject to all conditions contained in the special activity permit as may be
from time to time established by the Town Council: use of barricades on public
streets or closure of public streets; and sound amplification; provided,
however, a permit for sound amplification does not allow an applicant to
violate any noise provisions provided elsewhere in this code.
   (C)   In granting waivers to the open container provision of the town code,
no waiver to the hours of operation established by this code shall be
permitted.
   (D)   Notwithstanding any of the foregoing, no permit or waiver shall be
issued for any special activity which would meet the definition of a rave club
as that term is defined in Ordinance 2001-25, as amended from time to time, an
ordinance of Brevard County.
(Ord. 2009-03, passed 7-28-2009)
§ 115.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GATED STREET EVENT. An event held on public right-of-way in the town where
admission is charged for access to the event area.
   SPECIAL ACTIVITY. An event activity or any occasion that is characterized by
its limited duration, infrequent occurrence or seasonal nature and by the fact
that permanent improvements are not made to the site. Temporary activities
include but are not limited to, exhibitions, celebrations, festivals, shows,
parades, carnivals, block parties, outdoor seasonal sales, concerts, marathons,
races, walks, fund raisers, taking place within a specifically defined area of
the town which event, activity or occasion does not fall within the normal
categories of permitted uses, activities, accessory uses or activities within
the applicable town zoning district.
   SPECIAL ACTIVITY APPLICATIONS. The form provided by the town for the
purposes of processing a select activity.
   SPECIAL ACTIVITY FEE. The fee an applicant is required to pay in accordance
with the special activity permitting procedure, before a special activity
application can be processed.
   SPECIAL ACTIVITY PERMIT. The permit that is issued by the Town Council.
(Ord. 2009-03, passed 7-28-2009)
§ 115.04 TIME FOR SUBMITTING APPLICATION.
   A special activity application must be submitted to the town no later than
30 days before the scheduled event, activity or occurrence.
(Ord. 2009-03, passed 7-28-2009) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.05 FEES.
   All applications for a special activity permit will be charged a special
activity fee of $100. This fee may be waived by the Town Council.
(Ord. 2009-03, passed 7-28-2009) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.06 APPLICATION PROCESSING PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The town shall provide an application for a special activity permit.
Upon submittal of the application, along with the applicable fee and
attachments, the town administration shall distribute the applications to the
Building and Zoning Department and other staff members as may be necessary for
comment. The completed application and comments shall be submitted to the Town
Council at the next regularly scheduled Town Council meeting for approval or
disapproval. The Town Council may impose any and all reasonable conditions on
the issuance of the permit.
   (B)   Criteria for approval. The town may approve or conditionally approve
the issuance of a special activity permit, unless one of the following
circumstances exists:
      (1)   The applicant has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor
involving moral turpitude and has not subsequently demonstrated rehabilitative
characteristics;
      (2)   The applicant has made a material misrepresentation on the
application;
      (3)   The applicant has not complied with the town’s request for further
information necessary for the town to fully evaluate the application;
      (4)   The proposed special activity will substantially disrupt peace and
quiet within any area of the town;
      (5)   The proposed special activity will have a substantial negative
impact upon traffic in any area of the town;
      (6)   The proposed special activity damages or degrades the image of the
town;
      (7)   The proposed special activity will have a material negative impact
upon the neighboring property;
      (8)   The proposed special activity will create a safety hazard;
      (9)   The proposed special activity is not appropriate for the location
due to zoning requirements for that location;
      (10)   The proposed special activity subjects the town to contingent
liability which cannot adequately be addressed by requiring the applicant to
name the town as an insured on the applicants general liability insurance
policy;
      (11)   The applicant has failed to supply the town an insurance
certificate naming the town as an additional insured on the applicant’s general
liability policy;
      (12)   The special activity fails to comply with any of the criteria
designated under this section for the issuance of a special activity permit or
rules and regulations governing this special activity; and
      (13)   An applicant has violated conditions of a previous special
activity permit or any ordinances or regulation of the town in the conduct of a
prior special activity.
   (C)   The following provisions are not intended to be all-inclusive and may
be amended based on the type of event or the information submitted by the
applicant.
      (1)   Special activity application/fee. The applicant will be required to
complete a special activity application prior to the activity and submit it to
the town with the application fee. A site plan is required with each
application and may be hand drawn. The site plan should be detailed enough to
indicate major streets, a north arrow and event set-up. The application shall
set forth the anticipated attendance, arrangements for off-street parking and a
plan for dealing with disposed of waste and refuse and the placement of
portable toilet facilities if applicable.
      (2)   Special activity permit. Once an applicant has submitted all
required documents, met all conditions and staff concerns with the issuance of
a permit, and the Town Council has approved the permit, the town will issue a
special activity permit. The activity shall not be considered approved until
the town has issued a permit.
      (3)   Frequency of events. An applicant may apply for a special activity
one time per year. A year is defined as January 1 through December 31. An event
shall not exceed one day in duration.
      (4)   Set-up and take down period for events. An applicant will be
allowed a reasonable set-up and take-down period for an event. The period will
be based on the type and complexity of the event. Balloons and banners will be
allowed a one-day set-up and one-day take-down period. Violations of this
section may result in future permits being denied.
      (5)   Alcoholic beverages.
         (a)   The provisions contained in the town code (open container), may
be waived by a special activity permit. The waiver will be subject to all
conditions contained in the permit.
         (b)   If an applicant operates a licensed establishment for the sale
of alcoholic beverages, that applicant will be required to obtain an extension
of the permit from the Department of Business and Professional Regulation,
Division of Alcoholic Beverages and Tobacco for alcoholic beverages sold/
consumed outdoors. Non-profit civic organizations will be required to obtain a
temporary permit for sale/consumption of alcoholic beverages in accordance with
F.S. § 561.422.
         (c)   Additionally the applicant is responsible for controlling
alcoholic beverages by ensuring under-age consumption does not occur.
      (6)   Balloons. Tethered balloons that are no larger than 15 cubic feet
may be considered for a permit. Small, helium-filled balloons are prohibited.
      (7)   Barricades. The town will determine if barricades are required for
an event. Applicants will need to obtain barricades from a private source. Once
barricades are placed, signs, balloons or other items may not be placed on the
barricades.
      (8)   Block party. In addition to a special activity application, a
petition is required to be signed by all the residents who live on the portion
of the street that will be closed/barricaded indicating their support of the
event.
      (9)   Carnival. In addition to any applicable fees, an occupational
license is required regardless of non-profit status. Each carnival ride is
required to have a current inspection certificate from the Bureau of Fairs,
Rides Inspection.
      (10)   Circus. In addition to any applicable fees, an occupational
license is required regardless of non-profit status.
      (11)   Co-sponsorship. The town may from time to time provide services
for an event (police, barricades and the like) which may result in reduced
charges.
      (12)   Fire prevention/code enforcement inspections. Most events require
an on-site review and final inspection by fire/code personnel. If the event
requires extraordinary inspections, including inspections after hours, the
applicant will be required to pay the staff time at $??? per hour.
      (13)   Hold harmless and indemnification. The applicant, by submitting a
special activity application, agrees that at all times they will indemnify and
hold harmless the town from and against any and all liability, claims, demands,
damages, expenses, loss, injury, death, fees, costs, attorney’s fees, fines,
penalties or suits to or by any person, firm, corporation or entity arising
from or out of the special activity.
      (14)   Insurance. An applicant for an event held on public property or on
a public right-of-way will be required to provide a general liability insurance
policy in the amount of $1,000,000. Additionally, if alcohol is being served at
the event, liquor liability in the amount of $1,000,000 will be required. A
certificate of insurance will be required and the following language must
appear on the certificate: “The town is named as additional insured as the
town’ interest may appear only.”
      (15)   Additional permits. Additional permits may be required from the
town or other governmental authorities. The applicant shall submit proof of
compliance with the permitting requirements of all governmental authorities,
including, but not limited to, disabled parking and sanitation requirements.
      (16)   Medical services.
         (a)   Late night events involving alcohol and events that, due to
their nature, may have injuries will require medical coverage. The applicant
shall be responsible for payment of medical services. The cost will be based on
the hourly rate of the medical team.
         (b)   A MEDICAL TEAM is defined as at least one paramedic and one
emergency medical technician. Additional medical team personnel may be required
depending on the special event. The Town Mayor shall determine if additional
medical team personnel are needed.
      (17)   Outdoor seasonal sales. The following stipulations shall apply:
         (a)   The applicant must obtain an occupational license and a special
activity permit prior to set-up;
         (b)   Adequate paved parking, including handicapped parking, must be
provided within 100 feet of the sales/display area. Restrooms, including
handicapped accessible restrooms, must be provided on the site within 500 feet
of the sales/display area;
         (c)   Hours of the sales must coincide with the hours of availability
for the restrooms and parking;
         (d)   The sale/display shall not be located within a required
landscaped area and on-site vegetation shall not be disturbed;
         (e)   Proof of ownership or a lease agreement with the property owner
must be submitted with the application; and
         (f)   A maximum of one recreational vehicle and one private vehicle
may be maintained on- site by the applicant.
      (18)   Law enforcement. Law enforcement services are required for any
special activity. The applicant shall be responsible for the presence and
payment of law enforcement services. The cost will be based on the average
hourly rate of deputy sheriffs for Brevard County.
      (19)   Sound amplification. A permit for sound amplification does not
allow the applicant to violate the noise levels in the code of ordinances of
the town or Brevard County, whichever is more strict. The applicant agrees to
control noise, and in the event surrounding residents complain of excessive
noise, to reduce that noise to a satisfactory level. The applicant further
understands that if reducing noise cannot control citizen complaints, the
source of the of the noise shall be terminated.
      (20)   Signs in the right-of-way. No signs in the public rights-of-way
are permitted.
      (21)   Tents. A flame retardant certificate must be attached to the
application for a tent permit.
      (22)   Damage and clean-up deposit. An applicant for a special activity
permit for an event on town property or an event that may impact a town right-
of-way shall post a refundable damage and clean-up deposit with the town in an
amount to be determined by the Town Council. The deposit may be used to off-set
any costs incurred by the town as a result of the town providing for repair to
or clean up of town property at the expiration of the special event. Prior to
the town incurring the costs the town shall provide written notification to the
applicant that it has 24 hours from the date of the notice to make repairs to
or clean up the area or property identified by the town in the notice. The
notice shall also state that if the applicant fails to make the repairs to or
clean up the area or property to the satisfaction of the town then the town
will provide the necessary repair or clean up services and deduct the cost from
the damage and clean up deposit posted with the town. Any unused portion of the
damage and clean up deposit shall be returned to the applicant within ten days
of the repair or clean up provided by the town or the town’s determination that
the repair or clean up efforts of the applicant are satisfactory, which ever is
later.
(Ord. 2009-03, passed 7-28-2009) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.07 PERMIT.
   The Town Administrator will issue a special activity permit once an
applicant has completed a special activity application, submitted all required
documents, met all conditions and staff concerns with the issuance of the
permit, and the special activity permit has been approved by the Town Council.
(Ord. 2009-03, passed 7-28-2009)
§ 115.08 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF SPECIAL ACTIVITY PERMIT.
   A special activity permit may be revoked or suspended immediately for any of
the following reasons:
   (A)   A material false statement in the application;
   (B)   Failure to comply with any federal, state or municipal laws and
regulations;
   (C)   Failure to comply with any limitation or condition imposed by the town
on the issuance of a special activity permit; and
   (D)   To conduct any special activity in a manner as to create a public
nuisance or conducting the special activity in a fraudulent disorderly manner
or in a manner which endangers the public health safety and welfare or any
manner in which disrupts the public peace.
(Ord. 2009-03, passed 7-28-2009)
§ 115.99 PENALTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, group of persons, firm, corporation or
entity to advertise, hold, conduct, engage in, permit or allow any special
activity to occur unless a permit has been obtained from the town. A violation
of this section is punishable by the imposition of a fine not exceeding $500
and/or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days.
(Ord. 2009-03, passed 7-28-2009)
CHAPTER 116: PERMITS, GENERAL
Section
   
116.01   Low-voltage alarm system installation permitting
   
116.02   Permit suspension, revocation
 
   
116.99   Penalty
§ 116.01 LOW-VOLTAGE ALARM SYSTEM INSTALLATION PERMITTING.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      CONTRACTOR.  A person who is qualified to engage in the business of
electrical or alarm system contracting pursuant to a certificate or
registration issued by the department under F.S. Ch. 489, part II.
      LOW-VOLTAGE ALARM SYSTEM PROJECT.  A project related to the installation,
maintenance, inspection, replacement, or service of a new or existing alarm
system, as defined in F.S. § 489.505, operating at low voltage, as defined in
the National Electrical Code Standard 70, Current Edition, and ancillary
components or equipment attached to such a system, including, but not limited
to, home-automation equipment, thermostats, and video cameras.
      PERMIT.  A low-voltage alarm system installation permit.
   (B)   The town is adopts, pursuant to F.S. § 553.793 a permit fee for the
installation, maintenance, inspection, replacement, or service of a new or
existing lowvoltage alarm system.
   (C)   This section does not apply to the installation or replacement of a
fire alarm if a plan review is required.
   (D)   The town shall provide basic permit labels available for purchase by a
contractor to be used for the installation or replacement of a new or existing
alarm system at a cost of not more than $55 per label per project per unit
(residential or commercial). A lost permit label may be replaced at a cost of
$25.
      (1)   The town shall not require a contractor, as a condition of
purchasing a label, to submit information other than identification information
of the licensee and proof of registration or certification as a contractor.
      (2)   A label is valid for one year after the date of purchase and may
only be used within the jurisdiction of the local enforcement agency that
issued the label. A contractor may purchase labels in bulk, not to exceed ten,
for one or more unspecified current or future projects.
   (E)   A contractor shall post an unused uniform basic permit label in a
conspicuous place on the premises of the low-voltage alarm system project site
before commencing work on the project.
   (F)   A contractor is not required to notify the town before commencing work
on a low-voltage alarm system project. However, a contractor must submit a
Uniform Notice of a Low-Voltage Alarm System Project as provided under division
(G) to the town agency within 14 days after completing the project. The town
may take disciplinary or enforcement action against a contractor who fails to
timely submit a Uniform Notice of a Low-Voltage Alarm System Project.
   (G)   The Uniform Notice of a Low-Voltage Alarm System Project may be
submitted electronically or by facsimile if all submissions are signed by the
owner, tenant, contractor, or authorized representative of such persons. The
Uniform Notice of a Low-Voltage Alarm System Project must contain the following
information:
      UNIFORM NOTICE OF A LOW-VOLTAGE ALARM SYSTEM PROJECT
      Owner's or Customer's Name                     
      Owner's or Customer's Address                     
      City                     
      State                      Zip                     
      Phone Number                     
      E-mail Address                     
      Contractor's Name                     
      Contractor's Address                     
      City                     
      State                      Zip                     
      Phone Number                     
      Contractor's License Number                     
      Date Project Completed                     
      Scope of Work                     
      Notice is hereby given that a low-voltage alarm system project has been
completed at the address specified above. I certify that all of the foregoing
information is true and accurate.
      (Signature of Owner, Tenant, Contractor, or Authorized Representative)
   (H)   A low-voltage alarm system project may be inspected by the Town
Building Official to ensure compliance with applicable codes and standards. If
a low-voltage alarm system project fails an inspection, the contractor must
take corrective action as necessary to pass inspection.
   (I)   In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this chapter and
F.S. § 553.793 the provisions of F.S. § 553.793 shall control.
   (J)   A basic permit label shall not be required for the subsequent
maintenance, inspection, or service of an alarm system that was permitted in
accordance with this chapter.
   (K)   Any changes in permit fees authorized herein may be changed by the
adoption of a resolution by the Town Council.
(Ord. 2013-13, passed 11-26-2013)
§ 116.02 PERMIT SUSPENSION, REVOCATION.
   In addition to all other remedies provided for in this Code, any holder of a
low-voltage alarm system installation permit may have such permit suspended or
revoked as provided herein.
   (A)   Suspension for cause by Building Official.
      (1)   Whenever the Building Official determines that there exists a
violation of local, state, or federal regulations and the violation is of such
a nature as to endanger the health, safety, and welfare of the public, he or
she may immediately suspend the low-voltage alarm system installation permit
issued to a contractor.
      (2)   Any holder low-voltage alarm system installation permit of a
aggrieved by the decision of the Building Official, under this division, may
appeal within 30 days from the written decision of the Building Official to
suspend the permit, to the Town Council. Upon receipt of such appeal the holder
of a permit shall be subject to a suspension hearing as described below. The
appeal shall toll the suspension issued by the Building Official. Failure for
the holder of a permit to appeal the decision of the Building Official under
this section will result in the automatic suspension of the permit for 60 days
at the expiration of the 30-day period, In the event that the Town Council
upholds the suspension issued by the Building Official the Town Council may
order a suspension of the permit for up to 90 days.
   (B)   Suspension and revocation for cause by the Town Council. Any low-
voltage alarm system installation permit issued by the town pursuant to this
chapter may be suspended for cause or absolutely revoked or cancelled by the
Town Council at a public hearing (revocation hearing), where it has ascertained
and determined that either:
      (1)   A permit was obtained upon a false notarized statement, fraud,
concealment, deceit, misrepresentation, misleading statements, evasions or
suppression of material facts;
      (2)   The applicant for or holder of a permit has been convicted or found
guilty, regardless of adjudication, of a crime in any jurisdiction which
directly relates to the activities performed by the subject business or
involves moral turpitude or fraudulent or dishonest dealing, any plea of nolo
contendere shall be considered a conviction for purposes of this division;
      (3)   A holder of a permit has committed substantial violations of the
terms and conditions on which a permit was issued including, but not limited
to, doing business beyond the scope which the permit was issued;
      (4)   A holder of a permit violated an ordinance or law authorizing or
regulating the business activity or thing for which it is issued;
      (5)   A permit was issued by a person without proper authority or power
or issued in violation of a town ordinance;
      (6)   A holder of a permit fails to obtain or forfeits any certification,
license or other such authorization required by an applicable federal, state or
local statute, ordinance, rule or regulation to operate the business,
occupation or profession for which the permit was issued.
   (C)    Notice and hearing.  A holder of a permit subject to a revocation
hearing shall be provided a fair and orderly procedure to the fullest extent
feasible. The town shall provide notice, by certified mail, return receipt
requested, at least five business days prior to the revocation hearing. The
notice shall state the time, place and purpose of the hearing including a
statement of the charges which serve as the basis for the possible revocation.
Except as provided in division (A) above, all such hearings shall be before the
Code Enforcement Special Magistrate.
   (D)   Revocation hearing procedures.
      (1)   Due process. Fundamental due process shall be observed and shall
govern the proceedings. The holder of a permit shall be afforded a fair
opportunity to be heard, the right to present evidence, and the right to cross
examine adverse witnesses.
      (2)   Burden of proof. The burden shall lie with the town to present
competent evidence to support the contention the permit should be suspended,
revoked or cancelled based on division (A) or one or more of the enumerated
causes listed in division (B) of this section. The standard of proof is by
preponderance of evidence.
   (E)   Penalties. Any holder of a permit which has its permit revoked
pursuant to this section shall be prohibited from obtaining another such permit
from the town for a period of one year, The period shall begin the day after
which the previous permit was revoked and end 365 consecutive days hence.
   (F)   Appeals. Any aggrieved party may appeal a final decision of the Town
Council to the Circuit Court, pursuant to the Florida Rules of Appellate
Procedure. Such an appeal shall not be a hearing de novo but shall be limited
to appellate review of the record created before the Town Council or the Code
Enforcement Special Magistrate, as the case may be.
(Ord. 2013-13, passed 11-26-2013)
§ 116.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter may be brought before
the Code Enforcement Special Magistrate pursuant to Chapter 31 and subject to a
penalty as prescribed by §
31.99.
(Ord. 2013-13, passed 11-26-2013)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
131.   PUBLIC NUDITY
      
132.   SEXUAL OFFENDERS AND SEXUAL PREDATORS
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
130.01   Adoption of state misdemeanors; violation prohibited
§ 130.01 ADOPTION OF STATE MISDEMEANORS; VIOLATION PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to commit within the limits of the town any act
that is or shall be recognized by the laws of the state as a misdemeanor; and
the town incorporates into this chapter, as though fully and completely set
forth, all misdemeanor violations of the state. The commission of these acts is
forbidden.
   (B)   Whosoever shall violate the provisions of this section, upon
conviction, shall be punished as provided in §
10.99.
(2000 Code, § 34-1) (Ord. 63-03, passed 9-26-1963) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 131: PUBLIC NUDITY
Section
General Provisions
   
131.01   Title
   
131.02   Intent
   
131.03   Definitions
   
131.04   Findings
Prohibitions and Exemptions
   
131.15   Nudity, sexual conduct prohibited
   
131.16   Nudity in public places
   
131.17   Nudity, sexual conduct prohibited in establishments dealing in
alcoholic beverages
   
131.18   Exemptions
 
   
131.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 131.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the Town of Palm Shores Public Nudity
Chapter.
(Ord. 2007-10, passed 6-26-2007)
§ 131.02 INTENT.
   (A)   It is the intent of this chapter to protect and preserve the good
order, health, safety, welfare and morals of the citizens of the town by
prohibiting a person from intentionally or recklessly appearing or being nude,
or causing another person to appear or be nude, in a public place and in other
places which may reasonably be expected to be observed by the public within the
town in other places than those establishments defined in §
131.03.
   (B)   It is the further intention of this chapter to accomplish the intents
and purposes expressed in the following recitals:
      (1)   Local governments may prohibit the exposure of certain body parts,
see Geaneas v. Willets, 911 F. 2d 579 (11th Cir. 1990), certiorari denied, 499
U.S. 955, 111 S. Ct. 1431, 113 L. Ed. 2d 484 (1991) and see Barnes v. Glen
Theater, 501 U.S. 560 (1991);
      (2)   Efforts by the state and federal governments to apply state
criminal statutes have been rejected by the courts because, under certain of
Florida’s criminal laws, nudity alone cannot be prosecuted without proof of
lewd and lascivious conduct;
      (3)   Local governments for other counties have successfully passed and
defended regulations relating to public nudity;
      (4)   The citizens of the town wish to regulate nudity and sexual
conduct, and the citizens of the town believe that nudity and sexual conduct
begets undesirable behavior, and that adverse secondary effects such as, but
not limited to, prostitution, attempted rape, rape and assault may occur and
have the potential for occurring where nude and sexual conduct is permitted;
      (5)   The citizens of the town wish to protect against similar conditions
to the end that they not occur in the town;
      (6)   The citizens of the town desire to prohibit the public display of
nudity and sexual behavior or the simulation thereof;
      (7)   The citizens of the town believe that there are increasing
incidents of nudity in public places and in other places readily visible to the
public;
      (8)   The citizens of Palm Shores believe that persons who choose to
appear nude in public places are engaging in conduct which often serves to
impose their nudity on others who did not seek it out, who are not able to
reasonably avoid observing it, and who may be offended or distressed thereby;
      (9)   Appearing nude in public places was a criminal offense at common
law and was considered an act malum en se (a wrong in itself) and appearing
nude in a public place which is not a public place provided or set apart for
nudity has been considered improper; see Moffett v. State, 340 So. 2d 1155,
1156 n.3 (Fla. 1977);
      (10)   The citizens of the town desire to protect and preserve the
wholesome character of the town as a family oriented community with a high
quality of life offered for families, tourists and businesses;
      (11)   The citizens of the town believe that appearing nude in public
places is still contrary to the general societal disapproval that the people of
the town have of persons appearing nude among strangers in public places;
      (12)   The citizens of the town believe that the appearance of persons in
the nude in public places generally increases adverse secondary effects such
as, but not limited to, incidents of prostitution, unhealthy environment for
minors, other citizens and tourists, sexual assaults and batteries, attracts
other criminal activity to the community and encourages degradation of women
and other activities which break down societal and family structures;
      (13)   The citizens of the town believe that without regulation public
nudity constitutes harmful conduct and occurs in a manner which is incompatible
with the normal primary activity of a particular place at a particular time;
      (14)   The citizens of the town sole intent in enacting this chapter is
to prohibit the conduct of being nude in public places and to suppress the
adverse secondary effects nudity generates;
      (15)   It is the intent of the citizens of the town to protect and
preserve the good order, public health, safety, welfare and morals of the town
by restricting, to the fullest extent allowed by the United States Constitution
and State Constitution, the act of being nude to places which are readily
visible to the public;
      (16)   The Town Council’s sole intent in enacting this chapter is to
prohibit the conduct of being nude in public places and to suppress the adverse
secondary effects nudity generates, the Town Council nevertheless recognizes
that there may be instances wherein appearing nude in a public place may be
expressive conduct incidental to and a necessary part of the freedom of
expression that is protected by United States or state constitutional
provisions;
      (17)   The citizens of the town believe that Palm Shores is a town that
is, and desires very much to continue to be, a community that contains and is
known for traditional and wholesome public recreational activities, natural
features and resources and historic facilities;
      (18)   The citizens of the town believe that the average person applying
contemporary community standards would find that the public nudity prohibited
by this chapter, if allowed, when taken as a whole:
         (a)   Appeals to the prurient interests; and
         (b)   Lacks serious literary, artistic, political and scientific
value.
      (19)   The citizens of the town believe that the absence of regulation of
persons appearing nude in public places within the town encourages persons and
entities to advertise outside of the town and the state by billboard, radio,
print and other media the availability of nudity in public places within the
town and thus encourages the influx into the town of persons seeking:
         (a)   To observe and/or participate in nudity; and
         (b)   To participate in the disorderly, unhealthy, harmful and illegal
conduct that is associated therewith, thereby increasing injuries and damages
to the citizens of the town who will be victims of an increased disorderly,
harmful and unlawful conduct and thereby working directly against the town’s
economic development and tourism development activities;
      (20)   The citizens of the town believe that commercial advertising and/
or exploitation of nudity encourages escalation of nude and lewd conduct within
the competing commercial establishments exploiting the conduct and thereby
increases the adverse effects upon public order and the public health;
      (21)   The citizens of the town believe that the prohibitions contained
herein are the most reasonable and minimal restrictions required so as to
regulate conduct which is adverse to public order, health, safety, morality and
decency within the town when the conduct takes place at locations where the
public is present or is likely to be present, or where the conduct would be
readily visible to the public;
      (22)   The citizens of the town believe that the passage of this chapter
is necessary to preserve the basic character of Palm Shores;
      (23)   States may regulate the conduct of appearing nude in public
places, see Barnes v. Glen Theater, Inc., 501 U.S. 560, 111 S. Ct. 2456 115 L.
Ed. 2d 504 (1991) and Café 207, Inc. vs. St. Johns City, 856 F. supp. 641 (M.D.
Fla. 1994), aff’d, 989 F. 2d 1136 (11th Cir. 1995);
      (24)   The citizens of the town are not hereby prohibiting nudity in
private places or prohibiting nudity which is protected by the United States
Constitution or State Constitution;
      (25)   The citizens of the town believe that the express exemptions
contained in this chapter provide adequate protection to persons who, without
express exemptions, might otherwise be prevented or discouraged by this chapter
from exercising constitutionally protected rights; and
      (26)   This chapter is intended to regulate conduct, not speech; and not
an ordinance that affects the use of land as contemplated by F.S. § 125.66.
(Ord. 2007-10, passed 6-26-2007)
§ 131.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BREAST. A portion of the human female mammary gland (commonly referred to as
the female breast) including the nipple and areola (the darker colored area of
the breast surrounding the nipple) and an outside area of the gland wherein the
outside area is:
      (1)   Reasonably compact and contiguous to the areola; and
      (2)   Contains at least the nipple and the areola and one-fourth of the
outside surface area of the gland.
   BUTTOCKS.
      (1)   For a short general description, see the last division, division
(4) of this definition. The area at the rear of the human body (sometimes
referred to as the gluteus maximus) which lies between two imaginary straight
lines running parallel to the ground when a person is standing, the first or
top line being one-half inch below the top of the vertical cleavage of the
nates (i.e., the prominence formed by the muscles running from the back of the
hip to the back of the leg) and the second or bottom line being one-half inch
above the lowest point of the curvature of the fleshy protuberance (sometimes
referred to as the gluteal fold), and between two imaginary straight lines, one
on each side of the body (the “outside lines”), which outside lines are
perpendicular to the ground and to the horizontal lines described above and
which perpendicular outside lines pass through the outermost point(s) at which
each nate meets the other side of leg.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the above, BUTTOCKS shall not include the leg, the
hamstring muscle below the gluteal fold, the tensor fasciae latae muscle or any
of the above-described portion of the human body that is between either:
         (a)   The left inside perpendicular line and the left outside
perpendicular line; or
         (b)   The right inside perpendicular line and the right outside
perpendicular line.
      (3)   For the purpose of the previous division the left inside
perpendicular line shall be an imaginary straight line on the left side of the
anus that:
         (a)   Is perpendicular to the ground and to the horizontal lines
described above;
         (b)   Is one-third of the distance from the anus to the left outside
line, and the right inside perpendicular line shall be an imaginary straight
line on the right side of the anus:
            1.   That is perpendicular to the ground and to the horizontal
lines described above; and
            2.   That is one-third of the distance from the anus to the right
outside line.
      (4)   The above description can generally be described as covering one-
third of the buttocks centered over the cleavage for the length of the
cleavage.
   ENTITY. Any proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, business
trust, joint venture, joint-stock company or other for profit and/or not for
profit organization.
   NUDE. Any person insufficiently clothed in any manner or that any of the
following body parts are not entirely covered with a fully opaque covering:
      (1)   The male or female genitals;
      (2)   The pubic area;
      (3)   The vulva;
      (4)   The penis;
       (5)   The female breast (each female person may determine which one-
fourth of her breast surface area (see definition of breast) contiguous to and
containing the nipple and the areola is to be covered);
      (6)   The anus;
      (7)   The anal cleft;
      (8)   The anal cleavage;
       (9)   The buttocks. Attire which is insufficient to comply with this
requirement includes, but is not limited to, g-strings, t-backs, dental floss
and thongs; and
       (10)   For the purposes of this definition, body paint, body dyes,
tattoos, liquid latex whether wet or dried, string and dental floss and similar
substance shall not be considered an “opaque covering.”
   PERSON. Any live human being aged ten years of age or older.
   PLACES APPROVED OR SET APART FOR NUDITY. Enclosed single sex public
restrooms, enclosed single sex functional shower, single sex locker and/or
dressing room facilities, enclosed motel rooms and hotel rooms designed and
intended for sleeping accommodations, doctor’s offices, portions of hospitals,
the yard areas of private residences and similar places in which nudity or
exposure is necessarily and customarily expected outside of the home and the
sphere of privacy constitutionally protected therein. The aforementioned PLACES
APPROVED OR SET APART FOR NUDITY shall not be deemed to include places where a
person’s conduct of being nude is used for his or her profit or where being
nude is used for the promotion of business or is otherwise for commercial gain.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any location frequented by the public, or where the public is
present or likely to be present, or where a person may reasonably be expected
to be observed by members of the public. PUBLIC PLACES include, but are not
limited to, streets, sidewalks, parks, beaches, business and commercial
establishments (whether for profit or not for profit and whether open to the
public at large or where entrance is limited by a cover charge or membership
requirement or membership fee), bottle clubs, hotels, motels, restaurants,
night clubs, country clubs, cabarets and meeting facilities utilized by any
religious, social, fraternal or similar organization. Premises, or portions
thereof, such as motel or hotel rooms, used solely as a private residence,
whether permanent or temporary in nature, shall not be deemed to be a PUBLIC
PLACE.
(Ord. 2007-10, passed 6-26-2007)
§ 131.04 FINDINGS.
   In addition and supplemental to the findings and determinations contained in
the recitals (§
131.02(B)) of this chapter, it is the intent of the citizens of the town to
regulate the conduct of appearing nude in public places for the purpose of
regulating nudity and other conduct, that considering what has happened in
other communities, the acts prohibited in §
131.15 herein below encourage or create the potential for the conduct of
adverse secondary effects such as, but not limited to, prostitution, attempted
rape, rape, assault and the spread of sexually communicable diseases; that
actual and simulated nudity and sexual conduct in public places, begets and has
the potential for begetting undesirable and unlawful behavior; that sexual,
lewd, lascivious and salacious conduct results in violation of law and creates
dangers to the health, safety, morals and welfare of the public and those who
engage in conduct; and, it is the intent of §
131.15 of this chapter to specifically prohibit nudity, gross sexuality and the
simulation thereof.
(Ord. 2007-10, passed 6-26-2007)
PROHIBITIONS AND EXEMPTIONS
§ 131.15 NUDITY, SEXUAL CONDUCT PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly, intentionally or recklessly appear, or
cause another person to appear nude, as defined in §
131.03, or expose to public view his or her genitals, vulva, penis, pubic area
or buttocks or any simulation thereof.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly, intentionally or recklessly expose, or
cause a female person to expose her breasts or any simulation thereof to public
view.
   (C)   No person or entity maintaining, owning or operating a public place
shall encourage, allow or permit any person to appear nude or to expose to
public view his or her genitals, pubic area, vulva, penis, anus or any portion
of the buttocks or simulation thereof. This section shall be violated if any
portion of the buttocks is visible from any vantage point.
   (D)   No person shall engage in and no person or entity maintaining, owning
or operating a public place shall encourage, allow or permit any sexual
intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation,
lap dancing, straddle dancing, any sexual act which is prohibited by law,
touching, caressing or fondling of the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals, or
the simulation thereof.
   (E)   Each female person may determine which one-fourth of her breast
surface area (see definition of breast, §
131.03) contiguous to and containing the areola is to be covered.
   (F)   This section shall not be deemed to address photographs, movies, video
presentations or other non-live performances.
(Ord. 2007-10, passed 6-26-2007) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.16 NUDITY IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly, intentionally or
recklessly appear, or cause another person to appear nude, as defined in §
131.03, in a public place or in any other place which is readily visible to the
public, except as provided in §
131.18. It shall also be unlawful for any person or entity maintaining, owning
or operating any public place to encourage, suffer or allow any person to
appear nude in a public place, except as provided in §
131.18.
(Ord. 2007-10, passed 6-26-2007) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.17 NUDITY, SEXUAL CONDUCT PROHIBITED IN ESTABLISHMENTS DEALING IN
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   (A)   The prohibitions and criteria given in divisions (B) through (I) below
of this section shall apply within establishments dealing in alcoholic
beverages and their curtilage.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly, intentionally or recklessly appear, or
cause another person to appear, nude or expose to public view his or her
genitals, pubic area, vulva, buttocks, or any simulation of body parts.
   (C)   No female person shall knowingly, intentionally or recklessly expose,
or cause another female person to expose, her breasts or any simulation of her
breasts to public view.
   (D)   No person or entity maintaining, owning or operating an establishment
dealing in alcoholic beverages shall encourage, allow or permit any person to
appear nude or to expose to public view his or her genitals, pubic area, vulva,
anus or any portion of the buttocks or simulation of body parts. This division
shall be violated if any portion of the buttocks is visible from any vantage
point.
   (E)   No person or entity maintaining, owning or operating an establishment
dealing in alcoholic beverages shall encourage, allow or permit any female
person to expose her breasts or any simulation of her breasts to public view.
   (F)   No person shall engage in and no person or entity maintaining, owning
or operating an establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages shall encourage,
allow or permit any sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral
copulation, flagellation, lap dancing, straddle dancing, any sexual act is
prohibited by law, touching, caressing or fondling of the breasts, buttocks,
anus or genitals or the simulation of those actions.
   (G)   The prohibitions of this section shall not apply when a person appears
nude in a place provided or set apart for nudity provided the person is nude
for the sole purpose of performing the legal functions customarily intended to
be performed within the place provided or set apart for nudity and the person
is not nude for the purpose of obtaining money or other financial gain for the
person or for another person or entity.
   (H)   Each female person may determine which one-fourth of her breast
surface contiguous to and containing the areola is to be covered.
   (I)   This section shall not be deemed to address photographs, movies, video
presentations or other non-live performances.
(2000 Code, § 34-56) (Ord. 95-03, passed 10-24-1995) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.18 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   The prohibitions of §
131.16 of this chapter shall not apply:
      (1)   When a person appears nude in a place provided or set apart for
nudity, as defined by this chapter, provided:
          (a)   The person is nude for the sole purpose of performing the legal
function(s) that is/are customarily intended to be performed within the place
provided or set apart for nudity; and
          (b)   The person is not nude for the purpose of obtaining money or
other financial gain for the person or for another person or entity.
       (2)   When the conduct of being nude cannot legally be prohibited by
this chapter because:
         (a)   It constitutes a part of a bona fide live communication,
demonstration or performance by a person wherein the nudity is expressive
conduct incidental to and necessary for the conveyance or communication of a
genuine message or public expression and is not a mere guise or pretense
utilized to exploit the conduct of being nude for profit or commercial gain
(see for instance Board of City Commissioners v. Dexterhouse, 348 So. 2d 916
(Fla. 2nd DCA 1977)), and as such is protected by the United States
Constitution or State Constitution; or
          (b)   It is otherwise protected by the United States Constitution or
Florida Constitution.
   (B)   A mother’s breast feeding of her baby does not under any circumstance
violate the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   In establishments or businesses denominated as adult entertainment
establishments or sexually-oriented businesses and regulated by the Adult
Entertainment Chapter,
Chapter 113.
(Ord. 2007-10, passed 6-26-2007)
§ 131.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Generally. Any person or entity violating any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be prosecuted in the same manner as misdemeanors are
prosecuted. The violations shall be prosecuted in the name of the state in a
court having jurisdiction of misdemeanors by the prosecuting attorney thereof
and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500 or by
imprisonment not to exceed 60 days or by both a fine and imprisonment as
provided in Florida Statutes or other applicable law. Each incident or separate
occurrence of an act that violates this chapter shall be deemed a separate
offense.
   (B)   Injunctive relief. In addition to the procedures provided herein,
persons and entities that are not in conformity with these requirements shall
be subject to appropriate civil action in the court of appropriate jurisdiction
for abatement.
(Ord. 2007-10, passed 6-26-2007)
CHAPTER 132: SEXUAL OFFENDERS AND SEXUAL PREDATORS
Section
General Provisions
   
132.01   Legislative findings
   
132.02   Definitions
   
132.03   Countywide application
Sexual Offenders and Sexual Predators
   
132.15   Prohibited residences of sexual offenders and predators
   
132.16   Restriction of certain activities of sexual offenders and sexual
predators
Distance Requirements and Residency
   
132.30   Measurement of distance requirement for residence
   
132.31   Measurement of distance requirement for sexual offender or sexual
predator
   
132.32   Required declaration of status as a sexual offender or sexual predator
   
132.33   Prohibition on rentals and leaseholds
   
132.34   Unlawful residency
 
   
132.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 132.01 LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS.
   It is the further intention of this chapter to accomplish those intents and
purposes expressed in the following recitals:
   (A)   The Board of County Commissioners, collectively and in conjunction
with other elected and appointed officials within Brevard County, notes that
there have been numerous occurrences within the state and the United States
where convicted sexual offenders and predators are released from custody and
thereafter commit similar crimes;
   (B)   It appears that the recidivism rate for released sexual offenders and
sexual predators is alarmingly high, especially for those who commit crimes
upon children;
   (C)   The Legislature has found and determined that sexual offenders and
sexual predators present an extreme threat to the public safety; are extremely
likely to use physical violence and to repeat their offenses; commit many
offenses and have many more victims than are ever reported, and are prosecuted
for only a fraction of their crimes;
   (D)   The Legislature has found and determined that protection of the public
from sexual offenders, particularly those who have committed offenses against
children, is a paramount governmental interest;
   (E)   Florida law prohibits certain sexual offenders from residing within
1,000 feet of any school, day care center, park or playground;
   (G)   The Florida Legislature passed House Bill 1877, commonly known as the
“Jessica Lunsford Act,” which was approved by Governor Jeb Bush on May 2, 2005,
and codified as Laws of Fla., Chapter 2005-28;
   (H)   The “Jessica Lunsford Act” will likely increase the number of
offenders who will be designated as sexual offenders or sexual predators and
will require electronic monitoring of certain offenders and predators and will
otherwise strengthen the state’s efforts to control the cancer of child sexual
victimization;
   (I)   The town is a family-oriented community that highly values its
children and is a place that families with young children find highly
desirable;
   (J)   Schools, day care centers, parks and playgrounds are places within the
town that children are frequently and regularly located and involved in
activities;
   (K)   The town has a substantial and compelling interest in maintaining the
quality of life and protecting the health, safety and welfare of citizens at
schools, day care centers, parks and playgrounds to engage m positive
educational, economic and social activities, and has a substantial and
compelling interest in allowing the citizens to gainfully and productively use
and enjoy the facilities in these areas and communities without victimization
at the hands of a sexual offender or sexual predator;
   (L)   Individuals have a significant interest in being able to travel and
associate freely in all areas of the town, except during times of a public
safety emergency, such as natural or man-made disasters;
   (M)   It is in the public interest to exclude certain sexual offenders and
sexual predators from the areas surrounding schools, day care centers, parks
and playgrounds;
   (N)   Persons utilizing public shelters during times of disaster must be
protected from sexual offenders and sexual predators;
   (O)   Certain exceptions must be made to the blanket prohibition against
sexual offenders and sexual predators traveling to, through and in the area of
schools, day care centers, parks and playgrounds;
   (P)   The town desires to ensure that the citizens of the county are
protected from criminal activity to the maximum extent afforded by controlling
law in order to advance the public health, safety and welfare, and benefit the
citizens of the town to the maximum extent possible;
   (Q)   The county is not prohibited from acting on the subject matter of this
chapter and the provisions of this chapter are not preempted by and are
consistent with state law; and
   (R)   This chapter is enacted under the general home rule and law
enforcement powers of the town and is not a zoning ordinance or a land
development regulation.
(Ord. 2006-04, passed 3-21-2006)
Statutory reference:
   Conditional release program, see F.S. § 947.1405
   Florida Sexual Predators Act, see F.S. § 775.21(3)(a)
   Sexual offenders; notification upon release, see F.S. § 944.606(2)
   Unlawful place of residence for persons convicted of certain sex offenses,
see F.S. § 794.065
§ 132.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DAY CARE CENTER. Any family or child care facility licensed by the state
pursuant to F.S. Ch. 402. For purposes of this chapter, a DAY CARE CENTER
includes the parking lot, curtilage, yards, landscaped areas, playgrounds,
accessory buildings and all outdoor areas of the facility. It is the intent to
include all areas reasonably included in and part of the facility.
   PARK. A publicly owned or operated area used or available for the public’s
use as a recreational facility, including, by way of example and not
limitation, linear parks and the state, county and municipal recreational
trails systems.
   PERMANENT RESIDENCE. A place where a person abides, lodges or resides for 14
or more consecutive days.
   PLAYGROUND. An established or dedicated outdoor area for recreation and
play, including, by way of example and not limitation, soccer fields, baseball
diamonds, football fields and locations with outdoor equipment, such as, by way
of example and not limitation, swing sets, climbing apparatus and slides.
   PUBLIC SHELTER. Any shelter specifically designated by the town or any
municipality to house persons in times prior to, during and after the threat or
occurrence of disaster.
   SCHOOL. Any public or private school to include charter schools as defined
in F.S. §§ 1000.04(1) and 1002.01, excluding facilities dedicated exclusively
to the education of adults.
   SEXUAL PREDATOR AND SEXUAL OFFENDER SHELTER. Any shelter officially
designated by Brevard County or any municipality that is designated to house
sexual predators or sexual offenders in times prior to, during and after the
threat or occurrence of disaster.
   SEXUAL OFFENDER. As defined in F.S. § 944.606(l).
   SEXUAL PREDATOR. As defined in F. S. § 775.21.
   TEMPORARY RESIDENCE. Any place where a person may abide, lodge or reside
that is not that person’s permanent residence.
(Ord. 2006-04, passed 3-21-2006)
§ 132.03 COUNTYWIDE APPLICATION.
   This chapter shall apply in accordance with the Brevard County ordinance,
that both the incorporated and unincorporated areas of the county; provided
that any provision of this chapter in conflict with a municipal ordinance shall
not be effective within that municipality to the extent of the conflict.
(Ord. 2006-04, passed 3-21-2006)
SEXUAL OFFENDERS AND SEXUAL PREDATORS
§ 132.15 PROHIBITED RESIDENCES OF SEXUAL OFFENDERS AND PREDATORS.
   It is prohibited and unlawful for any sexual offender or sexual predator to
abide, lodge or reside in a permanent or temporary residence located within the
town when the residence is located within 1,000 feet of any school, day care
center, park or playground, regardless of whether the school, day care center,
park or playground lies within the jurisdictional limits of the town. A sexual
offender or sexual predator, having a permanent residence within 1,000 feet of
any school, day care center, park or playground, does not commit a violation of
this section if any of the following apply:
   (A)   The sexual offender or sexual predator established the permanent
residence in the specific dwelling in question prior to the effective date of
the enactment of this chapter;
   (B)   The sexual offender or sexual predator was a minor when committing the
offense causing the designation as a sexual predator or sexual offender and was
not sentenced as an adult for that offense; and/or
   (C)   The school, day care center, park or playground was opened or
established after the sexual offender or sexual predator established the
permanent residence.
(Ord. 2006-04, passed 3-21-2006) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.16 RESTRICTION OF CERTAIN ACTIVITIES OF SEXUAL OFFENDERS AND SEXUAL
PREDATORS.
   (A)   No sexual offender or sexual predator shall enter into or remain
within the 1,000-foot buffer zone surrounding any school, day care center, park
or playground except to:
      (1)   Attend a scheduled interview or meeting with a social service
provider licensed by the state;
      (2)   Comply with a request or court order from the judiciary, a
correctional facility or a law enforcement entity;
      (3)   Attend a scheduled meeting or interview with criminal justice
personnel at a criminal justice facility;
      (4)   Attend a bona fide educational institution as a registered student;
      (5)   Attend a scheduled or emergency health care visit with a licensed
physician;
      (6)   As a result of fulfilling legally allowable duties imposed by
gainful employment;
      (7)   Transport children within their legal custody to and from school or
day care without any undue delay or loitering on premises;
      (8)   Seek refuge in a public shelter that has been officially designated
by Brevard County or any municipality to house sexual offenders or sexual
predators during times of impending natural disasters or acts of terrorism;
      (9)   Attend a scheduled legal consultation meeting with an attorney who
is recognized as a licensed member of the Bar of the State of Florida;
      (10)   Attend a church service or function;
      (11)   Vote at a designated polling place within his or her district;
      (12)   If the sexual offender or sexual predator is the parent or
guardian of a person under 18 years of age, provided the sexual offender or
sexual predator has declared his or her status as a sexual offender or sexual
predator prior to entering the school property and has either scheduled a set
time period to enter upon the property with the principal or designee or
immediately notifies the principal or designee upon entering the school
property:
         (a)   Attend a scheduled conference at school with school personnel to
discuss the progress of his or her child academically or socially;
         (b)   Participate in scheduled child review conferences in which
evaluation and placement decisions may be made or considered with respect to
his or her child regarding special education services; or
         (c)   Attend scheduled conferences to discuss other student issues
concerning his or her child such as retention and promotion.
      (13)   If the sexual offender or sexual predator lawfully resides within
1,000 feet of any school, day care center, park or playground, he or she may
enter into or remain within 1,000 feet of the school, day care center, park or
playground for the purposes of travel to and from his or her residence, and any
other bona fide activity arising from the ordinary maintenance and activities
associated with the residence.
   (B)   However, this section shall not be construed as prohibiting any person
from traveling on those public roads located within the town when traveling
through the buffer zone without intentional delay. A law enforcement officer
shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section afford the person
an opportunity to explain his or her presence in the area and the purpose
thereof. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section if the
law enforcement officer did not comply with this procedure or if it appears at
trial that the explanation given by the person is true and, if believed by the
officer at the time, would have authorized the person to be in the area
pursuant to one of the exceptions listed above.
(Ord. 2006-04, passed 3-21-2006) Penalty, see §
132.99
DISTANCE REQUIREMENTS AND RESIDENCY
§ 132.30 MEASUREMENT OF DISTANCE REQUIREMENT FOR RESIDENCE.
   For purposes of measuring separation of a residence from a school, day care
center, park or playground, all distances shall be measured from the outermost
property line of the parcel upon which the residence is located running in a
direct line to the outermost property line of the school, day care center, park
or playground. For example, if the residence were located in a generally
southwesterly direction from a park, then the measurement would be from the
northeast corner of the residential parcel to the southwest corner of the park.
For all other purposes, measurements shall run from the outermost property line
of the school, day care center, park or playground.
(Ord. 2006-04, passed 3-21-2006)
§ 132.31 MEASUREMENT OF DISTANCE REQUIREMENT FOR SEXUAL OFFENDER OR SEXUAL
PREDATOR.
   For purposes of measuring separation of a person designated as a sexual
offender or sexual predator from a school, day care center, park or playground,
all distances shall be measured from the closest observed location of the
sexual offender or sexual predator to the outermost property line of the
school, day care center, park or playground using a direct line measurement.
(Ord. 2006-04, passed 3-21-2006)
§ 132.32 REQUIRED DECLARATION OF STATUS AS A SEXUAL OFFENDER OR SEXUAL
PREDATOR.
   (A)   During times of impending natural disasters or acts of terrorism,
sexual offenders and sexual predators shall immediately identify themselves as
a sexual offender or sexual predator, as the case may be, to the official in
charge of any public shelter where they seek refuge. Sexual offenders or sexual
predators will not be permitted to remain at general shelters not designated to
house them. Sexual offenders and sexual predators will only be permitted
housing at shelters specifically approved to house sexual offenders and sexual
predators.
   (B)   A sexual offender or sexual predator attending any school or
transporting children they have legal custody of to a school or day care center
must declare his or her status as a sexual offender or sexual predator to the
school or day care center principal or designee prior to entering the school or
day care center property, and must also either schedule with the principal a
set time period to enter upon the property or immediately notify the principal
or designee upon entering school grounds or day care center property.
   (C)   All sexual offenders and sexual predators registered in Brevard County
shall carry their state drivers’ license or state identification card on their
person at all times.
(Ord. 2006-04, passed 3-21-2006) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.33 PROHIBITION ON RENTALS AND LEASEHOLDS.
   It is unlawful for a property owner to knowingly let or rent any place,
structure, or part thereof, to a sexual offender or sexual predator, with the
knowledge that it will be used as a permanent or temporary residence, if the
place, structure, or part thereof, is located within 1,000 feet of any school,
day care center, park or playground. In any prosecution for a violation of this
section there shall be the following rebuttable presumptions:
   (A)   The property owner had knowledge that the person letting or renting
the premises was a sexual offender or sexual predator, upon proof that the
person was registered as same, either in the statewide or local registry; and
   (B)   The place, structure or part thereof would be used as a permanent or
temporary residence, upon proof that the property is located within a
residential zoning classification.
(Ord. 2006-04, passed 3-21-2006) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.34 UNLAWFUL RESIDENCY.
   It is unlawful for a sexual offender or sexual predator to establish
residency, whether through ownership, rental or lease after the effective date
of this chapter, if the place, structure, or part thereof, is located within
1,000 feet of any school, day care center, park or playground.
(Ord. 2006-04, passed 3-21-2006) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person or entity that violates any provision of this chapter shall
be subject to any and all remedies available at law, including but not limited
to, the code enforcement provisions of F.S. Ch. 162.
   (B)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§
132.15 and
132.16 of this chapter shall be prosecuted in the same manner as misdemeanors
are prosecuted. The violations shall be prosecuted in the name of the state in
a court having jurisdiction of misdemeanors by the prosecuting attorney thereof
and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500 or by
imprisonment in the county jail, not to exceed 60 days or by both a fine and
imprisonment, or if the offender is supervised by the Department of Corrections
under conditional release, the offender may be charged with a violation of his
or her supervision and be returned to state custody.
(Ord. 2006-04, passed 3-21-2006)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
      
151.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
      
152.   PLANNING
      
153.   SIGNS
      
154.   VEGETATION
      
155.   DESIGN STANDARDS
      
156.   SUBDIVISIONS
      
157.   ZONING
      
158.   VACATION RENTAL CODE
CHAPTER 150: BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
   
150.01   Definitions
   
150.02   Adoption of Building Code
   
150.03   Adoption of Gas Code
   
150.04   Adoption of Housing Code
   
150.05   Adoption of Mechanical Code
   
150.06   Adoption of Plumbing Code
   
150.07   Adoption of Electrical Code
   
150.08   Adoption of existing Building Code
   
150.09   Adoption of Unsafe Building Abatement Code
   
150.10   Adoption of Swimming Pool Code
   
150.11   Adoption of Excavation Code
   
150.12   Adoption of Amusement Device Code
   
150.13   Adoption of International Maintenance Code
   
150.14   Fee schedule
   
150.15   Unlicensed contractors
   
150.16   Inspections
§ 150.01 DEFINITIONS.
   Whenever used in this chapter, or whenever used in any of the standard codes
adopted in this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as follows. In
the event that any term used herein or any term used in the adopted standard
codes herein is not defined then the definition of such term as used in the
latest version of the Dictionary of Architecture and Construction, by Cyril M.
Harris, McGraw-Hill Publishing shall be used.
   APPOINTING AUTHORITY. The Town Council of the Town of Palm Shores.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL. The Building Official duly authorized by the Council of
the Town of Palm Shores, Florida.
   ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR. The Building Official or designee certified for
inspection by the State Department of Professional Regulation duly authorized
by the Council of the Town of Palm Shores. Florida.
   GAS INSPECTOR. The Building Official or designee certified for inspection by
the State of Florida Department of Professional Regulation duly authorized by
the Council of the Town of Palm Shores, Florida.
   HOUSING OFFICIAL. The Building Official or designee certified for inspection
by the State of Florida Department of Professional Regulation duly authorized
by the Council of the Town of Palm Shores, Florida.
   PLUMBING OFFICIAL. The Building Official or designee certified for
inspection by the State of Florida Department of Professional Regulation duly
authorized by the Council of the Town of Palm Shores, Florida.
(Ord. 2009-07, passed 11-24-2009; Ord. 2014-04, passed 3-25-2014)
§ 150.02 ADOPTION OF BUILDING CODE.
   Except as otherwise provided, the current regulations mandated by the
Florida Legislature and published by the Florida Building Commission, entitled
Florida Building Code 2007, including all amendments, adopted by the Town
Council and on file in the Town Clerk’s office, are adopted by reference as the
Building Code of the town.
   (A)   Sec. 104.10.1, Florida Building Code, added.
      104.10.1 Modifications of the strict application of the requirements of
the Florida Building Code. The Building Official shall coordinate with the
Floodplain Administrator to review requests submitted to the Building Official
that seek approval to modify the strict application of the flood resistant
construction requirements of the Florida Building Code to determine whether
such requests require the granting of a variance pursuant to Section 117.
   (B)   Sec. 107.6.1, Florida Building Code, added.
      107.6.1 Building permits issued on the basis of an affidavit. Pursuant to
the requirements of federal regulation for participation in the National Flood
Insurance Program (44 C.F.R. Sections 59 and 60), the authority granted to the
Building Official to issue permits, to rely on inspections, and to accept plans
and construction documents on the basis of affidavits and plans submitted
pursuant to 105.14 and Section 107.6, shall not extend to the flood load and
flood resistance construction requirements of the Florida Building Code.
   (C)   Sec. 117, Florida Building Code, added.
      117.1 Flood hazard areas. Pursuant to section 553.73(5), F.S., the
variance procedures adopted in the local floodplain management ordinance shall
apply to requests submitted to the Building Official for variances to the
provisions of Section 1612.4 of the Florida Building Code, Building or, as
applicable, the provisions of R322 of the Florida Building Code, Residential.
This section shall not apply to Section 3109 of the Florida Building Code,
Building.
(Ord. 2009-07, passed 11-24-2009; Ord. 2012-10, passed 8-28-2012; Ord. 2014-02,
passed 2-25-2014)
§ 150.03 ADOPTION OF GAS CODE.
   The Florida Fuel Gas Code, 2007 Edition, as mandated by the Florida
Legislature, and published by the Florida Building Commission, is hereby
adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if fully set out.
(Ord. 2009-07, passed 11-24-2009)
§ 150.04 ADOPTION OF HOUSING CODE.
   The Standard Housing Code, 1997 Edition, is hereby adopted by reference and
incorporated herein as if fully set out.
(Ord. 2009-07, passed 11-24-2009)
§ 150.05 ADOPTION OF MECHANICAL CODE.
   The Florida Mechanical Code, 2007 Edition, as mandated by the Florida
Legislature, and published by the Florida Building Commission, is hereby
adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if fully set out.
(Ord. 2009-07, passed 11-24-2009)
§ 150.06 ADOPTION OF PLUMBING CODE.
   The Florida Plumbing Code, current edition, as mandated by the Florida
Legislature, and published by the Florida Building Commission is hereby adopted
by reference and incorporated herein as if fully set out.
(Ord. 2009-07, passed 11-24-2009)
§ 150.07 ADOPTION OF ELECTRICAL CODE.
   (A)   The National Electrical Code, NFPA 70, 2008 Edition, as mandated by
the Florida Legislature and published by the National Fire Protection
Association, is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if fully
set out.
   (B)   The Electrical Inspector is hereby given the power to disconnect
extension cords, temporary wiring, branch circuits, subfeed conductors, or the
main service supplying electrical energy to any portion of an electrical wiring
system on or in buildings, or on premises, if this wiring is in the opinion of
the Inspector considered to be hazardous to life or property. Any person
supplying current must disconnect service from the source of supply upon
instructions from the electrical inspector where hazards are deemed to exist,
after receiving written notice from the Electrical Inspector.
(Ord. 2009-07, passed 11-24-2009)
§ 150.08 ADOPTION OF EXISTING BUILDING CODE.
   The Florida Existing Building Code, 2007 Edition, as mandated by the Florida
Legislature and published by the Florida Building Commission, is hereby adopted
by reference and incorporated herein as if fully set out.
(Ord. 2009-07, passed 11-24-2009)
§ 150.09 ADOPTION OF UNSAFE BUILDING ABATEMENT CODE.
   The Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code, 1985 Edition, as published by
the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc., is hereby adopted by
reference and incorporated herein as if fully set.
(Ord. 2009-07, passed 11-24-2009)
§ 150.10 ADOPTION OF SWIMMING POOL CODE.
   The Swimming Pool Code, 2007 Edition, as published is hereby adopted by
reference and incorporated herein as if fully set.
(Ord. 2009-07, passed 11-24-2009)
§ 150.11 ADOPTION OF EXCAVATION CODE.
   The Excavation Code, 2007 Edition, as published is hereby adopted by
reference and incorporated herein as if fully set.
(Ord. 2009-07, passed 11-24-2009)
§ 150.12 ADOPTION OF AMUSEMENT DEVICE CODE.
   The Standard Amusement Device Code, 1997 Edition, as published by the
Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc., is hereby adopted by
reference and incorporated herein as if fully set.
(Ord. 2009-07, passed 11-24-2009)
§ 150.13 ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL MAINTENANCE CODE.
   The International Property Maintenance Code, 2006 Edition, as published by
the International Code Council, is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated
herein as if fully set out.
(Ord. 2009-07, passed 11-24-2009)
§ 150.14 FEE SCHEDULE.
   The fees to be charged for permits issued pursuant to the codes identified
in this chapter and inspections performed by the city shall be those from time
to time established by a duly adopted resolution of the Town Council. In such a
resolution, the Town Council shall also have the authority to establish fees
for administrative services.
(Ord. 2009-07, passed 11-24-2009)
§ 150.15 UNLICENSED CONTRACTORS.
   (A)   The town hereby appoints the town’s Code Enforcement Officer as
defined in F.S. Ch. 162 and §
31.33 of the Code of Ordinances of the town to enforce the provisions of this
section.
   (B)   The Town Code Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized to enforce the
provisions of F.S. §§ 489.127(1) and 489.132(1).
   (C)   Should the Town Code Enforcement Officer determine that a violation of
F.S. §§ 489,127(1) and 489.132(1) exists the Code Enforcement Officer shall
issue a citation in accordance with the provisions of F.S. § 489.127(5).
   (D)   The maximum general civil penalty may be levied not exceeding $2,000
if a violation of F.S. §§ 489.127(1) and 489.132(1) are found to exist.
Additionally, an additional civil penalty of not more than $2,500 may be levied
per day for each violation. In determining the amount of any fine the Code
Enforcement Special Magistrate shall consider:
      (1)   The gravity of the violation.
      (2)   Any actions taken by the violator to correct the violation.
      (3)   Any previous violations committed by the violator.
   (E)   The town may collect outstanding fines against registered or certified
contractors issued by the Construction Industry Licensing Board and may retain
75% of the fines it is able to collect, provided that the town transmits 25% of
the fines it collects to the Florida Department of Business and Professional
Regulation according to a procedure to be determined by the Florida Department
of Business and Professional Regulation.
   (F)   To the extent of any conflict between the provisions of this section
and F.S. Ch. 489, the provisions of F.S. Ch. 489 shall control.
(Ord. 2013-14, passed 11-26-2013)
§ 150.16 INSPECTIONS.
   A request for any inspection for work performed pursuant to an approved
building permit must be made to the town within 30 days of completion of the
work for which the inspection is requested. If the inspection is not requested
within the 30 days, an additional fee of $100 shall be paid to the town for
such an inspection. No inspection shall occur unless and until the inspection
fees are paid to the town. The fee may be changed by resolution of the Town
Council.
(Ord. 2018-10, passed 1-29-2019)
CHAPTER 151: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
Administration and Applicability
   
151.001   Title
   
151.002   Scope
   
151.003   Intent
   
151.004   Coordination with the Florida Building Code
   
151.005   Warning
   
151.006   Disclaimer of liability
   
151.007   Applicability; general
   
151.008   Areas to which this chapter applies
   
151.009   Basis for establishing hazard areas
   
151.010   Submission of additional data to establish flood hazard areas
   
151.011   Other laws
   
151.012   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
151.013   Interpretation
   
151.014   Definitions
Duties and Power of the Floodplain Administrator
   
151.030   Designation
   
151.031   General
   
151.032   Applications and permits
   
151.033   Substantial improvement and substantial damage determinations
   
151.034   Modifications of the strict application of the requirements of the
Florida Building Code
   
151.035   Notices and orders
   
151.036   Inspections
   
151.037   Other duties of the Floodplain Administrator
   
151.038   Floodplain management records
Permits
   
151.050   Permits required
   
151.051   Floodplain development permits or approvals
   
151.052   Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building
Code
   
151.053   Application for a permit or approval
   
151.054   Validity of permit or approval
   
151.055   Expiration
   
151.056   Suspension or revocation
   
151.057   Other permits required
Site Plans and Construction Documents
   
151.070   Information for development in flood hazard areas
   
151.071   Information in flood hazard areas without base flood elevations
   
151.072   Additional analyses and certifications
   
151.073   Submission of additional data
Inspections
   
151.090   General
   
151.091   Development other than buildings and structures
   
151.092   Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building
Code
   
151.093   Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building
Code, lowest floor inspection
   
151.094   Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building
Code, final inspection
   
151.095   Manufactured homes
Variances and Appeals
   
151.110   General
   
151.111   Appeals
   
151.112   Limitations on authority to grant variances
   
151.113   Restrictions in floodways
   
151.114   Historic buildings
   
151.115   Functionally dependent uses
   
151.116   Considerations for issuance of variances
   
151.117   Conditions for issuance of variances
Flood Resistant Development
   
151.130   Buildings and structures
   
151.131   Subdivisions
   
151.132   Site improvements, utilities and limitations
   
151.133   Manufactured homes
   
151.134   Recreational vehicles and park trailers
   
151.135   Tanks
   
151.136   Other development
Violations
   
151.150   Violations
   
151.151   Authority
   
151.152   Unlawful continuance
ADMINISTRATION AND APPLICABILITY
§ 151.001 TITLE.
   These regulations shall be known as the Floodplain Management Chapter of the
Town of Palm Shores, hereinafter referred to as "this chapter."
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-24-2020)
§ 151.002 SCOPE.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all development that is wholly
within or partially within any flood hazard area, including but not limited to
the subdivision of land; filling, grading, and other site improvements and
utility installations; construction, alteration, remodeling, enlargement,
improvement, replacement, repair, relocation or demolition of buildings,
structures, and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code;
placement, installation, or replacement of manufactured homes and manufactured
buildings; installation or replacement of tanks; placement of recreational
vehicles; installation of swimming pools; and any other development.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-24-2020)
§ 151.003 INTENT.
   The purposes of this chapter and the flood load and flood resistant
construction requirements of the Florida Building Code are to establish minimum
requirements to safeguard the public health, safety, and general welfare and to
minimize public and private losses due to flooding through regulation of
development in flood hazard areas to:
   (A)   Minimize unnecessary disruption of commerce, access and public service
during times of flooding;
   (B)   Require the use of appropriate construction practices in order to
prevent or minimize future flood damage;
   (C)   Manage filling, grading, dredging, mining, paving, excavation,
drilling operations, storage of equipment or materials, and other development
which may increase flood damage or erosion potential;
   (D)   Manage the alteration of flood hazard areas, watercourses, and
shorelines to minimize the impact of development on the natural and beneficial
functions of the floodplain;
   (E)   Minimize damage to public and private facilities and utilities;
   (F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood hazard areas;
   (G)   Minimize the need for future expenditure of public funds for flood
control projects and response to and recovery from flood events; and
   (H)   Meet the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program for
community participation as set forth in 44 C.F.R. § 59.22.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-24-2020)
§ 151.004 COORDINATION WITH THE FLORIDA BUILDING CODE.
   (A)   This chapter is intended to be administered and enforced in
conjunction with the Florida Building Code. Where cited, ASCE 24 refers to the
edition of the standard that is referenced by the Florida Building Code.
   (B)   In the event that any term used herein is not defined then the
definition of such term as used in the latest version of the Dictionary of
Architecture and Construction, by Cyril M. Harris, McGraw-Hill Publishing shall
be used.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2014-04, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01,
passed 3-24-2020)
§ 151.005 WARNING.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter and the Florida
Building Code, as amended by this community, is considered the minimum
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur. Flood heights may be
increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land
outside of mapped special flood hazard areas, or that uses permitted within
such flood hazard areas, will be free from flooding or flood damage. The flood
hazard areas and base flood elevations contained in the Flood Insurance Study
and shown on Flood Insurance Rate Maps and the requirements of 44 C.F.R. §§ 59
and 60 may be revised by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, requiring
this community to revise these regulations to remain eligible for participation
in the National Flood Insurance Program. No guaranty of vested use, existing
use, or future use is implied or expressed by compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01 passed 3-24-2020)
§ 151.006 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Town of Palm
Shores or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results
from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-24-2020)
§ 151.007 APPLICABILITY; GENERAL.
   Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific
requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-24-2020)
§ 151.008 AREAS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.
   This chapter shall apply to all flood hazard areas within the Town of Palm
Shores, as established in §
151.009.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-24-2020)
§ 151.009 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING HAZARD AREAS.
   The Flood Insurance Study for Brevard County, Florida and Incorporated
Areas, dated March 17, 2014 and all subsequent amendments and revisions, and
the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM), and all subsequent
amendments and revisions to such maps, are adopted by reference as a part of
this chapter and shall serve as the minimum basis for establishing flood hazard
areas. Studies and maps that establish flood hazard areas are on file at the
Office of the Town Clerk.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-24-2020)
§ 151.010 SUBMISSION OF ADDITIONAL DATA TO ESTABLISH FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.
   To establish flood hazard areas and base flood elevations, pursuant to §§
151.070 through
151.073 the Floodplain Administrator may require submission of additional data.
Where field surveyed topography prepared by a Florida licensed professional
surveyor or digital topography accepted by the community indicates that ground
elevations:
   (A)   Are below the closest applicable base flood elevation, even in areas
not delineated as a special flood hazard area on a FIRM, the area shall be
considered as flood hazard area and subject to the requirements of this chapter
and, as applicable, the requirements of the Florida Building Code.
   (B)   Are above the closest applicable base flood elevation, the area shall
be regulated as special flood hazard area unless the applicant obtains a Letter
of Map Change that removes the area from the special flood hazard area.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-24-2020)
§ 151.011 OTHER LAWS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions
of local, state or federal law.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-24-2020)
§ 151.012 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter supersedes any ordinance in effect for management of
development in flood hazard areas. However, it is not intended to repeal or
abrogate any existing ordinances including but not limited to land development
regulations, zoning ordinances, stormwater management regulations, or the
Florida Building Code. In the event of a conflict between this chapter and any
other ordinance, the more restrictive shall govern. This chapter shall not
impair any deed restriction, covenant or easement, but any land that is subject
to such interests shall also be governed by this chapter.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-24-2020)
§ 151.013 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-24-2020)
§ 151.014 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Scope. For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (B)   Terms defined in the Florida Building Code. Where terms are not
defined in this chapter and are defined in the Florida Building Code, such
terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in that code.
   (C)   Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined in this chapter or the
Florida Building Code, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such
as the context implies.
   (D)   Definitions.
      ALTERATION OF A WATERCOURSE. A dam, impoundment, channel relocation,
change in channel alignment, channelization, or change in cross-sectional area
of the channel or the channel capacity, or any other form of modification which
may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the
riverine flow of water during conditions of the base flood.
      APPEAL. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter.
      ASCE 24. A standard titled Flood Resistant Design and Construction that
is referenced by the Florida Building Code. ASCE 24 is developed and published
by the American Society of Civil Engineers, Reston, VA.
      BASE FLOOD. A flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in
any given year. (Also defined in FBC, B § 1612.2.) The base flood is commonly
referred to as the 100-YEAR FLOOD or the 1% ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD.
      BASE FLOOD ELEVATION. The elevation of the base flood, including wave
height, relative to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), North American
Vertical Datum (NAVD) or other datum specified on the Flood insurance Rate Map
(FIRM). (Also defined in FBC, B § 1612.2.)
      BASEMENT. The portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides. (Also defined in FBC, B § 1612.2.)
      DESIGN FLOOD. The flood associated with the greater of the following two
areas (also defined in FBC, B § 1612.2):
         (a)   Area with a floodplain subject to a 1% or greater chance of
flooding in any year; or
         (b)   Area designated as a flood hazard area on the community's flood
hazard map, or otherwise legally designated.
      DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to, buildings or other structures, tanks, temporary
structures, temporary or permanent storage of equipment or materials, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavations, drilling operations or any
other land disturbing activities.
      ENCROACHMENT. The placement of fill, excavation, buildings, permanent
structures or other development into a flood hazard area which may impede or
alter the flow capacity of riverine flood hazard areas.
      EXISTING BUILDING AND EXISTING STRUCTURE. Any buildings and structures
for which the start of construction commenced before March 27, 1995. (Also
defined in FBC, B § 1612.2.)
      EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park
or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before March 27, 1995.
      EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
      FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA). The federal agency that, in
addition to carrying out other functions, administers the National Flood
Insurance Program.
      FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land from (also defined in FBG, B §
1612.2):
         (a)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
         (b)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source.
      FLOOD DAMAGE-RESISTANT MATERIALS. Any construction material capable of
withstanding direct and prolonged contact with floodwaters without sustaining
any damage that requires more than cosmetic repair. (Also defined in FBG, B §
1612.2.)
      FLOOD HAZARD AREA. The greater of the following two areas (also defined
in FBG, B § 1612.2):
         (a)   The area within a floodplain subject to a 1% or greater chance
of flooding in any year.
         (b)   The area designated as a flood hazard area on the community's
flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated.
      FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). The official map of the community on
which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both special flood
hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. (Also
defined in FBG, B § 1612.2.)
      FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). The official report provided by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency that contains the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the
Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (if applicable), the water surface elevations
of the base flood, and supporting technical data. (Also defined in FBG, B §
1612.2.)
      FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. The office or position designated and charged
with the administration and enforcement of this chapter (may be referred to as
the Floodplain Manager).
      FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT OR APPROVAL. An official document or
certificate issued by the community, or other evidence of approval or
concurrence, which authorizes performance of specific development activities
that are located in flood hazard areas and that are determined to be compliant
with this chapter.
      FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other riverine watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
(Also defined in FBC, B § 1612.2.)
      FLOODWAY ENCROACHMENT ANALYSIS. An engineering analysis of the impact
that a proposed encroachment into a floodway is expected to have on the
floodway boundaries and base flood elevations; the evaluation shall be prepared
by a qualified Florida licensed engineer using standard engineering methods and
models.
      FLORIDA BUILDING CODE. The family of codes adopted by the Florida
Building Commission, including: Florida Building Code, Building; Florida
Building Code, Residential; Florida Building Code, Existing Building; Florida
Building Code, Mechanical; Florida Building Code, Plumbing; Florida Building
Code, Fuel Gas.
      FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE. A use which cannot perform its intended
purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water,
including only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair
facilities; the term does not include long-term storage or related
manufacturing facilities.
      HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls or foundation of a
structure.
      HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is determined eligible for the
exception to the flood hazard area requirements of the Florida Building Code,
Existing Building, Chapter 12 Historic Buildings.
      LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC). An official determination issued by FEMA
that amends or revises an effective Flood Insurance Rate Map or Flood Insurance
Study. LETTERS OF MAP CHANGE include:
         (a)   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). An amendment based on technical
data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special
flood hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective Flood Insurance Rate Map
and establishes that a specific property, portion of a property, or structure
is not located in a special flood hazard area.
         (b)   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR). A revision based on technical
data that may show changes to flood zones, flood elevations, special flood
hazard area boundaries and floodway delineations, and other planimetric
features.
         (c)   LETTER OF MAP REVISION BASED ON FILL (LOMR-F). A determination
that a structure or parcel of land has been elevated by fill above the base
flood elevation and is, therefore, no longer located within the special flood
hazard area; in order to qualify for this determination, the fill must have
been permitted and placed in accordance with the community's floodplain
management regulations.
         (d)   CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR). A formal review and
comment as to whether a proposed flood protection project or other project
complies with the minimum NFIP requirements for such projects with respect to
delineation of special flood hazard areas. A CLOMR does not revise the
effective Flood Insurance Rate Map or Flood Insurance Study; upon submission
and approval of certified as-built documentation, a Letter of Map Revision may
be issued by FEMA to revise the effective FIRM.
   LIGHT-DUTY TRUCK. As defined in 40 C.F.R. § 86.082-2, any motor vehicle
rated at 8,500 pounds Gross Vehicular Weight Rating or less, which has a
vehicular curb weight of 6,000 pounds or less and which has a basic vehicle
frontal area of 45 square feet or less, which is:
         (a)   Designed primarily for purposes of transportation of property or
is a derivation of such a vehicle;
         (b)   Designed primarily for transportation of persons and has a
capacity of more than 12 persons; or
         (c)   Available with special features enabling off street or off-
highway operation and use.
      LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area of a building
or structure, including basement, but excluding any unfinished or flood-
resistant enclosure, other than a basement, usable solely for vehicle parking,
building access or limited storage provided that such enclosure is not built so
as to render the structure in violation of the non-elevation requirements of
the Florida Building Code or ASCE 24. (Also defined in FBC, B § 1612.2.)
      MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which is eight feet or more in width and greater than 400 square feet, and
which is built on a permanent, integral chassis and is designed for use with or
without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The
term MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a recreational vehicle or park trailer.
(Also defined in F.A.C. 15C-1.0101.)
      MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels)
of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
      MARKET VALUE. The price at which a property will change hands between a
willing buyer and a willing seller, neither party being under compulsion to buy
or sell and both having reasonable knowledge of relevant facts. As used in this
chapter, the term refers to the market value of buildings and structures,
excluding the land and other improvements on the parcel. Market value may be
established by a qualified independent appraiser, actual cash value
(replacement cost depreciated for age and quality of construction), or tax
assessment value adjusted to approximate market value by a factor provided by
the Property Appraiser.
      NEW CONSTRUCTION. For the purposes of administration of this chapter and
the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code,
structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after March 27,
1995 and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
      NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after March
27,1995.
      PARK TRAILER. A transportable unit which has a body width not exceeding
14 feet and which is built on a single chassis and is designed to provide
seasonal or temporary living quarters when connected to utilities necessary for
operation of installed fixtures and appliances. (Defined in F.S. § 320.01)
      RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle, including a park trailer, which is
(defined in F.S. § 320.01(b)):
         (a)   Built on a single chassis;
         (b)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
         (c)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-
duty truck; and
         (d)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
      SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. An area in the floodplain subject to a 1% or
greater chance of flooding in any given year. Special flood hazard areas are
shown on FIRMs as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, AH, V1-V30, VE or V. (Also
defined in FBC, B § 1612.2.)
      START OF CONSTRUCTION. The date of issuance of permits for new
construction and substantial improvements, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or
other improvement is within 180 days of the date of the issuance. The actual
start of construction means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a building (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as
the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns. Permanent construction does not include land preparation (such as
clearing, grading, or filling), the installation of streets or walkways,
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations, the erection of
temporary forms or the installation of accessory buildings such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main buildings. For a
substantial improvement, the actual START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
(Also defined in FBC, B § 1612.2.)
      SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a building or
structure whereby the cost of restoring the building or structure to its
before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the
building or structure before the damage occurred. (Also defined in FBC, B §
1612.2.)
      SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a building or structure, the cost of which
equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the building or structure before
the improvement or repair is started. If the structure has incurred substantial
damage, any repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of the
actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either (also
defined in FBC, B § 1612.2):
         (a)   Any project for improvement of a building required to correct
existing health, sanitary, or safety code violations identified by the Building
Official and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.
         (b)   Any alteration of a historic structure provided the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure.
      VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, or the
flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, which
permits construction in a manner that would not otherwise be permitted by this
chapter or the Florida Building Code.
      WATERCOURSE. A river, creek, stream, channel or other topographic feature
in, on, through, or over which water flows at least periodically.
   (E)   In the event that any term used herein is not defined then the
definition of such term as used in the latest version of the Dictionary of
Architecture and Construction, by Cyril M. Harris, McGraw-Hill Publishing shall
be used.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2014-04, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01,
passed 3-24-2020)
DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR
§ 151.030 DESIGNATION.
   The Town Building Official is currently designated as the Floodplain
Administrator. This designation may be changed by resolution of the Town
Council.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-24-2020)
§ 151.031 GENERAL.
   The Floodplain Administrator is authorized and directed to administer and
enforce the provisions of this chapter. The Floodplain Administrator shall have
the authority to render interpretations of this chapter consistent with the
intent and purpose of this chapter and may establish policies and procedures in
order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations,
policies, and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements
specifically provided in this chapter without the granting of a variance
pursuant to §§
151.110 through
151.117.
(Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-24-2020)
§ 151.032 APPLICATIONS AND PERMITS.
   The Floodplain Administrator, in coordination with other pertinent offices
of the community, shall:
   (A)   Review applications and plans to determine whether proposed new
development will be located in flood hazard areas;
   (B)   Review applications for modification of any existing development in
flood hazard areas for compliance with the requirements of this chapter;
   (C)   Interpret flood hazard area boundaries where such interpretation is
necessary to determine the exact location of boundaries; a person contesting
the determination shall have the opportunity to appeal the interpretation;
   (D)   Provide available flood elevation and flood hazard information;
   (E)   Determine whether additional flood hazard data shall be obtained from
other sources or shall be developed by an applicant;
   (F)   Review applications to determine whether proposed development will be
reasonably safe from flooding;
   (G)   Issue floodplain development permits or approvals for development
other than buildings and structures that are subject to the Florida Building
Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida
Building Code, when compliance with this chapter is demonstrated, or disapprove
the same in the event of noncompliance; and
   (H)   Coordinate with and provide comments to assure that applications, plan
reviews, and inspections for buildings and structures in flood hazard areas
comply with the applicable provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-24-2020)
§ 151.033 SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENTS AND SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE DETERMINATIONS.
   For applications for building permits to improve buildings and structures,
including alterations, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, change of
occupancy, additions, rehabilitations, renovations, substantial improvements,
repairs of substantial damage, and any other improvement of or work on such
buildings and structures, the Floodplain Administrator shall:
   (A)   Estimate the market value, or require the applicant to obtain an
appraisal of the market value prepared by a qualified independent appraiser, of
the building or structure before the start of construction of the proposed
work; in the case of repair, the market value of the building or structure
shall be the market value before the damage occurred and before any repairs are
made;
   (B)   Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair a
damaged building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs of
improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building or
structure;
   (C)   Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes
substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; and
   (D)   Notify the applicant if it is determined that the work constitutes
substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage and that compliance
with the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code
and this chapter is required.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-24-2020)
§ 151.034 MODIFICATIONS OF THE STRICT APPLICATION OF THE REQUIREMENTS OF THE
FLORIDA BUILDING CODE.
   The Floodplain Administrator shall review requests that seek approval to
modify the strict application of the flood load and flood resistant
construction requirements of the Florida Building Code to determine whether
such requests require the granting of a variance pursuant to §§
151.110 through
151.117 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-24-2020)
§ 151.035 NOTICES AND ORDERS.
   The Floodplain Administrator shall coordinate with appropriate local
agencies for the issuance of all necessary notices or orders to ensure
compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-24-2020)
§ 151.036 INSPECTIONS.
   The Floodplain Administrator shall make the required inspections as
specified in §§
151.090 through
151.095 for development that is not subject to the Florida Building Code,
including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building
Code. The Floodplain Administrator shall inspect flood hazard areas to
determine if development is undertaken without issuance of a permit.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-24-2020)
§ 151.037 OTHER DUTIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Floodplain Administrator shall have other duties, including but not
limited to:
   (A)   Establish procedures for administering and documenting determinations
of substantial improvement and substantial damage made pursuant to §
151.033;
   (B)   Require that applicants proposing alteration of a watercourse notify
adjacent communities and the Florida Division of Emergency Management, State
Floodplain Management Office, and submit copies of such notifications to the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA);
   (C)   Require applicants who submit hydrologic and hydraulic engineering
analyses to support permit applications to submit to FEMA the data and
information necessary to maintain the Flood Insurance Rate Maps if the analyses
propose to change base flood elevations, flood hazard area boundaries, or
floodway designations; such submissions shall be made within six months of such
data becoming available;
   (D)   Review required design certifications and documentation of elevations
specified by this chapter and the Florida Building Code to determine that such
certifications and documentations are complete; and
   (E)   Notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency when the corporate
boundaries of the town are modified.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-24-2020)
§ 151.038 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT RECORDS.
   Regardless of any limitation on the period required for retention of public
records, the Floodplain Administrator shall maintain and permanently keep and
make available for public inspection all records that are necessary for the
administration of this chapter and the flood resistant construction
requirements of the Florida Building Code, including Flood Insurance Rate Maps;
Letters of Map Change; records of issuance of permits and denial of permits;
determinations of whether proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or
repair of substantial damage; required design certifications and documentation
of elevations specified by the Florida Building Code and this chapter;
notifications to adjacent communities, FEMA, and the state related to
alterations of watercourses; assurances that the flood carrying capacity of
altered watercourses will be maintained; documentation related to appeals and
variances, including justification for issuance or denial; and records of
enforcement actions taken pursuant to this chapter and the flood resistant
construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. These records shall be
available for public inspection at the office of the Town Clerk.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-24-2020)
PERMITS
§ 151.050 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   Any owner or owner's authorized agent (hereinafter "applicant") who intends
to undertake any development activity within the scope of this chapter,
including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building
Code, which is wholly within or partially within any flood hazard area shall
first make application to the Floodplain Administrator, and the Building
Official if applicable, and shall obtain the required permit(s) and approval
(s). No such permit or approval shall be issued until compliance with the
requirements of this chapter and all other applicable codes and regulations has
been satisfied.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-24-2020)
§ 151.051 FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMITS OR APPROVALS.
   Floodplain development permits or approvals shall be issued pursuant to this
chapter for any development activities not subject to the requirements of the
Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt
from the Florida Building Code. Depending on the nature and extent of proposed
development that includes a building or structure, the Floodplain Administrator
may determine that a floodplain development permit or approval is required in
addition to a building permit.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-24-2020)
§ 151.052 BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND FACILITIES EXEMPT FROM THE FLORIDA BUILDING
CODE.
   Pursuant to the requirements of federal regulation for participation in the
National Flood Insurance Program (44 C.F.R. §§ 59 and 60), floodplain
development permits or approvals shall be required for the following buildings,
structures and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code and
any further exemptions provided by law, which are subject to the requirements
of this chapter:
   (A)   Railroads and ancillary facilities associated with the railroad.
   (B)   Nonresidential farm buildings on farms, as provided in F.S. § 604.50.
   (C)   Temporary buildings or sheds used exclusively for construction
purposes.
   (D)   Mobile or modular structures used as temporary offices.
   (E)   Those structures or facilities of electric utilities, as defined in
F.S. § 366.02, which are directly involved in the generation, transmission, or
distribution of electricity.
   (F)   Chickees constructed by the Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Florida or
the Seminole Tribe of Florida. As used in this paragraph, the term CHICKEE
means an open-sided wooden hut that has a thatched roof of palm or palmetto or
other traditional material, and that does not incorporate any electrical,
plumbing, or other non-wood features.
   (G)   Family mausoleums not exceeding 250 square feet in area which are
prefabricated and assembled on site or preassembled and delivered on site and
have walls, roofs, and a floor constructed of granite, marble or reinforced
concrete.
   (H)   Temporary housing provided by the Department of Corrections to any
prisoner in the state correctional system.
   (I)   Structures identified in F.S. § 553.73(10)(k), are not exempt from the
Florida Building Code if such structures are located in flood hazard areas
established on Flood Insurance Rate Maps.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-24-2020)
§ 151.053 APPLICATION FOR A PERMIT OR APPROVAL.
   To obtain a floodplain development permit or approval the applicant shall
first file an application in writing on a form furnished by the community. The
information provided shall:
   (A)   Identify and describe the development to be covered by the permit or
approval.
   (B)   Describe the land on which the proposed development is to be conducted
by legal description, street address or similar description that will readily
identify and definitively locate the site.
   (C)   Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed development is
intended.
   (D)   Be accompanied by a site plan or construction documents as specified
in §§
151.070 through
151.073.
   (E)   State the valuation of the proposed work.
   (F)   Be signed by the applicant or the applicant's authorized agent.
   (G)   Give such other data and information as required by the Floodplain
Administrator.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-24-2020)
§ 151.054 VALIDITY OF PERMIT OR APPROVAL.
   The issuance of a floodplain development permit or approval pursuant to this
chapter shall not be construed to be a permit for, or approval of, any
violation of this chapter, the Florida Building Codes, or any other ordinance
of this community. The issuance of permits based on submitted applications,
construction documents, and information shall not prevent the Floodplain
Administrator from requiring the correction of errors and omissions.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-24-2020)
§ 151.055 EXPIRATION.
   A floodplain development permit or approval shall become invalid unless the
work authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance,
or if the work authorized is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days
after the work commences. Extensions for periods of not more than 180 days each
shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause shall be demonstrated.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-24-2020)
§ 151.056 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   The Floodplain Administrator is authorized to suspend or revoke a floodplain
development permit or approval if the permit was issued in error, on the basis
of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in violation of this
chapter or any other ordinance, regulation or requirement of this community.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-24-2020)
§ 151.057 OTHER PERMITS REQUIRED.
   Floodplain development permits and building permits shall include a
condition that all other applicable state or federal permits be obtained before
commencement of the permitted development, including but not limited to the
following:
   (A)   The Saint Johns River Water Management District; F.S. § 373.036.
   (B)   Florida Department of Health for onsite sewage treatment and disposal
systems; F.S. § 381.0065 and F.A.C. Ch. 64E-6.
   (C)   Florida Department of Environmental Protection for activities subject
to the Joint Coastal Permit; F.S. § 161.055.
   (D)   Florida Department of Environmental Protection for activities that
affect wetlands and alter surface water flows, in conjunction with the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers; § 404 of the Clean Water Act.
   (E)   Federal permits and approvals.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-24-2020)
SITE PLANS AND CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS
§ 151.070 INFORMATION FOR DEVELOPMENT IN FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.
   (A)   The site plan or construction documents for any development subject to
the requirements of this chapter shall be drawn to scale and shall include, as
applicable to the proposed development:
      (1)   Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries and flood
zone(s), base flood elevation(s), and ground elevations if necessary for review
of the proposed development.
      (2)   Where base flood elevations or floodway data are not included on
the FIRM or in the Flood Insurance Study, they shall be established in
accordance with §
151.071(B) or (C).
      (3)   Where the parcel on which the proposed development will take place
will have more than 50 lots or is larger than five acres and the base flood
elevations are not included on the FIRM or in the Flood Insurance Study, such
elevations shall be established in accordance with §
151.071(A).
      (4)   Location of the proposed activity and proposed structures, and
locations of existing buildings and structures.
      (5)   Location, extent, amount, and proposed final grades of any filling,
grading, or excavation.
      (6)   Where the placement of fill is proposed, the amount, type, and
source of fill material; compaction specifications; a description of the
intended purpose of the fill areas; and evidence that the proposed fill areas
are the minimum necessary to achieve the intended purpose.
      (7)   Existing and proposed alignment of any proposed alteration of a
watercourse.
   (B)   The Floodplain Administrator is authorized to waive the submission of
site plans, construction documents, and other data that are required by this
chapter but that are not required to be prepared by a registered design
professional if it is found that the nature of the proposed development is such
that the review of such submissions is not necessary to ascertain compliance
with this chapter.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-24-2020)
§ 151.071 INFORMATION IN FLOOD HAZARD AREAS WITHOUT BASE FLOOD ELEVATIONS.
   Where flood hazard areas are delineated on the FIRM and base flood elevation
data have not been provided, the Floodplain Administrator shall:
   (A)   Require the applicant to include base flood elevation data prepared in
accordance with currently accepted engineering practices.
   (B)   Obtain, review, and provide to applicants base flood elevation and
floodway data available from a federal or state agency or other source or
require the applicant to obtain and use base flood elevation and floodway data
available from a federal or state agency or other source.
   (C)   Where base flood elevation and floodway data are not available from
another source, where the available data are deemed by the Floodplain
Administrator to not reasonably reflect flooding conditions, or where the
available data are known to be scientifically or technically incorrect or
otherwise inadequate:
      (1)   Require the applicant to include base flood elevation data prepared
in accordance with currently accepted engineering practices; or
      (2)   Specify that the base flood elevation is two feet above the highest
adjacent grade at the location of the development, provided there is no
evidence indicating flood depths have been or may be greater than two feet.
   (D)   Where the base flood elevation data are to be used to support a Letter
of Map Change from FEMA, advise the applicant that the analyses shall be
prepared by a Florida licensed engineer in a format required by FEMA, and that
it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to satisfy the submittal
requirements and pay the processing fees.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-24-2020)
§ 151.072 ADDITIONAL ANALYSES AND CERTIFICATIONS.
   As applicable to the location and nature of the proposed development
activity, and in addition to the requirements of this section, the applicant
shall have the following analyses signed and sealed by a Florida licensed
engineer for submission with the site plan and construction documents:
   (A)   For development activities proposed to be located in a regulatory
floodway, hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that demonstrates that the
encroachment of the proposed development will not cause any increase in base
flood elevations; where the applicant proposes to undertake development
activities that do increase base flood elevations, the applicant shall submit
such analysis to FEMA as specified in §
151.073 and shall submit the Conditional Letter of Map Revision, if issued by
FEMA, with the site plan and construction documents.
   (B)   For development activities proposed to be located in a riverine flood
hazard area for which base flood elevations are included in the Flood Insurance
Study or on the FIRM and floodways have not been designated, hydrologic and
hydraulic analyses that demonstrate that the cumulative effect of the proposed
development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated flood hazard
area encroachments, will not increase the base flood elevation more than one
foot at any point within the community. This requirement does not apply in
isolated flood hazard areas not connected to a riverine flood hazard area or in
flood hazard areas identified as Zone AO or Zone AH.
   (C)   For alteration of a watercourse, an engineering analysis prepared in
accordance with standard engineering practices which demonstrates that the
flood-carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse
will not be decreased, and certification that the altered watercourse shall be
maintained in a manner which preserves the channel's flood-carrying capacity;
the applicant shall submit the analysis to FEMA as specified in §
151.073.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-24-2020)
§ 151.073 SUBMISSION OF ADDITIONAL DATA.
   When additional hydrologic, hydraulic or other engineering data, studies,
and additional analyses are submitted to support an application, the applicant
has the right to seek a Letter of Map Change from FEMA to change the base flood
elevations, change floodway boundaries, or change boundaries of flood hazard
areas shown on FIRMs, and to submit such data to FEMA for such purposes. The
analyses shall be prepared by a Florida licensed engineer in a format required
by FEMA. Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility
of the applicant.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-24-2020)
INSPECTIONS
§ 151.090 GENERAL.
   Development for which a floodplain development permit or approval is
required shall be subject to inspection.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-24-2020)
§ 151.091 DEVELOPMENT OTHER THAN BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.
   The Floodplain Administrator shall inspect all development to determine
compliance with the requirements of this chapter and the conditions of issued
floodplain development permits or approvals.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-24-2020)
§ 151.092 BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND FACILITIES EXEMPT FROM THE FLORIDA BUILDING
CODE.
   The Floodplain Administrator shall inspect buildings, structures and
facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code to determine compliance with
the requirements of this chapter and the conditions of issued floodplain
development permits or approvals.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-24-2020)
§ 151.093 BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND FACILITIES EXEMPT FROM THE FLORIDA BUILDING
CODE, LOWEST FLOOR INSPECTION.
   Upon placement of the lowest floor, including basement, and prior to further
vertical construction, the owner of a building, structure or facility exempt
from the Florida Building Code, or the owner's authorized agent, shall submit
to the Floodplain Administrator:
   (A)   If a design flood elevation was used to determine the required
elevation of the lowest floor, the certification of elevation of the lowest
floor prepared and sealed by a Florida licensed professional surveyor; or
   (B)   If the elevation used to determine the required elevation of the
lowest floor was determined in accordance with §
151.071(C)(2), the documentation of height of the lowest floor above highest
adjacent grade, prepared by the owner or the owner's authorized agent.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-24-2020)
§ 151.094 BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND FACILITIES EXEMPT FROM THE FLORIDA BUILDING
CODE, FINAL INSPECTION.
   As part of the final inspection, the owner or owner's authorized agent shall
submit to the Floodplain Administrator a final certification of elevation of
the lowest floor or final documentation of the height of the lowest floor above
the highest adjacent grade; such certifications and documentations shall be
prepared as specified in §
151.093.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-24-2020)
§ 151.095 MANUFACTURED HOMES.
   The Building Official shall inspect manufactured homes that are installed or
replaced in flood hazard areas to determine compliance with the requirements of
this chapter and the conditions of the issued permit. Upon placement of a
manufactured home, certification of the elevation of the lowest floor shall be
submitted to the Building Official.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-24-2020)
VARIANCES AND APPEALS
§ 151.110 GENERAL.
   The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide on requests for appeals and
requests for variances from the strict application of this chapter. Pursuant to
F.S. § 553.73(5), the Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide on requests for
appeals and requests for variances from the strict application of the flood
resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-24-2020)
§ 151.111 APPEALS.
   The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged
there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the
Floodplain Administrator in the administration and enforcement of this chapter.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Adjustment may appeal such
decision to the Circuit Court, as provided by Florida Statutes.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-24-2020)
§ 151.112 LIMITATIONS ON AUTHORITY TO GRANT VARIANCES.
   The Board of Adjustment shall base its decisions on variances on technical
justifications submitted by applicants, the considerations for issuance in §
151.116, the conditions of issuance set forth in §
151.117, and the comments and recommendations of the Floodplain Administrator
and the Building Official. The Board of Adjustment has the right to attach such
conditions as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this
chapter.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-24-2020)
§ 151.113 RESTRICTIONS IN FLOODWAYS.
   A variance shall not be issued for any proposed development in a floodway if
any increase in base flood elevations would result, as evidenced by the
applicable analyses and certifications required in §
151.072 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-24-2020)
§ 151.114 HISTORIC BUILDINGS.
   A variance is authorized to be issued for the repair, improvement, or
rehabilitation of a historic building that is determined eligible for the
exception to the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida
Building Code, Existing Building, Chapter 12 Historic Buildings, upon a
determination that the proposed repair, improvement, or rehabilitation will not
preclude the building's continued designation as a historic building and the
variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design
of the building. If the proposed work precludes the building's continued
designation as a historic building, a variance shall not be granted and the
building and any repair, improvement, and rehabilitation shall be subject to
the requirements of the Florida Building Code.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-24-2020)
§ 151.115 FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USES.
   A variance is authorized to be issued for the construction or substantial
improvement necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, as
defined in this chapter, provided the variance meets the requirements of §
151.113, is the minimum necessary considering the flood hazard, and all due
consideration has been given to use of methods and materials that minimize
flood damage during occurrence of the base flood.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-24-2020)
§ 151.116 CONSIDERATIONS FOR ISSUANCE OF VARIANCES.
   In reviewing requests for variances, the Board of Adjustment shall consider
all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all other applicable
provisions of the Florida Building Code, this chapter, and the following:
   (A)   The danger that materials and debris may be swept onto other lands
resulting in further injury or damage;
   (B)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
   (C)   The susceptibility of the proposed development, including contents, to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on current and future owners;
   (D)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed development to
the community;
   (E)   The availability of alternate locations for the proposed development
that are subject to lower risk of flooding or erosion;
   (F)   The compatibility of the proposed development with existing and
anticipated development;
   (G)   The relationship of the proposed development to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program for the area;
   (H)   The safety of access to the property in times of flooding for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
   (I)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and debris and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
   (J)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, streets and bridges.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-24-2020)
§ 151.117 CONDITIONS FOR ISSUANCE OF VARIANCES.
   Variances shall be issued only upon:
   (A)   Submission by the applicant, of a showing of good and sufficient cause
that the unique characteristics of the size, configuration, or topography of
the site limit compliance with any provision of this chapter or the required
elevation standards;
   (B)   Determination by the Board of Adjustment that:
      (1)   Failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship
due to the physical characteristics of the land that render the lot
undevelopable; increased costs to satisfy the requirements or inconvenience do
not constitute hardship;
      (2)   The granting of a variance will not result in increased flood
heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, nor
create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict
with existing local laws and ordinances; and
      (3)   The variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood
hazard, to afford relief;
   (C)   Receipt of a signed statement by the applicant that the variance, if
granted, shall be recorded in the Office of the Clerk of the Court in such a
manner that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land;
and
   (D)   If the request is for a variance to allow construction of the lowest
floor of a new building, or substantial improvement of a building, below the
required elevation, a copy in the record of a written notice from the
Floodplain Administrator to the applicant for the variance, specifying the
difference between the base flood elevation and the proposed elevation of the
lowest floor, stating that the cost of federal flood insurance will be
commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced floor elevation
(up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage), and stating that
construction below the base flood elevation increases risks to life and
property.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-24-2020)
FLOOD RESISTANT DEVELOPMENT
§ 151.130 BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.
   Design and construction of buildings, structures and facilities exempt from
the Florida Building Code.
   (A)   Pursuant to §
151.052, buildings, structures, and facilities that are exempt from the Florida
Building Code, including substantial improvement or repair of substantial
damage of such buildings, structures and facilities, shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with the flood load and flood resistant construction
requirements of ASCE 24.
   (B)   Structures exempt from the Florida Building Code that are not walled
and roofed buildings shall comply with the requirements of §
151.136.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-24-2020)
§ 151.131 SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   Minimum requirements. Subdivision proposals, including proposals for
manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall be reviewed to determine that:
      (1)   Such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and will be reasonably safe from flooding;
      (2)   All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric,
communications, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage; and
      (3)   Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards;
in Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
   (B)   Subdivision plats. Where any portion of proposed subdivisions,
including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, lies within a flood hazard
area, the following shall be required:
      (1)   Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries and flood
zones, and design flood elevations, as appropriate, shall be shown on
preliminary plats and final plats;
      (2)   Where the subdivision has more than 50 lots or is larger than five
acres and base flood elevations are not included on the FIRM, the base flood
elevations determined in accordance with §
151.071(A) of this chapter; and
      (3)   Compliance with the site improvement and utilities requirements of
§
151.132.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-24-2020)
§ 151.132 SITE IMPROVEMENTS, UTILITIES AND LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   Minimum requirements. All proposed new development shall be reviewed
to determine that:
      (1)   Such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and will be reasonably safe from flooding;
      (2)   All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric,
communications, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage; and
      (3)   Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards;
in Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
   (B)   Foundations. All new manufactured homes and replacement manufactured
homes installed in flood hazard areas shall be installed on permanent,
reinforced foundations that are designed in accordance with the foundation
requirements of the Florida Building Code Residential Section R322.2 and this
chapter. Foundations for manufactured homes subject to §
151.133(F) are permitted to be reinforced piers or other foundation elements of
at least equivalent strength.
   (C)   Anchoring. All new manufactured homes and replacement manufactured
homes shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood
damage and shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring
include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground
anchors. This anchoring requirement is in addition to applicable state and
local anchoring requirements for wind resistance.
   (D)   Elevation. Manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or
substantially improved shall comply with §
151.133(E) and (F), as applicable.
   (E)   General elevation requirement. Unless subject to the requirements of §
151.133(F), all manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially
improved on sites located:
      (1)   Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision;
      (2)   In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;
      (3)   In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision; or
      (4)   In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision upon which a
manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood,
shall be elevated such that the bottom of the frame is at or above the
elevation required, as applicable to the flood hazard area, in the Florida
Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 (Zone A).
   (F)   Elevation requirement for certain existing manufactured home parks and
subdivisions. Manufactured homes that are not subject to § 151.133(E) of this
chapter, including manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or
substantially improved on sites located in an existing manufactured home park
or subdivision, unless on a site where substantial damage as result of flooding
has occurred, shall be elevated such that either the:
      (1)   Bottom of the frame of the manufactured home is at or above the
elevation required in the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2
(Zone A); or
      (2)   Bottom of the frame is supported by reinforced piers or other
foundation elements of at least
equivalent strength that are not less than 36 inches in height above grade.
   (G)   Enclosures. Enclosed areas below elevated manufactured homes shall
comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section
R322.2 for such enclosed areas.
   (H)   Utility equipment. Utility equipment that serves manufactured homes,
including electric, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning
equipment and other service facilities, shall comply with the requirements of
the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-24-2020)
§ 151.133 MANUFACTURED HOMES.
   (A)   General. All manufactured homes installed in flood hazard areas shall
be installed by an installer that is licensed pursuant to F.S. § 320.8249, and
shall comply with the requirements of F.A.C. Ch. 15C-I and the requirements of
this chapter.
   (B)   Foundations. All new manufactured homes and replacement manufactured
homes installed in flood hazard areas shall be installed on permanent,
reinforced foundations that are designed in accordance with the foundation
requirements of the Florida Building Code Residential Section R322.2 and this
chapter. Foundations for manufactured homes subject to § 151.133(F) are
permitted to be reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least
equivalent strength.
   (C)   Anchoring. All new manufactured homes and replacement manufactured
homes shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood
damage and shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring
include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground
anchors. This anchoring requirement is in addition to applicable state and
local anchoring requirements for wind resistance.
   (D)   Elevation. Manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or
substantially improved shall comply with §§
151.133(E) and (F), as applicable.
   (E)   General elevation requirement. Unless subject to the requirements of §
151.133(F), all manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially
improved on sites located:
      (1)   Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision;
      (2)   In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;
      (3)   In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision; or
      (4)   In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision upon which a
manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood,
shall be elevated such that the bottom of the frame is at or above the
elevation required, as applicable to the flood hazard area, in the Florida
Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 (Zone A).
   (F)   Elevation requirement for certain existing manufactured home parks and
subdivisions. Manufactured homes that are not subject to §
151.133(E) of this chapter, including manufactured homes that are placed,
replaced, or substantially improved on sites located in an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision, unless on a site where substantial
damage as result of flooding has occurred, shall be elevated such that either
the:
      (1)   Bottom of the frame of the manufactured home is at or above the
elevation required in the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2
(Zone A); or
      (2)   Bottom of the frame is supported by reinforced piers or other
foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are not less than 36
inches in height above grade.
   (G)   Enclosures. Enclosed areas below elevated manufactured homes shall
comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section
R322.2 for such enclosed areas.
   (H)   Utility equipment. Utility equipment that serves manufactured homes,
including electric, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning
equipment and other service facilities, shall comply with the requirements of
the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-24-2020)
§ 151.134 RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND PARK TRAILERS.
   (A)   Temporary placement. Recreational vehicles and park trailers placed
temporarily in flood hazard areas shall:
      (1)   Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or
      (2)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, which means the
recreational vehicle or park model is on wheels or jacking system; is attached
to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and
has no permanent attachments such as additions, rooms, stairs, decks and
porches.
   (B)   Permanent placement. Recreational vehicles and park trailers that do
not meet the limitations in division (A) above for temporary placement shall
meet the requirements of §
151.133 for manufactured homes.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-24-2020)
§ 151.135 TANKS.
   (A)   Underground tanks. Underground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood,
including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty.
   (B)   Above-ground tanks not elevated. Above-ground tanks that do not meet
the elevation requirements of §
151.135(C) shall be permitted in flood hazard areas provided the tanks are
anchored or otherwise designed and constructed to prevent flotation, collapse
or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during
conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the
tank is empty and the effects of flood-borne debris.
   (C)   Above-ground tanks, elevated. Above-ground tanks in flood hazard areas
shall be attached to and elevated to or above the design flood elevation on a
supporting structure that is designed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement during conditions of the design flood. Tank-supporting structures
shall meet the foundation requirements of the applicable flood hazard area.
   (D)   Tank inlets and vents. Tank inlets, fill openings, outlets and vents
shall be:
      (1)   At or above the design flood elevation or fitted with covers
designed to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the contents of the
tanks during conditions of the design flood; and
      (2)   Anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic
and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of
the design flood.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-24-2020)
§ 151.136 OTHER DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   General requirements for other development. All development, including
man-made changes to improved or unimproved real estate for which specific
provisions are not specified in this chapter or the Florida Building Code,
shall:
      (1)   Be located and constructed to minimize flood damage;
      (2)   Meet the limitations of §
151.132(D) if located in a regulated floodway;
      (3)   Be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement
resulting from hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during
conditions of the design flood;
      (4)   Be constructed of flood damage-resistant materials; and
      (5)   Have mechanical, plumbing, and electrical systems above the design
flood elevation or meet the requirements of ASCE 24, except that minimum
electric service required to address life safety and electric code requirements
is permitted below the design flood elevation provided it conforms to the
provisions of the electrical part of building code for wet locations.
   (B)   Fences in regulated fioodways. Fences in regulated floodways that have
the potential to block the passage of floodwaters, such as stockade fences and
wire mesh fences, shall meet the limitations of §
151.132(D).
   (C)   Retaining walls, sidewalks and driveways in regulated floodways.
Retaining walls and sidewalks and driveways that involve the placement of fill
in regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of §
151.132(D).
   (D)   Roads and watercourse crossings in regulated floodways. Roads and
watercourse crossings, including roads, bridges, culverts, low-water crossings
and similar means for vehicles or pedestrians to travel from one side of a
watercourse to the other side, that encroach into regulated floodways shall
meet the limitations of §
151.132(D) of this chapter. Alteration of a watercourse that is part of a road
or watercourse crossing shall meet the requirements of §
151.072(C).
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-24-2020)
VIOLATIONS
§ 151.150 VIOLATIONS.
   Any development that is not within the scope of the Florida Building Code
but that is regulated by this chapter that is performed without an issued
permit, that is in conflict with an issued permit, or that does not fully
comply with this chapter, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. A
building or structure without the documentation of elevation of the lowest
floor, other required design certifications, or other evidence of compliance
required by this chapter or the Florida Building Code is presumed to be a
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-24-2020)
§ 151.151 AUTHORITY.
   For development that is not within the scope of the Florida Building Code
but that is regulated by this chapter and that is determined to be a violation,
the Floodplain Administrator is authorized to serve notices of violation or
stop work orders to owners of the property involved, to the owner's agent, or
to the person or persons performing the work.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-24-2020)
§ 151.152 UNLAWFUL CONTINUANCE.
   Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a
notice of violation or a stop work order, except such work as that person is
directed to perform to remove or remedy a violation or unsafe condition, shall
be subject to penalties as prescribed by §
10.99 of this Code.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-24-2020)
CHAPTER 152: PLANNING
Section
Local Planning Agency
   
152.01   Designated; purpose
Comprehensive Plan
   
152.15   Adopted
   
152.16   Maintenance of copy
   
152.17   Governs development
Concurrency Management System
   
152.30   Purpose and intent
   
152.31   Consistency with comprehensive plan
   
152.32   Concurrency determinations
LOCAL PLANNING AGENCY
§ 152.01 DESIGNATED; PURPOSE.
   (A)   The Planning and Zoning Board is designated the local planning agency.
   (B)   The purpose of this local planning agency will be to prepare or
supervise the preparation of a legally binding comprehensive plan for meeting
present and future development needs in the areas of:
      (1)   Land use;
      (2)   Traffic circulation;
      (3)   Water and sewage;
      (4)   Natural resource conservation;
      (5)   Recreation and open space;
      (6)   Housing;
      (7)   Coastal zone protection (if appropriate);
      (8)   Intergovernmental cooperation; and
      (9)   Utilities.
(2000 Code, § 50-31) (Ord. 81-1, passed 2-24-1981)
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
§ 152.15 ADOPTED.
   The comprehensive plan for the town entitled Comprehensive Plan of the Town
of Palm Shores is adopted by reference for the area of jurisdiction of the town
pursuant to the Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development
Regulations Act of 1985, F.S. §§ 163.3161 et seq.
(2000 Code, § 50-61) (Ord. 88-05, passed 8-30-1988)
§ 152.16 MAINTENANCE OF COPY.
   A copy of the comprehensive plan, and any subsequent amendments to the plan,
shall be maintained for public inspection in the office of the Mayor at Town
Hall.
(2000 Code, § 50-62) (Ord. 88-05, passed 8-30-1988)
§ 152.17 GOVERNS DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   All development undertaken by any person or entity shall be consistent
with the comprehensive plan and all other applicable land development
ordinances and regulations of the town.
   (B)   All land development ordinances and regulations adopted by the town
shall also be consistent with the comprehensive plan.
(2000 Code, § 50-63) (Ord. 88-05, passed 8-30-1988)
CONCURRENCY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
§ 152.30 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   It is the intent of the town to provide land development regulations which
are consistent with and which contain specific and detailed provisions to
implement the comprehensive plan of the town. Further, it is the intent of the
town to provide specific procedures to ensure that development permits issued
by the town are conditioned on the availability of public facilities and
services, thereby meeting the concurrency requirements of the comprehensive
plan.
(Ord. 2001-09, passed 1-22-2002)
§ 152.31 CONSISTENCY WITH COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
   All applications for development shall demonstrate compliance with the
comprehensive plan of the town and this chapter. If the application for
development is found to meet all requirements of this chapter, it shall be
presumed to be consistent with the comprehensive plan of the town. A
determination, however, will not eliminate the further requirements of a
finding of concurrency. All applications for development must therefore further
demonstrate that specified public facilities and services shall be available at
prescribed levels of service concurrent with the impact of the development on
those facilities.
(Ord. 2001-09, passed 1-22-2002)
§ 152.32 CONCURRENCY DETERMINATIONS.
   (A)   Concurrency management system established. There is hereby created a
concurrency management system which is based upon the comprehensive plan of the
town, including, but not limited to, the capital improvements element thereof
and the adopted level of service standards. The system is designed to ensure
that the issuance of a development permit will not result in a degradation of
the adopted levels of service for specified public facilities and services. The
public facilities and services for which levels of service have been
established are potable water, wastewater, drainage, solid waste, recreation
and traffic circulation.
   (B)   Adopted levels of service not to be degraded.
      (1)   All applications for development permits shall demonstrate that the
proposed development does not degrade adopted levels of service in the town.
      (2)   Concurrency shall be determined prior to or simultaneous with the
issuance of a building permit. For purposes of this subchapter, the issuance of
a building permit or approval of development on platted or unplatted land
consistent with applicable zoning regulations shall be deemed not to materially
alter the use or density or intensity of use on that piece of property.
   (C)   Determination of available capacity; required submittals. For purposes
of determining concurrency, any person seeking a building permit shall provide
the town planner evidence that sufficient public facilities and services
meeting or exceeding the standards and levels of service established in the
city’s comprehensive plan either are available when needed for the development
contemplated by the development permit, or will, as a condition of the permit,
be available to serve the proposed development. This determination shall be
made in accordance with the standards set forth in Rule 9J-5, Florida
Administrative Code. The approval of a site plan or a subdivision plat in
accordance with the procedures and provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
to be preliminary or initial approval only. No site plan or subdivision plat
shall be deemed to have received final approval of the town, and no building
permit shall be issued, until the following documents have been submitted to
the town with respect to the site plan, subdivision plat or building permit
application. The following documentation in support of concurrency shall be
provided to the town by the applicant:
      (1)   A certificate from the St. Johns River Water Management District,
the county or the State Department of Transportation, whichever agency is the
appropriate permitting authority, indicating that the stormwater system into
which the proposed project will discharge stormwater runoff has sufficient
capacity to accommodate the proposed development;
      (2)   A certificate from the county indicating sufficient sewer capacity
for the proposed development;
      (3)   A certificate from the county indicating sufficient solid waste
capacity for the proposed development in the county landfill;
      (4)   A certificate from the town indicating sufficient potable water
capacity for the proposed development in the town water system;
      (5)   For those projects proposing access to a road or highway under the
jurisdiction of the county or the State Department of Transportation, a
driveway, curb cut or other access permit from the appropriate agency. The
permit shall indicate the existing level of service from the access road
serving the project, the latest average daily traffic count on the road, the
average daily trip generation projections for the project, and the resulting
level of service on the access road after taking into account the trip
generation data; and
      (6)   A certificate from the town indicating that sufficient recreational
facilities exist in the town and in the vicinity of the proposed development to
serve the occupants of the proposed development.
   (D)   Expiration of approval of site plan or subdivision plat.
Notwithstanding the requirements set out in division (C) of this section for
submission of documentation and final approval by the town, the time limits
applicable to expiration of approvals for site plans and subdivision plats set
forth in this chapter shall be measured from the date of initial approval by
the town, and not from the date of final approval as referred to in this
section.
   (E)   Exempted construction. Nothing in this section shall apply to building
permits for construction which has no impact on public facilities or services,
including, but not limited to, permits for fences, accessory buildings,
enlargement of single-family residences, repairs to structures, driveways,
signs and similar matters
(Ord. 2001-09, passed 1-22-2002)
CHAPTER 153: SIGNS
Section
General Provisions
   
153.001   Definitions
   
153.002   Purposes
   
153.003   Nonconforming signs
   
153.004   Administration
   
153.005   Permits
   
153.006   Inspections
   
153.007   Maintenance
   
153.008   Signs exempted from permitting procedures
   
153.009   Authorized signs
   
153.010   Prohibited signs and exceptions
   
153.011   Regulations applicable to all districts
   
153.012   Abandoned and hazardous signs
   
153.013   (Reserved)
   
153.014   Off-site signs
   
153.015   Restriction on parking of vehicles and trailers with painted or
mounted signs
   
153.016   Substitution of noncommercial speech for commercial speech
   
153.017   Severability
Administration
   
153.030   (Reserved)
   
153.031   Compliance with chapter
Variances/Waiver
   
153.045   Applications
   
153.046   Granting of variance conditions
 
   
153.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. In the
event that any term used herein is not defined then the definition of such term
as used in the latest version of the Dictionary of Architecture and
Construction, by Cyril M. Harris, McGraw-Hill Publishing shall be used.
   ELECTRIC. Any sign containing electric wiring. This does not include signs
illuminated by an exterior floodlight source.
   FLASHING. Any illumined sign on which the artificial light is not maintained
stationary or constant in intensity and color at all times when such sign is in
use. For the purpose of this Code any moving illuminated sign, except digital
billboards, shall be considered a flashing sign.
   FLAT WALL (FAÇADE-MOUNTED). A sign affixed directly to or painted on or
otherwise inscribed on an exterior wall and confined within the limits thereof
of any building and which projects from that surface less than 12 inches at all
points.
   FREESTANDING. A sign erected and maintained on a freestanding frame, mast or
pole not attached to any building, and not including ground mounted signs.
   GOVERNMENT SIGN. A government sign is a sign that is constructed, placed or
maintained by the federal, state or local government or a sign that is required
to be constructed, placed or maintained by the federal, state or local
government either directly or to enforce a property owner's rights.
   GROUND MOUNTED. A sign which extends from the ground, or has support which
places the bottom of the sign less than two feet from the ground.
   HIGHWAY SIGN. A freestanding sign, integral sign or flat mounted sign that
is erected and maintained within the view of motorists who are driving on a
highway.
   INTEGRAL. A sign that is embedded, extruded or carved into the material of a
building façade. A sign made of bronze, brushed stainless steel or aluminum, or
similar material attached to the building façade.
   MARQUEE. A canopy or covering structure bearing a signboard or copy
projecting from and attached to a building.
   OFF SITE-SIGN. A sign which has no relation to the property it is located
on.
   PORTABLE SIGN. Any structure without a permanent foundation or otherwise
permanently attached to a fixed location, which can be carried, towed, hauled
or driven and is primarily designed to be moved rather than be limited to a
fixed location regardless of modifications that limit its movability.
   PROJECTING. A sign, other than a wall sign, which projects from and is
supported by a wall of a building or structure.
   ROOF SIGN. A sign located on or above the roof of any building, not
including false mansard roof, canopy, or other fascia.
   SIGN. A name, identification, description, display or illustration, which is
affixed to, painted or represented directly or indirectly upon a building, or
other outdoor surface which directs attention to or is designed or intended to
direct attention to the sign face or to an object, product, place, activity,
person, institution, organization or business and where sign area means the
space enclosed within the extreme edges of the sign for each face, not
including the supporting structure or where attached directly to a building
wall or surface, the outline enclosing all the characters of the word. Signs
located completely within an enclosed building, and not exposed to view from a
street, shall not be considered a sign. Each display surface of a sign or sign
face shall be considered to be a sign.
   TEMPORARY. A banner, pennant, poster, portable sign or advertising display
constructed of paper, cloth, canvas, plastic sheet, cardboard, wallboard,
plywood or other like materials and that appears to be intended to be displayed
for a limited period of time.
(Ord. 2007-01, passed 1-23-2007; Ord. 2014-04, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 2016-02,
passed 4-26-2016)
§ 153.002 PURPOSES.
   (A)   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the sign regulations
of the town. The purpose of this chapter is to establish requirements for the
design, construction, placement, installation, number, type, location and
maintenance of signs in order to preserve and protect the health, safety,
welfare and general well-being of the citizens of the town without impeding the
inherent right of business to advertise and reasonably assist potential
customers in locating and identifying any service or facility they may desire
to use or any product they may desire to purchase.
   (B)   The regulation of the design, construction, placement, installation
and maintenance of signs is further justified by their innate scheme and
primary purpose to draw mental attention to them, potentially to the detriment
of sound driving practices and the safety of the motoring public to which a
majority of signs are oriented. Therefore, it is the future purpose of this
chapter to regulate the size and location of signs so that their purpose can be
served without unduly interfering with motorists and causing unsafe conditions.
   (C)   Finally, it is also the purpose of this chapter to protect and
preserve the aesthetic qualities of the community by regulating the design,
construction, placement, installation and maintenance of signs and by
eliminating unsightly signs and preventing clutter among sign placement. The
aesthetic impact of signs is an economic fact which may bear heavily upon the
enjoyment and value of property; therefore, the Town Council finds that the
regulation of signs is validly justified on the basis of conserving the value
of property and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the
town.
(Ord. 2007-01, passed 1-23-2007; Ord. 2016-02, passed 4-26-2016)
§ 153.003 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   (A)   All signs or other advertising structures erected in the town after
the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives shall
conform to this chapter.
   (B)   Signs or advertising structures which are made nonconforming by this
chapter shall be regulated as follows:
      (1)   Any temporary sign shall be removed or made to conform to this
chapter within 180 days from the effective date of the ordinance from which
this chapter is derived;
      (2)   No conforming sign or advertising structure shall be permitted to
be erected on the same place of business with an existing nonconforming sign
until the nonconforming sign has been removed or made conforming;
      (3)   A nonconforming permanent sign shall not be modified in a way which
would increase the nonconformity of the sign. A nonconforming sign shall not be
replaced by another nonconforming sign except for the change of copy or
substitution of changeable panels;
      (4)   Reasonable repair and maintenance of nonconforming signs, including
change of advertising message, is permitted and is not a change, which would
terminate the nonconforming status. REASONABLE REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE means the
work necessary to keep the sign structure in a state of good repair, including
the replacement, in-kind, of materials in the sign structure. Where the
replacement of materials is involved, the replacement may not exceed 50% of the
structural materials in the sign within any 24-month period. The replacement
value and repair and maintenance cost shall be determined by the submission of
two written estimates from contractors, engineers or architects;
      (5)   A nonconforming sign may not be disassembled and re-erected at the
same location;
      (6)   A nonconforming sign may not be relocated;
      (7)   A nonconforming sign may continue to exist so long as it is not
destroyed, abandoned or discontinued as follows:
         (a)   DESTROYED means more than 50% of the upright supports of a sign
structure are physically damaged so that the normal repair practices of the
industry would call for replacement of the damaged support(s).
         (b)   A sign will not be considered destroyed within the meaning of
this section under the following conditions:
            1.   The destruction of a sign caused by vandalism or other
criminal or tortuous act; and
            2.   The sign owner must demonstrate that the replacement materials
cost would not exceed 50% of the value of the structural materials in the sign,
immediately prior to destruction. The following shall be applicable in
determining whether the replacement materials cost to re-erect the sign would
not exceed 50% of the value of the structural materials in the sign:
               a.   Structural materials are all those materials incorporated
into the sign as load-bearing parts, including vertical supports, horizontal
stringers, braces, bracing wires, brackets and catwalks. Structural materials
do not include the sign face and skirt, any electrical service or electrical
lighting, except in cases where the items have been incorporated into the sign
as load-bearing parts;
               b.   The value of the structural materials in the sign
immediately prior to destruction shall be based on the cost of all structural
materials contained in the sign as it was configured just prior to damage and
the cost of materials shall be based on or about the date of destruction,
without regard to any labor costs or special market conditions; and
               c.   The materials to be included in the replacement materials
costs to re-erect the sign shall be all materials that would be used to return
the sign to its configuration immediately prior to destruction and shall
include any material obtained from a source other than the sign itself, that is
repaired on-site. The repairs to the sign shall be those reasonably necessary
to permanently repair the sign in accordance with the normal industry standard.
The cost of the materials shall be as described in division (B)(7)(b)2.b.
above.
      (8)   A nonconforming sign is abandoned or discontinued when the sign
face which remains devoid of a bona fide advertising or when there is no bona
fide advertising contract for 180 consecutive days or longer. Signs displaying
an “available for lease” or similar message, signs displaying advertising for a
product or service no longer available, and partially obliterated signs which
do not identify a particular product, service or facility shall be considered
void of advertising matter. A nonconforming sign which is abandoned or
discontinued shall lose its nonconforming status;
      (9)   Any repair and maintenance or re-erection of a nonconforming sign
pursuant to this section, without the required building or sign permit shall
constitute prima facie evidence that the damage or adverse conditions exceeded
the limits provided herein and result in the loss of nonconforming status; and
      (10)   Signs, which lose nonconforming status, are illegal, and are
subject to §§
31.33 through
31.38 and
31.99.
(Ord. 2007-01, passed 1-23-2007; Ord. 2016-02, passed 4-26-2016) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.004 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The Building Official or his or her authorized representative shall
act as the administrator of this chapter. The Building Official shall issue
permits and collect fees in accordance with this chapter.
   (B)   Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, refuses to comply
with, or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be punished as provided in §
10.99.
(Ord. 2007-01, passed 1-23-2007; Ord. 2016-02, passed 4-26-2016)
§ 153.005 PERMITS.
   (A)   Generally. Any person proposing to paint, erect, construct, enlarge,
move or make structural alterations to any sign within the town shall first
obtain a sign permit for each sign from the Building Official as required by
this chapter. These directives shall not be construed to require any permit for
a change of copy on a sign nor for the repainting, cleaning and other normal
maintenance or repair of a sign or structure for which a permit has previously
been issued, so long as the sign or sign structure is not modified in any way.
No new permit shall be required for signs which have permits and which conform
with the requirements of this chapter on the effective date of the ordinance
from which this chapter derives. A new permit shall be required for any sign
when the structural configuration or electrical components are altered or when
the sign is relocated. The Building Official shall issue sign permits in
accordance with the following procedures:
      (1)   A separate application and a separate permit shall be required for
each separate sign;
      (2)   Each application for a sign permit shall be accompanied by two
copies of a scaled drawing showing the proposed sign, including all dimensions
of the proposed sign and total sign surface area. In addition, the following
shall be provided:
         (a)   For detached signs, the elevation of the principal building or
structure and the location of the sign in relation to the property lines shall
be indicated; and
         (b)   For wall signs, the applicant shall submit the elevation of the
principal building or structure upon which the sign is to be placed with the
proposed sign and lettering of the sign superimposed thereon in correct ratio
to the scale of the drawing and with a notation thereon showing the type and
size of lettering to be used and the colors of the proposed sign.
      (3)   All plans for detached signs and projecting signs shall be prepared
and signed by a professional engineer registered and licensed in the state. All
signs shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements set for in the
Building Code;
      (4)   A drawing shall be submitted showing the location of the proposed
sign and all trees having a diameter of four inches or more at a height of four
and one-half feet above ground level in the general area of the proposed sign
location. For proposals associated with an approved site plan, the sign shall
not interfere with trees required to be planted as shown on the approved site
plan. For existing sites for which a sign application has been submitted, the
sign shall be located so that it does not interfere with existing trees on the
site. If, upon review by the Building Official, it is determined that no
alternative location can be achieved, the applicant may apply for a tree
removal permit provided, however, that trees cannot be removed in violation of
an approved site plan;
      (5)   The name and address of the owner or other person in control or
possession of the real property upon which the sign is to be located shall be
submitted. Written consent of the owner, his or her lessee or his or her agent
granting permission for the construction, operation, maintenance or display of
the sign shall be submitted;
      (6)   The name of the sign contractor shall be submitted;
      (7)   A separate electrical permit shall be required for any sign
containing electrical components to be connected to an electrical energy
source; and
      (8)   A survey prepared by a land surveyor registered and licensed in the
state shall be submitted when any determinations relative to an applicant
cannot be made without the use of the survey.
   (B)   Issuance. When an application for a sign permit complies with this
chapter and all other applicable town ordinances and regulations and when all
required fees have been remitted, the Building Official shall issue the
requested permit.
   (C)   Revocation. The Building Official is authorized and empowered to
revoke any permit issued by him or her for failure of the permittee to comply
with any of the sections of this chapter or for failure of the applicant to
construct, erect or maintain the permitted sign in strict conformance with the
plans and drawings submitted with the application. The Building Official may
also revoke a permit or approval, issued under this chapter, if there has been
any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the
application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. Any revocation
shall be in writing and shall show cause for the revocation notice.
   (D)   Electrical permit fee. For any sign containing electrical components
to be connected to an electrical energy source, the electrical permit fee shall
be provided for in this code.
   (E)   Unless otherwise exempted herein, any person proposing to paint,
erect, construct, or install any sign within the town shall first obtain a sign
permit for each sign from the Building Official as required by this chapter.
The permit fee for such signs shall be based on the number of signs, the
duration and the style of sign and shall be established by resolution of the
Town Council.
(Ord. 2007-01, passed 1-23-2007; Ord. 2016-02, passed 4-26-2016) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.006 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Signs for which permits have been issued shall be inspected during and
at completion of construction by the Building Official after installation and
at times as deemed necessary by the Building Official. It shall be the
responsibility of the permittee or his or her representative to notify the
Building Official at all stages of construction that require inspection and
approval. The requirements for the inspections shall be as follows:
      (1)   A footing inspection for all detached signs shall be required;
      (2)   A final structural inspection shall be required at completion of
the work on all types of signs; and
      (3)   A final electrical inspection shall be required for all signs
containing electrical components and wiring to be connected to an electrical
energy source.
   (B)   The Building Official is empowered to enter or inspect any building,
structure or premises in the town upon which or in connection with which a sign
is located for the purpose of inspection of the sign, its structural details
and electrical connections and to ensure compliance with this chapter.
   (C)   Each sign that requires a permit for installation may be inspected
annually by the Building Official to ascertain whether the sign is being
maintained in a safe condition and whether it is in need of maintenance or
removal.
(Ord. 2007-01, passed 1-23-2007; Ord. 2016-02, passed 4-26-2016) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.007 MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Signs shall be maintained in a safe manner free of plainly discolored,
uneven or peeling paint. All letters on any message on the sign shall be
clearly legible.
   (B)   All signs for which a permit is required, together with this supports,
braces, guys and anchors, shall be kept in repair and, unless of galvanized or
non-corroding metal, shall be thoroughly painted at least once every two years.
   (C)   When an inspection reveals repair or maintenance is needed, the owner
shall be notified in writing. The owner shall have ten days to make the repairs
or remove the sign. If this order is not complied with, the Building Official
may remove the sign and a lien may be filed against the property for any
expense incurred in the removal of the sign.
   (D)   Permits shall not be required for maintenance of existing signs,
including painting, repainting, cleaning or other normal maintenance and repair
not involving structural changes.
(Ord. 2007-01, passed 1-23-2007; Ord. 2016-02, passed 4-26-2016) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.008 SIGNS EXEMPTED FROM PERMITTING PROCEDURES.
   The following signs shall not require the issuance of permits, provided the
signs and operation conform with all other town building, structural and
electrical standards and regulations.
   (A)   Changing copy. Changing the advertising copy or message on an
existing, approved, painted or printed sign, changeable copy sign or a similar
approved sign when electrical, illuminated or non-illuminated painted message
which is specifically designed for the use of replaceable copy.
   (B)   Signs erected by governmental entities, for the purpose of promoting
the town or other government purpose. Governmental signs for control of traffic
and other regulatory purposes, street signs, danger signs, railroad crossing
signs, public utilities which indicate danger or an aid to safety. All signs
shall be erected by or on the order of a town official in the performance of
his or her public duty.
   (C)   Any sign provided for under §
153.009(A) and (B).
(Ord. 2007-01, passed 1-23-2007; Ord. 2016-02, passed 4-26-2016)
§ 153.009 AUTHORIZED SIGNS.
   (A)   The following signs are authorized under in every district:
      (1)   Government signs in every zoning district which include the signs
described and regulated in divisions (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4) and (A)(5) below.
      (2)   Traffic control devices on private or public property must be
erected and maintained to comply with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices adopted in this state and if not adopted by this state with the Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices adopted by the Federal Highway
Administration.
      (3)   Each property owner must mark their property using numerals that
identify the address of the property so that public safety departments can
easily identify the address from the public street. Where required under this
code or other law the identification must be on the curb and may be on the
principal building on the property. This size and location of the identifying
numerals and letters if any must be proportional to the size of the building
and the distance from the street to the building. In cases where the building
is not located within view of the public street, the identifier shall be
located on the mailbox or other suitable device such that it is visible from
the street.
      (4)   Where a federal, state or local law requires a property owner to
post a sign on the owner’s property to warn of a danger or to prohibit access
to the property either generally or specifically, the owner must comply with
the federal, state or local law to exercise that authority by posting a sign on
the property.
      (5)   A flag that has been adopted by the federal government, this state
or the local government may be displayed as provided under the law that adopts
or regulates its use.
      (6)   The signs described in divisions (A)(1) through (A)(4) above, are
an important component of measures necessary to protect the public safety and
serve the compelling governmental interest of protecting traffic safety,
serving the requirements of emergency response and protecting property rights
or the rights of persons on property. The flags described in division (A)(5) of
this section are permitted to serve a compelling governmental interest in
promoting the rule of law by establishing symbolic representations of the
governments who pass, protect and preserve those laws.
   (B)   Regulations involving temporary signs:
      (1)   One temporary sign per 0.25 acre of land may be located on the
owner’s property for a period of 30 days prior to any election involving any
referendum or political cause subject to election or candidates for a federal,
state or local office that represents the district in which the property is
located and any secondary primary or runoff election as to any such candidate
who is subject to such election. Such signs shall be removed within five days
following the election. Any person erecting any sign during this time period
shall be required to post with the Town Clerk a $100 deposit before posting any
such signs, which said sum shall be used to cover the cost of removal of said
signs by town employees in the event they are not removed within the time frame
set out above.
      (2)   One temporary sign may be located on the owner’s property when:
         (a)   That property is being offered for sale through a licensed real
estate agent;
         (b)   If not offered for sale through a real estate agent, when that
property is offered for sale through advertising in a local newspaper of
general circulation, the internet or similar electronic medium; and
         (c)   For a period of 15 days following the date on which a contract
of sale has been executed by a person purchasing the property.
      (3)   One temporary sign may be located on the owner’s property on a day
when the property owner is opening the property to the public; provided,
however, the owner may not use this type of sign in a Residential District on
more than two days in a year and the days must be consecutive and may not use
this type of sign in any non-residential district for more than 14 days in a
year and the days must be consecutive. For purposes of this division (B)(3) a
year is counted from the first day on which the sign is erected counting
backwards and from the last day on which the sign exists counting forward.
      (4)   During the 26 day period December 15 to January 10, a property
owner may place two temporary signs on the property.
      (5)   A property owner may place and maintain one temporary sign on the
property on July 4.
      (6)   A property owner may place a sign no larger than 8.5 inches by 11
inches in one window on the property at any time.
      (7)   A property owner may place one sign with a sign face no larger than
two square feet on the property at any time.
      (8)   A person exercising the right to place temporary signs on a
property as described in this division (B) must limit the number of signs on
the property per 0.25 acre at any one time to two plus a sign allowed in
division (B)(6) of this section.
      (9)   The sign face of any temporary sign, unless otherwise limited in
this division (B) must not be larger than four square feet.
(Ord. 2007-01, passed 1-23-2007; Ord. 2010-02, passed 1-26-2010; Ord. 2016-02,
passed 4-26-2016)
§ 153.010 PROHIBITED SIGNS AND EXCEPTIONS.
   The following signs and message devices shall be expressly prohibited in all
zoning districts, except as otherwise authorized by this chapter:
   (A)   Signs are prohibited in all districts unless:
      (1)   Constructed pursuant to a valid building permit when required under
this code; and
      (2)   Authorized under this code.
   (B)   The following signs are strictly prohibited:
      (1)   Spectacular or animated and intensely lighted signs. No sign shall
be permitted which is animated by means of flashing, scintillating, blinking or
traveling lights or any other means not providing constant illumination, with
the exception of public information message centers showing time and
temperature.
      (2)   Streamers, balloons and twirling signs. Streamers, balloons or
twirling signs shall not be permitted, except as may be otherwise authorized by
in this chapter.
      (3)   Rotating signs. No rotating signs and message devices having
rotating or spinning parts and no signs with moving copy shall be permitted.
      (4)   Signs in public areas. No sign shall be placed or permitted to be
placed on any curb, sidewalk, post, pole, hydrant, bridge, tree or any other
surface located on public property or right- of-way or over or across any
street or public thoroughfare, except as may otherwise be authorized by this
chapter. Signs shall be considered litter and removed by the town without
notice.
      (5)   Swinging signs. No sign shall be suspended by chains or other
devices that will allow the sign to swing.
      (6)   A-frame signs. A-frame or sandwich board signs shall be prohibited.
      (7)   Marquee signs. Marquee signs shall be prohibited in the town.
      (8)   Unclassified signs. The following signs having no distinct
classification shall be prohibited:
         (a)   Signs which bear or containing statements, words or pictures of
an obscene or pornographic character or which contain advertising matter which
is obviously untruthful;
         (b)   Signs painted or attached to any fence or wall which is not a
part of a building, except as may otherwise be authorized by this chapter;
         (c)   Signs which operate or employ any motion picture projection or
media in conjunction with any advertisements or have visible moving parts or
any portion which moves or which give the illusion of motion, except as may be
otherwise authorized by this chapter;
         (d)   Signs which emit audible sound, odor or visible matter; and/or
         (e)   Signs which purport to be or are an imitation or resemble
official traffic signs or signals or which bear the term “stop,” “go slow,”
“caution,” “danger,” “warning” or similar term or which because of their size,
location, movement, content, coloring or manner of illumination may be confused
with or construed as traffic control signs, signals or devices or the light of
an emergency or road equipment vehicle or which hide from view any traffic or
street sign, signal or device.
      (9)   Pennants, banners and the like. Pennants, banners and the like
shall be limited to no more than two permanent displays per property frontage
and must be separated by a minimum of 50 feet. Additional commercial pennants,
banners and the like can be permitted on a temporary basis as long as all
displays are separated by a minimum of 50 feet. The total area of permanent
signs shall not exceed 18 square feet. The total square feet of each temporary
display shall not exceed 18 square feet. The cumulative total of the display
areas shall not exceed 100 square feet per property. Pennants, banners and the
like shall not be attached to any building. Fourteen days per permit, maximum
six permits per year.
      (10)   Roof signs. No roof signs shall be permitted.
      (11)   Off-site signs. Except as may be otherwise authorized by this
chapter, off-site signs are prohibited.
      (12)   Billboards. Except as may be otherwise authorized by this chapter,
billboards are prohibited.
      (13)   Flags. Flags used to attract the attention of the public shall be
prohibited, except those adopted as an official symbol of government.
         (a)   A maximum of three flagpoles shall be permitted per each minimum
parcel of land on a public street displaying no more than one government
approved flag each.
         (b)   Flag size shall be in relation to the height of the flagpole.
The maximum height of any flag or combination of flags shall be 25% of the
total height of the flagpole.
         (c)   The maximum height of a flagpole shall be 32 feet.
         (d)   Flagpoles shall maintain a 15-foot setback from all property
lines and a 25-foot setback from any intersection.
(Ord. 2007-01, passed 1-23-2007; Ord. 2016-02, passed 4-26-2016) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.011 REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Residential Districts.
      (1)   Size.
         (a)   When a sign is authorized on a property, the sign must not
exceed four square feet in area. Where attached dwellings exist on a property
the total square footage of the sign must not exceed two square feet per
dwelling unit and must not exceed a total of 12 square feet in area per
structure.
         (b)   For platted residential developments the maximum size and number
of signs that the owner or owners of the residential development may erect and
maintain at the entrances to the development shall be controlled according to
the following:
            1.   Platted residential developments four acres or less in area
may have a sign or signs with a total area of no more than 32 square feet
located at the entrances to such developments. Such signs must have either been
installed by the developer of the subdivision or later installed by the
community association which governs the association.
            2.   Platted residential developments over four acres but less than
40 acres in area may have a sign or signs which have a total area of no more
than 48 square feet located at the entrances to such developments. Such signs
must have either been installed by the developer of the subdivision or later
installed by the community association which governs the association.
            3.   Platted residential developments of 40 acres or more in area
may have a sign or signs with a total area of no more than 102 square feet
located at the entrances to such developments.
Such signs must have either been installed by the developer of the subdivision
or later installed by the community association which governs the association.
      (2)   Location. Permitted signs in division (A)(1) above may be anywhere
on the premises, except signs in divisions (A)(1)(b)1. and 3. in a required
side yard or within ten feet of a street right-of-way.
      (3)   Height. The following maximum heights shall apply to signs
permitted in division (A)(1) above:
         (a)   If ground-mounted, the top shall not be over four feet above the
ground; and
         (b)   If building mounted, shall be flush mounted and shall not
project above the roof line.
      (4)   Illumination. Illumination if used shall not be blinking,
fluctuating or moving. Light rays shall shine only upon the sign and upon the
property within the premises.
   (B)   Commercial, professional and institutional districts. Each business
establishment shall be permitted to use any of the following described signs
with the limitations stated herein:
      (1)   A ground or projecting sign on each street frontage. The size of
said sign shall be as follows: 32 square feet for the first 25 linear feet of
street frontage, increased one square foot per one foot of linear street
frontage to a maximum of 100 square feet; maximum height of 25 feet; maximum
width of 25 feet. Where two ground or projecting signs are used on a corner lot
the area of both signs shall not exceed the total area allowed for the total
frontage.
      (2)   A wall sign on each end of the building perpendicular to the road
or street, 32 square feet per 50 linear feet of building perpendicular to the
road or street increased one square foot per one foot of linear street frontage
to 96 square feet.
      (3)   A wall sign parallel to the road or street, 32 square feet per 50
feet of frontage increased one square foot per one foot of linear street
frontage to 96 square feet.
      (4)   A marquee sign parallel to the road or street, not exceeding 32
square feet per 50 feet of frontage increased one square foot per one foot of
linear street frontage to a maximum of 96 square feet.
      (5)   A free standing sign perpendicular to the road or street not
exceeding 32 square feet per 50 feet of frontage, a maximum of 96 square feet.
      (6)   Businesses located on dead end streets may erect one directional
sign no larger than 16 square feet at the closest street intersection with
specific approval of the Town Council.
      (7)   In addition to the other types of signs permitted in this section a
business establishment may erect one additional non-permanent ground sign, not
exceeding four square feet. Such sign may be double sided and shall have the
sign face made of wood, metal or plastic. The post material for the sign shall
be made of either steel or pressure treated wood. The top of the sign when
installed into the ground shall not exceed ( ) feet above the ground upon which
it is placed. An application form, provided by the town along with a permit fee
established by resolution of the Town Council and consent of the owner of the
property shall be submitted to the Building Department for review. If the owner
does not give their consent no such sign shall be permitted. Any similar signs,
including any banner signs, which have been installed or placed on property
without a permit shall be removed by the owner of said sign or the proprietor
of the business for which such sign relates to within ten days of written
notification of the town and such notice shall inform the owner of such sign of
the provisions of this division.
(Ord. 2007-01, passed 1-23-2007; Ord. 2010-02, passed 1-26-2010; Ord. 2012-03,
passed 4-24-2012; Ord. 2016-02, passed 4-26-2016) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.012 ABANDONED AND HAZARDOUS SIGNS.
   (A)   Abandoned signs. It shall be unlawful for any permittee or owner of a
sign to fail or refuse to remove any sign or copy, after ten days of the
service of written notice from the Building Official to do so, which advertises
a business or product which has not been conducted or sold at the premises
where the sign is located for more than 90 consecutive days prior to the date
of the notice from the Building Official. Sign cabinets shall be secured so as
to protect the integrity of the structure. Sign structures shall be removed
after service of the notice. If the order to remove is not complied with, the
Building Official may remove the sign, and a lien may be filed against the
property for the expense incurred in removal of the sign.
   (B)   Hazardous signs. The Building Official shall refuse to issue a permit
for any sign which will constitute a hazard and a potential menace to the
safety of the public and may require the removal of any sign which is not
properly maintained or which otherwise shows signs of neglect or which is or
will become unsafe and constitute a hazard to the safety of the public. It
shall be unlawful for any permittee or owner to continue to display any sign
that constitutes a hazard after 48 hours from the time of notice by the
Building Official requesting the removal of the sign, unless within that time
the permittee or owner shall have filed with the Building Official notice of
his or her intention to appeal his or her decision to the Board of Adjustment
with payment of all applicable fees. Any sign displayed more than 48 hours
after notice to remove the sign may be removed by the town at the expense of
the permittee or owner unless the matter is pending on appeal to the Board of
Adjustment or unless the decision of the Building Official has been reversed by
the Board of Adjustment.
(Ord. 2007-01, passed 1-23-2007; Ord. 2016-02, passed 4-26-2016) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.013 (RESERVED)
§ 153.014 OFF-SITE SIGNS.
   (A)   Prohibited unless directional. No off-site signs shall be allowed
within the confines of the town except directional signs.
   (B)   Regulation of directional and public signs. Off-site directional signs
and public signs shall be erected only by the town and will conform to the
following:
      (1)   Off-site directional signs and public information signs shall only
be erected on town rights-of-way or town easements.
      (2)   Public necessity and convenience will be the standard used to
determine what directional signs and public information signs will be erected.
Such determination will be made by the Mayor.
   (C)   Real estate signs not considered off-site. A real estate sign, placed
or erected on property which the sign owner has a valid contract to sell, rent
or lease, shall not be considered an off- site sign.
(Ord. 2007-01, passed 1-23-2007; Ord. 2016-02, passed 4-26-2016) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.015 RESTRICTION ON PARKING OF VEHICLES AND TRAILERS WITH PAINTED OR
MOUNTED SIGNS.
   (A)   No motor vehicle or trailer having a sign painted or mounted thereon
shall be parked on the premises of the business or enterprise or in the parking
lot of any shopping center in which the business or enterprise maintains a
place of business unless:
      (1)   The motor vehicle or trailer is parking a lawful parking location
to the rear of a building located on the premises in a manner so that the motor
vehicle or trailer is not visible from any public street abutting the front of
the premises or shopping center; or
      (2)   If there are no lawful parking locations as described in division
(A)(1) of this section, the motor vehicle or trailer shall be parked at least
100 feet from any public right-of-way abutting the premises or shopping center
or in the lawful parking location on the premises or within the shopping center
which is farthest from an abutting right-of-way, whichever parking location is
farther from the public right-of-way.
   (B)   Any person violating division (A) of this section shall be subject to
all of the penalties and proceedings described in §
153.999. In addition, any vehicle found in violation of division (A) of this
section shall be subject to impoundment.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall apply to a sign painted or mounted upon
a motor vehicle or trailer when the sign has a total area of six square feet or
less.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall apply to a sign painted on a vehicle
either rented or available for rent in the ordinary course of business if:
      (1)   The business premises on which the vehicle is located is operated
by a business holding an occupational license issued by the town for automobile
or other vehicle rentals; and
      (2)   The sign painted on the vehicle primarily consists of the name and/
or business logo or trademark of the vehicle rental business.
   (E)   Nothing in this section shall be intended to prohibit any form of
vehicular sign permanently attached to a business or lettered on a motor
vehicle.
(Ord. 2007-01, passed 1-23-2007; Ord. 2016-02, passed 4-26-2016) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.016 SUBSTITUTION OF NONCOMMERCIAL SPEECH FOR COMMERCIAL SPEECH.
   Notwithstanding anything contained in this chapter or code to the contrary,
any sign erected pursuant to the provisions of the chapter or code or otherwise
lawfully existing with a commercial message may, at the option of the owner,
contain a noncommercial message in lieu of a commercial message. The
noncommercial message may occupy the entire sign face or any portion thereof.
The sign face may be changed from commercial to noncommercial messages, or from
one noncommercial message to another, as frequently as desired by the owner of
the sign, provided the sign is not a prohibited sign or sign-type and provided
that the size, height, setback and other dimensional criteria contained in this
chapter and code have been satisfied.
(Ord. 2005-04, passed 7-26-2005; Ord. 2016-02, passed 4-26-2016)
§ 153.017 SEVERABILITY.
   (A)   Generally. If any part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph,
sentence, phrase, clause, term or word of this chapter is declared
unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent
jurisdiction, the declaration of the unconstitutionally shall not affect any
other part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase,
clause, term or word of this chapter.
   (B)   Severability where less speech results. Without diminishing or
limiting in any way the declaration of severability set forth above in division
(A), or elsewhere in this chapter, this code, or any adopting ordinance, if any
part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause,
term or word of this chapter is declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment
or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration of
unconstitutionality shall not affect any other part, section, subsection,
paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term or word of this
chapter, even if severability would result in a situation where there would be
less speech, whether by subjecting previously exempt signs to permitting or
otherwise.
   (C)   Severability of provisions pertaining to prohibited signs. Without
diminishing or limiting in any way the declaration of severability set forth
above in division (A), or elsewhere in this chapter, this code, or any adopting
ordinance, if any part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence,
phrase, clause, term or word of this chapter or any other law is declared
unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent
jurisdiction, the declaration of unconstitutionality shall not affect any other
part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause,
term or word of this chapter that pertains to prohibited signs, including
specifically those signs and sign-types prohibited and not allowed under §
153.010. Furthermore, if any part, section, subsection, paragraph,
subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term or word of §
153.010 is declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any
court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration of the unconstitutionality
shall not affect any other part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph,
sentence, phrase, clause, term or word of §
153.010, thereby ensuring that as many prohibited signs-types as may be
constitutionally prohibited continue to be prohibited.
   (D)   Severability of prohibition on billboards. If any part, section,
subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term or word of
this chapter and/or any other code provisions and/or laws are declared invalid
or unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent
jurisdiction, the declaration of the unconstitutionality shall not affect the
prohibition on billboards as contained in this chapter or code.
(Ord. 2005-03, passed 7-26-2005; Ord. 2016-02, passed 4-26-2016)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 153.030 (RESERVED)
§ 153.031 COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER.
   (A)   All signs erected, placed or designed in a manner contrary to the
provisions of this chapter, including signs permitted under a special exception
or variance, prior to August 9, 1983, shall be deemed nonconforming signs; and
nonconforming signs shall be removed or altered so as to comply with this
chapter, including the utilization of all procedural steps, within three years
of August 9, 1983.
   (B)   Any sign advertising a nonexistent or defunct business or activity or
a business or activity for which a required occupational license has not been
procured shall be removed by the owner of the property on which the sign stands
within 30 days of notice to do so by the Town Building Official.
   (C)   Any nonconforming sign that requires repair, replacement or re-
erection for any reason, and the cost exceeds 50% of the original value, shall
be re-erected; or signs may be modified to advertise different businesses or
services from those which they advertised on August 9, 1983.
(2000 Code, § 54-61) (Ord. 83-3, passed 8-9-1983; Ord. 2016-02, passed 4-26-
2016)
VARIANCES/WAIVER
§ 153.045 APPLICATIONS.
   A variance from the terms of this chapter as to height, area, location,
duration or number of signs may be granted by the Town Council when not
contrary to public interest and where owing to conditions peculiar to the
property, lot of record or structure where the sign will be located and not the
result of the actions of the applicant, prior to filing of the variance
application, a literal enforcement of the ordinance would result in unnecessary
and undue hardship. Additionally, a waiver from the terms of this chapter as to
height, area, location, duration or number of signs may be granted by the Town
Council if it is determined by legal counsel for the town that the current
applicable regulation violates the First Amendment to the United States
Constitution. Such a waiver request shall be made directly to the Town Council
and upon receipt of such a request the matter shall be placed on the next
available Town Council agenda. In the event that the matter can not be placed
on the next available agenda for any reason, the Town Mayor in consultation
with the Town Attorney may grant the requested waiver or some variation of it.
(2000 Code, § 54-81) (Ord. 83-3, passed 8-9-1983; Ord. 2016-02, passed 4-26-
2016)
§ 153.046 GRANTING OF VARIANCE CONDITIONS.
   In granting any variance, the Town Council may prescribe appropriate
conditions as will serve the intent of this chapter and consistent with
constitutional law. Violation of the conditions, when made part of the terms
under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this
chapter.
(2000 Code, § 54-42) (Ord. 83-3, passed 8-9-1983; Ord. 2016-02, passed 4-26-
2016)
§ 153.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any section of this chapter relating to signs
shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in §
31.99.
   (B)   Any day any violation of any provision, subsection or section of this
chapter shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
   (C)   In addition to the provisions for penalties provided in §
31.99, any violation of this chapter shall be subject to the enforcement of the
special master established pursuant to §§
31.30 through
31.38 according to the procedure legally established for the special master,
and subject to the penalties provided in §
31.99.
(Ord. 2007-01, passed 1-23-2007; Ord. 2016-02, passed 4-26-2016)
CHAPTER 154: VEGETATION
Section
Tree Protection
   
154.001   Purpose and intent
   
154.002   Definitions
   
154.003   Jurisdiction
   
154.004   Appeals from decisions of the enforcement official, agencies
   
154.005   Grandfather provisions
   
154.006   Alternative, mitigation or betterment plan
Permits
   
154.020   Required, exemptions
   
154.021   Land clearing limitations and guidelines
   
154.022   Land clearing permit application procedures
   
154.023   Exhibits
   
154.024   Performance bond; surety
Regulations
   
154.040   Undesirable species
   
154.041   Alternative, mitigation or betterment plan
   
154.042   Exceptions
   
154.043   Tree variances
Landscaping
   
154.055   Purpose
   
154.056   Landscaping of off-street parking and other vehicular use areas
   
154.057   Landscaping adjacent to public rights-of-way, including streets and
walks
   
154.058   Perimeter landscaping adjacent to abutting commercial, industrial and
institutional properties
   
154.059   Landscaping the interior of off-street parking and vehicular use
areas
   
154.060   Sight distance for landscaping adjacent to public rights-of-way and
points of access
   
154.061   Existing plant material
   
154.062   Perimeter landscaping for multi-family housing
   
154.063   Planting within public rights-of-way
   
154.064   Parking area design criteria
   
154.065   Performance
   
154.066   Required minimum landscaping for single family housing
 
   
154.999   Penalty
TREE PROTECTION
§ 154.001 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to provide protective regulations for
trees and landscaping in the town.
   (B)   It is the intent of this chapter to promote the community appearance
and assist in the natural control of solar heat, soil conservation, flooding,
air pollution and noise. In addition, trees offer a haven for community
wildlife and provide citizens with psychological relief from the increasing
complexities of a man-made urban environment. Further, it is the intent of this
section to enhance the community and its citizenry and not be punitive or to
cause a hardship to any individual, private or public company who uses
reasonable care and diligence to protect trees and indigenous plant material
within the town.
   (C)   Trees, indigenous and nonindigenous plant material, as regulated and
protected in this chapter are declared to be a natural public resource; and the
town encourages planting, replacement and protection of trees and indigenous
plant material in the interest of the health, safety and welfare of present and
future citizens of the town. Also, certain trees, designated as specimen or
historic trees by the Town Council or its designee shall be protected because
of their ecological value, indigenous and nonindigenous character, size, age or
historic association. Trees and plant material so designated shall be protected
without regard to their location within the jurisdiction of the town. To attain
that end, it shall be unlawful to cut down, damage, poison or in any other
manner destroy or cause to be destroyed any tree or plant material as covered
by the terms of this section except in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
(2000 Code, § 62-31) (Ord. 86-04, passed 4-22-1986)
§ 154.002 DEFINITIONS.
   In addition to the definitions of
Chapter 157 of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. In the event that
any term used herein is not defined then the definition of such terms as used
in the latest version of the Dictionary of Architecture and Construction, by
Cyril M. Harris, McGraw-Hill Publishing shall be used.
   BONA FIDE AGRICULTURAL PURPOSES. Good-faith commercial or domestic
agricultural use of the land. In determining whether the proposed agricultural
use of land is bona fide, the following factors, though nonexclusive, shall be
taken into consideration:
      (1)   The issuance by the county of an agricultural tax exemption for the
particular real property;
      (2)   Prospective plans for utilization of the property; and
      (3)   Whether the property has qualified as a bona fide agricultural
purpose within the meaning of state law.
   CANOPY. The horizontal spread of tree and palm foliage.
   CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. The certificate issued by the Building Official
upon completion of a building in accordance with the ordinances of the town,
the Standard Building Code and all other applicable regulations.
   CERTIFICATION OF COMPLETION. The certificate issued by the enforcement
official upon completion of all requirements of this chapter.
   CERTIFIED LAND CLEARING PLAN. A plan having a written statement regarding
its accuracy or conformity to specified standards, signed and sealed by a
registered architect, surveyor, landscape architect or engineer.
   CLEARING. Includes, but is not limited to, the removal of trees, shrubbery,
brush or ground cover, excluding lawn grasses, from any part of the land, but
shall not include maintenance mowing.
   DEVELOPED. The point in time when the building and site have received all
required final inspection approvals.
   DEVELOPMENT. Means and refers to any proposed material change in the use or
character of land, including but not limited to the placement of any structure
or site improvement on the land. When appropriate to the context, DEVELOPMENT
may refer to the act of issuing any building permit.
   DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (DBH). The diameter of tree and palm material at
three feet six inches above existing grade.
   DRIPLINE. A vertical line running from the outermost horizontal
circumference of the tree branches extending to the ground.
   ENCROACHMENT. Any protrusion of a vehicle outside a parking space, display
area or accessway into a landscaped area.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL. The individual or entity designated by resolution of
the Town Council as the enforcing administrative officer of this chapter.
   EXCAVATION. The removal of any soil from a site so as to disturb an area
equal to one acre foot.
   GROUND COVERS. Vegetation, such as grass or vines or other materials, such
as mulch, capable of covering the ground and preventing erosion.
   GROWING SEASON. The productive period for plant development, generally from
March through October of any year.
   IMPROVEMENTS. Buildings, street pavements, fences, curbs and gutters,
driveways, sidewalks, alley pavements, walkway pavements, water mains, sanitary
sewers, sewerage systems or drainfields, stormwater drains, signs, permanent
structures.
   LANDSCAPING. Any material such as, but not limited to, grass, ground covers,
shrubs, vines, hedges, trees or palms and nonliving durable material commonly
used in landscaping, such as, but not limited to, rocks, pebbles, sand, walls
or fences, but excluding paving.
   MANGROVES. Any specimen of the species Rhizophora mangle (Red Mangroves),
Laguncularia racemosa (White Mangroves) or Avicennia nitida (Black Mangroves).
   MEUMATOPHORES. Roots that pull oxygen out of the air to feed the plants.
   PALM. A fibrous perennial plant with an upright trunk or trunks having a
terminal crown of large leaves, which normally grows or is capable of growing
to an overall height of a minimum of 15 feet in the central coastal region of
the state.
   PARKING AREA. Any vehicular use area in which five or more parking spaces
are required.
   REMOVAL. Includes remove, removing or actual displacement or effective
displacement through damaging.
   ROOT SYSTEMS. A system functioning in two ways. LARGE ROOTS serve in
anchoring plants while the HAIR ROOTS feed the plants.
   SITE. The parcel of land for which a tree removal permit is sought.
   TREE. A woody perennial plant with an upright trunk, which normally grows,
or is capable of growing, to an overall height of a minimum of 15 feet in the
central coastal area of the state, and having a trunk diameter of not less than
four inches as measured three feet above actual grade.
   SHRUBS AND HEDGES. A self-supporting nondeciduous species of plants as
capable of growing in the town.
   VIABLE. A tree or plant material alive six months after it is planted.
   VINES. Plants that normally require support to reach mature form.
   YARD AREA. An open space on the same lot with a building, being unoccupied
and unobstructed from the ground upward, with the exception of trees and other
plant material.
(2000 Code, § 62-32) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975; Ord. 86-04, passed 4-22-
1986; Ord. 2000-03, passed 5-23-2000; Ord. 2014-04, passed 3-25-2014)
§ 154.003 JURISDICTION.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all real property situated in
the corporate limits of the town. In addition, upon petition for annexation,
any party annexed will comply with the provisions of this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 62-33) (Ord. 86-04, passed 4-22-1986)
§ 154.004 APPEALS FROM DECISIONS OF THE ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL, AGENCIES.
   Any person aggrieved by any decision of any designated public agency in the
enforcement of any terms or provisions of this chapter may appeal within 15
days after the date of the decision complained of, on a form prescribed by the
town, a written notice of appeal with the Town Clerk, which shall set forth
concisely the decision appealed from and the reason or grounds for the appeal.
Each appeal shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount on file in the Town
Clerk’s office to cover the cost of the appeal proceedings. The Town Council
may affirm, reverse or modify the decision from which appealed. The word
DECISION as used in this section shall not include the filing of any action by
the designated public agency in any court.
(2000 Code, § 62-34) (Ord. 86-04, passed 4-22-1986)
§ 154.005 GRANDFATHER PROVISIONS.
   This chapter shall not apply to developments for which building permits have
been issued prior to the effective date of this chapter. This chapter shall not
apply to developments for which applications for building permits are properly
submitted and filed with the appropriate municipal departments, and that
conform to all applicable requirements in effect prior to the effective date of
this chapter, or to developments that have received tree removal authorization
from any designated public agency, department or board prior to the effective
date of this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 62-35) (Ord. 86-04, passed 4-22-1986)
§ 154.006 ALTERNATIVE, MITIGATION OR BETTERMENT PLAN.
   (A)   The terms and conditions for landscaping under this chapter may be
modified by the Town Council after consideration of the recommendations of the
enforcement official where an applicant has submitted to the enforcement
official an alternative landscaping plan that evidences that an improvement or
betterment of the environment may be accomplished or existing site conditions
through implementation of an alternative landscaping plan.
   (B)   An alternative plan must meet or exceed the standards and fulfill the
expressed intent of this chapter.
   (C)   Approval of any alternative landscaping plan by the enforcement
official shall not exempt the applicant from all other provisions of this
chapter.
   (D)   In all cases where this section is employed to provide mitigation for
the removal of vegetation as required in this section, the following standards
must be met or exceeded:
      (1)   All replacement vegetation must be native plant material;
      (2)   No replacement vegetation pursuant to this section may be applied
toward the requirement of previous sections;
      (3)   For each square foot of understory removed, one square foot of
vegetable landscaping must be placed on-site (excluding lawn grasses);
      (4)   Two palms or trees must replace each palm tree, or each 2,000
square feet or a percentage of one inch to four inches dbh cluster removed from
the site, or a fee may be paid for each tree or palm required in this division.
Where replacement trees or palms are not preferred by the applicant, the
enforcement official may consider other mitigating measures that achieve the
intent of this division and this chapter.
      (5)   Each replacement tree or palm must be in accordance with the
previous provisions of this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 62-36) (Ord. 86-04, passed 4-22-1986) Penalty, see §
154.999
PERMITS
§ 154.020 REQUIRED, EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to real property within
the incorporated area of the town.
   (B)   A land clearing permit shall be required for the removal of any tree,
palm or understory except as exempted in this section. Land clearing permits
shall be required prior to any land clearing activity.
   (C)   The provisions of this division shall not apply to real property for
which an application for a subdivision plat or site development plat, final
development plan or binding site plan has been properly submitted to the town
and in which all applicable fees have been paid to the appropriate department
or agency, prior to the effective date of this chapter.
   (D)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to real property for
which a building permit has been issued by the town prior to the effective date
of this chapter.
   (E)   Land clearing permits shall furthermore not be required under the
following circumstances:
      (1)   The removal of any tree that endangers public health or safety;
      (2)   The removal of any of the following species:
         (a)   Melaleuca quinquenervia (Cajaput or Paperback);
         (b)   Melaleuca leucadendra (Punk);
         (c)   Casuarina glauca (Brazilian Oak, Scaly Bark Beefwood);
         (d)   Casuarina equisetifolia (Australian Pine);
         (e)   Schinus terebinthifolius (Brazilian Pepper);
         (f)   Bischofia javanica (Bishopwood, Bischofia);
         (g)   Ricinus cummunis (Casterbean);
         (h)   Enterolobiom cyclocarpum (Ear Tree);
         (i)   Jacaranda acutifolia (Jacaranda Tree);
         (j)   Melia azedarach (Chinaberry Tree); and
         (k)   Metopium toxiferum (Poison Wood).
      (3)   The removal of any tree, palm or required understory on a single-
family lot or single-family parcel of two acres or less in size unless the
removal is in conjunction with additional improvements that require a building
permit for their replacement, alteration, addition or expansion;
      (4)   Clearing of any survey trails, surveying of transect lines or
property lines not to exceed three feet in width may be allowed, providing that
the total clearing for these purposes affects less than 5% of the lot or
parcel. Vegetation removed shall not include trees greater than six inches dbh,
or vegetation listed in this section except as provided in this section. Upon
written notification of the enforcement official, vegetation listed in this
section may be pruned by hand for surveying purposes to allow a clear line of
sight;
      (5)   Land utilized for a bona fide agricultural purpose; and
      (6)   Any development with respect to single-family dwellings.
   (F)   Land clearing permits in conjunction with subdivision development and
PUD applications shall be required; however, provisions of this section
regarding canopy and understory shall not apply. If there is a package plant
approved for use with respect to either subdivision development or PUD, the
effluent must be treated with a tertiary method and meet the DER standards for
water quality and must be used for irrigation of the project.
   (G)   Land clearing permits shall be required for those lots or parcels that
require a complete tree, palm or understory removal in order to meet the
development requirements of any governmental agency. However, prior to any
improvements in conjunction with an active development order, a replanting plan
pursuant to this division must be submitted to and approved by the Town Council
after consideration of recommendations of the enforcement official.
(2000 Code, § 62-61) (Ord. 86-04, passed 4-22-1986) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.021 LAND CLEARING LIMITATIONS AND GUIDELINES.
   (A)   The vegetation of any site may be altered by the following.
      (1)   Easements. Those areas dedicated as public/private easements are
not considered in the determination of vegetation coverage.
      (2)   Canopy. Up to 85% of any site may be canopy free.
         (a)   If tree/palm removal is required to increase the canopy-free
area to more than 40% of a site, the tree removal shall be subject to the
provisions of this section.
         (b)   The canopy of any site shall not be reduced so as to provide
less than 15% canopy coverage of a site. In those cases where alteration of the
canopy must occur, further provisions of this section may be employed to meet
the intent of this section and this chapter.
      (3)   Understory. At least 15% of all existing understory as determined
by area shall be undisturbed both hydrologically and physically. The areas to
be preserved need not be contiguous but are encouraged to be. However, other
provisions of this section may be employed to meet the intent of this section
and this chapter.
   (B)   During land clearing and site development, adequate precautions shall
be taken to protect vegetation to be preserved on the site from direct
mechanical damage or indirect damage such as soil compaction.
   (C)   The land clearing permit must be prominently displayed at the site for
which the permit was granted prior to the commencement of any land clearing
activities.
(2000 Code, § 62-62) (Ord. 86-04, passed 4-22-1986) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.022 LAND CLEARING PERMIT APPLICATION PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Permits for the clearing of land shall be obtained by submitting an
application, including all required exhibits.
   (B)   A land clearing application shall be submitted in conjunction with a
subdivision development application to the Town Clerk, who will forward it to
the Planning and Zoning Board simultaneously for approval by the enforcement
official. The permit application shall be approved at the same time as final
plat approval is given.
   (C)   For development requiring site plan, binding site plan or final
development plan approval, a land clearing application shall be submitted to
the enforcement official simultaneously with the site development plan, binding
site plan or final development plan application. Approval of the land clearing
application shall be included in the site development plan, binding site plan
or final development plan approval action to such. The permit applications
shall be approved at the same time as final approval is given to each plan.
   (D)   A land clearing permit in conjunction with a building permit
application shall be submitted to the Building Official. The permit application
shall be approved at the same time as the building permit.
   (E)   Land clearing proposals unrelated to other provisions of this division
shall be submitted to the enforcement official. Prior to commencing any land
clearing, a permit for land clearing must be issued. Other proposals may
include but are not limited to the removal of a single tree, mining,
development of private lakes and bona fide agriculture pursuits. Upon receipt
of an application, the enforcement official shall review the application and
shall take all steps to assure a decision on the application within 30 days.
   (F)   The application for land clearing permit, and the land clearing
permit, shall be on forms as provided by the town.
   (G)   One permit may be issued for an entire site, a single tree or group of
trees; however, no permit may be issued for more than one parcel or area of
land unless the parcels or areas of land are contiguous. The permit shall
reference, and include as part of the permit, the land clearing plan as
approved. For the purposes of this division where a lot or parcel of land is
under common ownership or interest and is divided by public or private rights-
of-way or easements, the lot or parcel shall be considered contiguous.
   (H)   All applications shall be accompanied by a fee as established from
time to time by resolution of the Town Council. The fees shall reflect the cost
of providing the town’s services rendered as a result of this chapter.
   (I)   The following types of trees shall be exempt from the provisions of
this section and this division; and no permit or fees shall be required for the
removal, cutting down or destruction of these trees:
      (1)   Melaleuca quinquenervia (Cajaput or Paperback);
      (2)   Melaleuca leucadendra (Punk);
      (3)   Casuarina glauca (Brazilian Oak, Scaly Bark Beefwood);
      (4)   Casuarina equisetifolia (Australian Pine);
      (5)   Schinus terebinthifolius (Brazilian Pepper);
      (6)   Bischofia javanica (Bishopwood, Bischofia);
      (7)   Ricinus cummunis (Casterbean);
      (8)   Enterolobiom cyclocarpum (Ear Tree);
      (9)   Jacaranda acutifolia (Jacaranda Tree);
      (10)   Melia azedarach (Chinaberry Tree); and
      (11)   Metopium toxiferum (Poison Wood).
   (J)   Before any development commences with respect to any property not
exempt under the provisions of this section, the owner or applicant shall give
the town one weeks’ notice in order to permit local chapters of the Nature
Plant Society, county officials or other groups designated by the town an
opportunity to inspect the property and remove plants, trees and other
vegetation considered to be endangered.
(2000 Code, § 62-63) (Ord. 86-04, passed 4-22-1986) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.023 EXHIBITS.
   (A)   A land clearing permit application must include exhibits showing
permits and applications for tree removal in conjunction with proposed
residential construction, subdivision residential development, multi-family
development and construction, commercial development and construction, and
industrial development and construction.
   (B)   Any person proposing any development or construction, other than a
single-family residence, shall submit as an attachment to the required site
plan or building permit 15 copies of a legible reproducible plan, drawn to
scale and indicating the following information for the entire site:
      (1)   Location, shape and spatial arrangements of all existing and
proposed buildings, walls, improvements and structures;
      (2)   Identification of uses on adjacent properties;
      (3)   Location, shape and spatial arrangement of all parking areas and
access roads;
      (4)   Existing and proposed utility services;
      (5)   Existing and proposed elevations;
      (6)   Setbacks, yard requirements and easements;
      (7)   Existing and proposed wells;
      (8)   All sinkholes, rock outcroppings and historical sites; and
      (9)   A certified tree survey overlaid directly upon the site plan, and
indicating the location, referenced to structure, of all trees. The survey
shall distinguish existing trees that are proposed to be destroyed, relocated,
replaced, preserved at their present location or introduced into the
development from an off-site source. All trees shall be identified by variety,
trunk diameter and height. Groups of trees less than three feet apart may be
designated as clumps, but any tree with a trunk diameter of eight or more
inches must be specifically designated. For sites on which development or tree
removal activity is to occur on less than the entirety of the site, the
enforcement official may provide that the tree survey exclude those portions of
the site it determines will not be affected by the development activity.
   (C)   Any development or construction except a single-family residence that
does not require site plan approval shall submit, as an attachment to the
construction permit application, the following listed information:
      (1)   Location, shape and spatial arrangements of all existing and
proposed buildings, walls, improvements and structures;
      (2)   Identification of uses on adjacent properties;
      (3)   Location, shape and spatial arrangement of all parking areas and
access roads;
      (4)   Existing and proposed utility services;
      (5)   Existing and proposed elevations;
      (6)   Setbacks, yard requirements and easements;
      (7)   Existing and proposed wells;
      (8)   All sinkholes, rock outcroppings and historical sites; and
      (9)   A certified tree survey overlaid directly upon the site plan, and
indicating the location, referenced to structure, of all trees. The survey
shall distinguish existing trees proposed to be destroyed, relocated, replaced,
preserved at their present location or introduced into the development from an
off-site source. All trees shall be identified by variety, trunk diameter and
height. Groups of trees less than three feet apart may be designated as clumps,
but any tree with a trunk diameter of eight or more inches must be specifically
designated. For sites on which development or tree removal activity is to occur
on less than the entirety of the site, the enforcement official may provide
that the tree survey exclude those portions of the site it determines will not
be affected by the development activity.
   (D)   Any owner/builder, construction or development of a single-family
residence shall submit, as an attachment to the construction permit
application, a sketch or rendering, drawn to scale, indicating the types of
trees and their location in relation to the proposed structure and plans for
removal.
   (E)   Where the enforcement official or reviewing agency has verified that
no tree removal activity is involved in a proposed development or construction
activity, the attachments prescribed in this section shall not be required.
   (F)   Prior to the issuance of a building permit or certificate of
occupancy, the Building Official shall certify that the final construction or
construction layout is in substantial conformance with the original application
and plans upon which the tree permit was issued.
   (G)   A tree removal permit issued under this section shall be subject to
the same time limitation rules as are applicable to its accompanying
construction or building permit.
   (H)   Upon the issuance of a tree removal permit under this section, a copy
of the permit shall be prominently displayed on the site, prior to the removal,
relocation or replacement of any trees. Tree removal permits issued in
conjunction with building or construction permits shall be included with all
other permit cards and shall be displayed alongside them on the site.
   (I)   No final certificate of occupancy shall be issued nor electrical power
cut-in authorization given until the relocation or replacement of trees, as
required by the tree removal permit, has been completed and then final tree
inspection approval has been given by the designated enforcement official.
Trees relocated from one portion of the site to another that do not survive
transplantation shall be replaced with a suitable replacement tree as specified
by the enforcement official. Trees not surviving relocation or transplantation
after six months from date of final inspection shall be exempt from the
provisions of this division.
(2000 Code, § 62-64) (Ord. 86-04, passed 4-22-1986) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.024 PERFORMANCE BOND; SURETY.
   (A)   Where the applicant requests and the enforcement official determines
that it would not be prudent to require the planting of trees prior to the
issuance of a subdivision certificate of completion or certificate of
occupancy, such as when it is an improper time of year for planting trees, or
there is a need to root prune the trees, or to comply with other provisions of
this chapter, a performance bond or other surety, in a form acceptable to the
Town Council, must be posted by the applicant.
   (B)   A performance bond or other form of acceptable surety, if posted,
shall be for 125% of the estimated cost of the purchase and installation of all
trees and palms to be planted or relocated. The bond or surety shall be posted
prior to the issuance of the certificate of completion or certificate of
occupancy and shall extend until a time as the enforcement official has
accepted the planting.
(2000 Code, § 62-65) (Ord. 86-04, passed 4-22-1986) Penalty, see §
154.999
REGULATIONS
§ 154.040 UNDESIRABLE SPECIES.
   The following species shall be discouraged from being retained on-site:
   (A)   Schinus terebinthifolius (Brazilian Pepper Tree);
   (B)   Melaleuca quinquenervia (Melaleuca, Cajeput Tree);
   (C)   Casuarina spp. (Australian Pine); and
   (D)   Eucalyptus spp. (Eucalyptus).
(2000 Code, § 62-86) (Ord. 86-04, passed 4-22-1986)
§ 154.041 ALTERNATIVE, MITIGATION OR BETTERMENT PLAN.
   (A)   The terms and conditions for land clearing under this chapter may be
modified by the Town Council after consideration of the recommendations of the
enforcement official where an applicant has submitted to the enforcement
official an alternative land clearing plan that evidences that an improvement
or betterment of the environment may be accomplished or existing site
conditions through implementation of the alternative land clearing plan.
   (B)   An alternative plan must meet or exceed the standards and fulfill the
expressed intent of this chapter.
   (C)   Approval of any alternative land clearing plan by the enforcement
official shall not exempt the applicant from all other provisions of this
chapter.
   (D)   In all cases where this section is employed to provide mitigation for
the removal of vegetation as required in this section, the following standards
must be met or exceeded:
      (1)   All replacement vegetation must be native plant material;
      (2)   No replacement vegetation pursuant to this section may be applied
toward the requirement of previous sections;
      (3)   For each square foot of understory removed, one square foot of
vegetable landscaping must be placed on-site (excluding lawn grasses);
      (4)   Two palms or trees must replace each palm tree, or each 2,000
square feet or a percent thereof of one inch to four inches dbh cluster removed
from the site or a fee may be paid for each tree or palm required in this
division. A schedule of fees, updated from time to time, shall be kept on file
at the office of the Town Clerk. Where replacement trees or palms are not
preferred by the applicant, the enforcement official may consider other
mitigating measures that achieve the intent of this division and this chapter;
and
      (5)   Each replacement tree or palm must be in accordance with the
previous provisions of this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 62-87) (Ord. 86-04, passed 4-22-1986) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.042 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   If any tree shall endanger health, safety or property and require
immediate removal without delay, verbal authorization may be given by the
enforcement official and the tree removed. The verbal authorization shall later
be confirmed in writing by the town.
   (B)   All state-approved and governmental plant or tree nurseries and
botanical gardens shall be exempt from the terms and provisions of this chapter
but only in relation to those trees planted and growing for the sale or
intended sale to the general public.
   (C)   Pruning of red mangroves shall be specifically prohibited except as
otherwise provided in this chapter.
   (D)   The pruning of white and black mangroves may be permitted up to 30% of
the canopy. All pruning of mangroves must follow specified guidelines set forth
in the ordinances of the town. The following standards shall apply:
      (1)   Selective pruning of limbs one inch in diameter or less is
permitted;
      (2)   No tree under six inches in height may be pruned; and
      (3)   No alteration may be made to meumatophores or trunk.
(2000 Code, § 62-88) (Ord. 86-04, passed 4-22-1986) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.043 TREE VARIANCES.
   The preservation of trees may be considered as a peculiar hardship for the
granting of a variance from the literal application of the provisions of the
zoning or subdivision regulations of the town.
(2000 Code, § 62-89) (Ord. 86-04, passed 4-22-1986)
LANDSCAPING
§ 154.055 PURPOSE.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall be the minimum requirements to:
   (A)   Promote the public health, safety and general welfare by providing for
installation and maintenance of certain landscaped areas;
   (B)   Protect the character and stability of residential, business,
institutional and industrial areas; and
   (C)   Conserve the value of land and buildings on surrounding properties and
neighborhoods.
(2000 Code, § 62-106) (Ord. 86-04, passed 4-22-1986)
§ 154.056 LANDSCAPING OF OFF-STREET PARKING AND OTHER VEHICULAR USE AREAS.
   Landscaping of off-street parking and other vehicular use areas shall
conform to the minimum requirements provided in this section.
   (A)   Installation. The owner, tenant and/or agent, if any, shall be jointly
and severally responsible for installing landscaping according to accepted
commercial planting procedures with the quality of plant materials. All
elements of landscaping shall be installed as to meet all other applicable
ordinances and code requirements of the town. Retention ponds as required by
state law shall not exceed 50% of the area to be landscaped under this chapter.
Landscaped areas shall require protection from vehicular encroachment. No more
than 10% of the landscaping material installed pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter will be palm material; the rest will be hardwood, deciduous plant
material from the list of preferred plant material on file with the Town Clerk.
The enforcement official of the town shall inspect all landscaping and no
certificates of occupancy or similar authorizations shall be issued prior to
landscaping conforming to the requirements herein provided.
   (B)   Maintenance. The owner, tenant and/or agent, if any, shall be jointly
and severally responsible for maintaining the landscaping in a healthy, neat
and orderly condition. The owner shall provide each landscaped area with a
readily available water supply with a minimum of one outlet within 150 feet of
all plant material to be maintained. All plant material shall be installed in a
healthy condition and kept alive. If requisite plant material pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter die, they shall be replaced at the applicant’s
expense.
   (C)   Plant material.
      (1)   Quality. Plant materials used in conformance with provisions of
this section shall equal or exceed the standard for Florida No. 1 as given in
Grades and Standards of Nursery Plants, part I, 1963 and part II, State
Department of Agriculture, and any amendments thereto. Grass sod shall be clean
and reasonably free of weeds and noxious pest or diseases. Grass seed shall be
delivered to the job site in containers with State Department of Agriculture
tags attached indicating the seed grower’s compliance with the Department’s
quality control program.
      (2)   Size of trees.
         (a)   Trees shall be species of any average mature spread or crown
greater than 15 feet and trunks that can be maintained in a clean condition
with over ten feet of clear wood. Trees having an average mature spread or
crown less than 15 feet may be substituted by grouping the same as to create
the minimum 15-foot crown spread. Trees shall be a minimum of seven feet in
overall height immediately upon planting. Immediately upon planting, trees
shall have a dbh of three inches. Trees of species providing roots known to
cause damage to public roadways or other public works shall not be planted
closer than 12 feet to public works unless the tree root system is completely
encased with a container for which the minimum interior dimensions shall be
five feet square and five feet deep.
         (b)   Palm trees are not an acceptable plant material substitute for
hardwood, deciduous trees that are removed or destroyed.
      (3)   Shrubs and hedges. Shrubs shall be a minimum of two feet six inches
in height immediately upon planting. Hedges shall be of nondeciduous species
and planted and maintained so as to form a continuous, unbroken, solid, visual
screen within a maximum of one year after planting.
      (4)   Vines. Vines shall be a minimum of 12 inches in height immediately
upon planting and may be used in conjunction with fences, screens or walls to
meet physical barrier requirements as specified.
      (5)   Ground covers. Ground covers in lieu of grass shall be planted in a
manner as to present a finished appearance and reasonable complete coverage
within three months after planting.
      (6)   Lawn grass. Grass shall be species normally grown as permanent
lawns in the town.
(2000 Code, § 62-107) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975; Ord. 86-04, passed 4-22-
1986; Ord. 2000-03, passed 5-23-2000) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.057 LANDSCAPING ADJACENT TO PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY, INCLUDING STREETS AND
WALKS.
   The owner, tenant and/or agent of an off-street parking or other vehicular
use area shall landscape between the area and any adjacent public street, walk
or right-of-way as provided in this section. Prior to issuance of a certificate
of occupancy by the enforcement official, this landscaping shall be installed
as follows:
   (A)   A landscaped strip at least ten feet wide;
   (B)   One tree planted within each 30 lineal feet or fraction thereof in a
planting area of at least 50 square feet with the minimum of at least ten feet;
   (C)   A hedge, wall or other durable landscape screen at least two feet six
inches in height except as provided in §
154.061;
   (D)   If the durable screen is of nonliving material, one shrub or vine
shall be planted abutting the screen, each ten feet apart. Shrubs or vines
shall be planted along the street side of the screen or of sufficient heights
at the time of planting to be readily visible over the top of the screen;
   (E)   The remainder of the required landscaped areas shall be landscaped
with grass, ground cover or other landscape material; and
   (F)   All ground between the right-of-way and off-street parking or other
vehicular use area shall be landscaped.
(2000 Code, § 62-108) (Ord. 86-04, passed 4-22-1986) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.058 PERIMETER LANDSCAPING ADJACENT TO ABUTTING COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL AND
INSTITUTIONAL PROPERTIES.
   The owner, his or her tenant and/or agent, of an off-street parking or other
vehicular use area shall landscape between the area and the abutting commercial
property as provided below. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy
by the enforcement official, this landscaping shall be installed as follows:
   (A)   A wall, hedge or other durable landscape screen at least five feet in
height shall be provided between the common lot line and the off-street parking
or other vehicular use area;
   (B)   Live screening materials shall be planted in a strip not less than
seven feet in width;
   (C)   Perimeter landscaped areas shall be protected from vehicular
encroachment by the use of curbing or wheel stops;
   (D)   A minimum of one tree shall be planted within and for each 30 lineal
feet or fraction thereof and in an area of at least 49 square feet with a
minimum dimension of at least seven feet; and
   (E)   The strip shall be landscaped with grass, ground cover or other
landscape material.
(2000 Code, § 62-109) (Ord. 86-04, passed 4-22-1986) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.059 LANDSCAPING THE INTERIOR OF OFF-STREET PARKING AND VEHICULAR USE
AREAS.
   The owner, tenant and/or agent of an off-street or other vehicular use area
shall landscape the interior of these areas to define aisles and other
vehicular use areas and to provide relief from the expanse of paving. Prior to
issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the enforcement officer, this
landscaping shall be installed as follows:
   (A)   At least ten square feet of interior landscaping for each parking
space, excluding those spaces abutting a perimeter for which landscaping is
required, and excluding all parking spaces directly served by an aisle abutting
and running parallel to this perimeter;
   (B)   At least one square foot of landscaping for each 100 square feet of
paving over 5,000 square feet;
   (C)   If the property contains both parking and other vehicular use areas,
the two areas may be separated to determine the landscaping required by this
division for the other vehicular use area by multiplying the total number of
parking spaces by 400 and subtracting the resulting figure from the total
square footage of the paved area;
   (D)   Each separate landscaped area shall be a minimum of 100 square feet
with a minimum dimension of five feet and shall include at least one tree. The
remaining area shall be adequately landscaped with 50% shrubs and 50% ground
cover or other authorized landscaping material;
   (E)   There shall be not less than one tree for each 100 square feet of the
interior landscaped area or fraction thereof; and
   (F)   All planting areas, except those abutting the perimeter of a parking
lot or area, shall be raised and curbed.
(2000 Code, § 62-110) (Ord. 86-04, passed 4-22-1986) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.060 SIGHT DISTANCE FOR LANDSCAPING ADJACENT TO PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND
POINTS OF ACCESS.
   No landscaping, tree, fence, wall or similar item shall be maintained in the
vicinity of any corner, street, intersection or accessway intersecting a public
right-of-way that the designated official of the town determines is an
obstruction to visibility, extends into sight lines or is a traffic hazard.
(2000 Code, § 62-111) (Ord. 86-04, passed 4-22-1986) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.061 EXISTING PLANT MATERIAL.
   The designated official may adjust the application of the standards of this
chapter, in part or in whole, to allow credit for healthy plant material on a
site prior to its development if, in his or her opinion, an adjustment is
consistent with the intent of this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 62-112) (Ord. 86-04, passed 4-22-1986)
§ 154.062 PERIMETER LANDSCAPING FOR MULTI-FAMILY HOUSING.
   The owner, tenant and/or agent of a site consisting of more than four acres
shall landscape as provided in this section. Prior to the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy by the enforcement official, this landscaping shall be
installed as follows:
   (A)   An opaque screen, no more than six feet in height, maintained at all
times in a sightly condition shall be constructed between any off-street
parking or other vehicular use area and the common lot line;
   (B)   A landscaped strip, not less than ten feet wide, running parallel with
all common property lines;
   (C)   Perimeter landscaped areas shall be landscaped with deciduous hardwood
trees, a space of one tree within each 30 lineal feet or fraction thereof.
Persons are encouraged to plant native species of trees; and
   (D)   The remainder of the required landscaped areas shall be landscaped
with grass, ground cover or other landscaped material.
(2000 Code, § 62-113) (Ord. 86-04, passed 4-22-1986) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.063 PLANTING WITHIN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   (A)   Type of planting. Plants to be considered for placing within public
rights-of-way shall have as many of the following characteristics as possible:
      (1)   Preferably native species;
      (2)   Resistant to hurricane winds;
      (3)   Nonpoisonous;
      (4)   Resistant to insects and diseases;
      (5)   Free from extensive root system;
      (6)   Hardiness to cold;
      (7)   Adaptable to soil condition;
      (8)   Adaptable to moisture condition;
      (9)   Free from noxious odors;
      (10)   Free from extremely messy fruits, flowers or leaves;
      (11)   Long season of beauty;
      (12)   Free from thorns or like growth; and
      (13)   Long life expectancy.
   (B)   Maintenance of planting. Approval for a private owner to plant within
the right-of-way will be given only where the planting is of a low maintenance
type, and the owner is willing and able to maintain the planting in an
acceptable condition. If authorized planting is not properly maintained, the
town may clear and remove the planting, after due notice to the owner.
   (C)   Location of planting.
      (1)   Planting within road rights-of-way. All planting within a road
right-of-way shall not obstruct visibility at intersections or at any other
critical locations along the roadway. Refer to standard detail No. I.
         (a)   Arterial roads and residential streets. The spacing between
trees shall be governed by the ultimate spread of the species and by the
conditions present where the trees are to be planted. The spacing of large
growing trees on both sides of the road shall be staggered. Planting will not
be allowed where it conflicts with the location of an existing or proposed
underground utility.
         (b)   Median planting. Planting within the median of a divided highway
may be in serious conflict with traffic safety and underground utility
placement; therefore, it is necessary to consider each re-request on an
individual basis.
      (2)   Planting within canal rights-of-way. Control of planting within
canal rights-of-way and easements is necessary to provide proper access for
maintaining the canals. As there are varied conditions associated with the
canal location, it will be necessary to consider each request for planting
within a canal right-of-way on an individual basis.
   (D)   Permitting procedure. A private owner, developer or civic association
desiring to plant within the public right-of-way shall submit a written request
to the Town Clerk. Accompanying the request shall be two copies of detailed
plans of the proposed planting including the following information:
      (1)   Existing utilities and location of proposed plantings to them;
      (2)   Existing roadways and their dimensions;
      (3)   Existing and proposed elevations;
      (4)   Setbacks, yard requirements and easements; and
      (5)   The type, size and number of plant materials to be planted. When
approved, a permit will be issued.
   (E)   Recommended plant and tree material. A list of recommended plant and
tree material will be kept on file with the Town Clerk and updated from time to
time as necessary.
(2000 Code, § 62-114) (Ord. 86-04, passed 4-22-1986) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.064 PARKING AREA DESIGN CRITERIA.
   (A)   Wherever an off-street parking area is designed to provide parking of
vehicles in six rows or more, interior landscaped curbed areas shall be
provided the length of the parking rows in order to prevent cross traffic flow
and traffic hazards. Parking rows shall be no greater than 200 feet in length
without providing cross drives. For parking areas associated with high-density
commercial or industrial activity, green areas between rows shall be not less
than eight feet in width.
   (B)   Off-street parking areas shall be designed so that there is an
unrestricted flow and circulation of traffic within and in and out of the area.
Traffic lanes shall be clearly marked on the paved surface to show flow of
traffic. All areas shall be designed for head-in parking only. The following
table shall govern the minimum width of traffic lanes within the parking area:
 
                           Minimum Width of Lanes
Angle of Parking (degrees) One-Way (feet) Two-Way (feet)
0 (parallel to curb)       16             24
90 (perpendicular to curb) 24             24
No parking allowed         16             24
 
   (C)   Parking areas that terminate in a dead end shall be provided with
culs-de-sac not less than 80 feet in diameter. All parking areas will be
provided with landscaped areas at the ends of each row.
   (D)   Perimeter and interior landscaped areas shall be protected from
vehicular encroachment by the use of curbing. When curbing is used as a wheel
stop for head-in parking, the 20-foot dimension of the parking space
requirement (9 by 20 feet) may be reduced to 18 feet. Curbing dimensions for
the landscaped area shall conform to the standard (not the Miami-type curb)
curb specifications established by the town. The overhang area of two feet in
width shall be paved or covered with concrete. Because of safety reasons,
individual wheel stops protruding from the pavement are prohibited.
(2000 Code, § 62-115) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975; Ord. 2000-03, passed 5-23-
2000; Ord. 2021-03, passed - -2021) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.065 PERFORMANCE.
   The owner and/or developer shall provide landscaping and parking facilities
in accordance with the approved site plan. He or she shall be required to post
a performance bond in the amount of 100% of the improvements, including
construction and landscaping; and before acceptance of these improvements by
the town, the owner or developer shall post a 10% yearly maintenance bond.
(2000 Code, § 62-116) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975; Ord. 2000-03, passed 5-23-
2000) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.066 REQUIRED MINIMUM LANDSCAPING FOR SINGLE FAMILY HOUSING.
   In addition to any other provision of this chapter requiring landscaping,
the provisions below shall also apply to any single family home erected or
constructed after March 1, 2014:
   (A)   Plant material.
      (1)   Quality. Plant material used in conformance with this section shall
equal or exceed the standards for Florida No. 1, as given in Grades and
Standards for Nursery Plants, parts I and II, State Department of Agriculture,
and any amendments thereto. Grass sod shall be clean and reasonably free of
weeds and noxious pests or diseases.
      (2)   Crown or spread. Trees as referenced in this section shall have an
average mature spread or crown a minimum of 15 feet.
      (3)   Palm trees. Palm trees shall only be an acceptable plant material
substitute for required trees, when the palms measure four inches in caliper,
in landscape islands of parking lots or half of the single-family residential
tree plantings; however, palm trees may be used as accents to the required
trees.
      (4)   Acceptable trees. A list of acceptable trees shall be set forth in
the Manual of Acceptable Plantings for the landscaping of sites within all
residential zoning districts in the town. The Manual of Acceptable Plantings,
as adopted by resolution of the Town Council and amended from time to time,
shall be maintained by the Town Clerk. Artificial trees are prohibited as
acceptable trees to meet these requirements.
         (a)   Large trees. Those large trees as described in the Manual of
Acceptable Plantings shall be used only where:
            1.   There is an area for plant and root spread of at least 20
feet;
            2.   There is well-drained soil; and
            3.   The tree is planted at least six feet from roads, sidewalks
and driveways to prevent damage to the surface. As an alternative, a large tree
can be replaced with medium or small trees listed in the Manual of Acceptable
Plantings.
            4.   Large trees shall be a minimum of ten feet in height and two
and one-half inches in caliper, four inches above grade.
         (b)   Medium trees. Medium trees, as described in the Manual of
Acceptable Plantings, shall be used in areas where there is insufficient area
for large trees and where there is well-drained soil. Medium trees shall be a
minimum of eight feet in height and one and one-half inches in caliper, four
inches above grade.
         (c)   Small trees. Small trees, as described in the Manual of
Acceptable Plantings, shall be used in areas where rooting space is limited or
near power lines. Small trees shall be a minimum of six feet in height and one
and one-half inches in caliper, four inches above grade.
      (5)   Acceptable shrubs and plants. The Manual of Acceptable Plantings
identifies appropriate shrubs and plants to be used on a site subject to these
landscaping requirements. The shrubs shall be a minimum of two and one-half
feet in height and one foot in width immediately upon planting and the spacing
shall depend on the spread of the plants chosen. Artificial shrubs and plants
are prohibited as acceptable shrubs and plants to meet these requirements.
      (6)   Grass sod. All disturbed areas which are not otherwise landscaped
shall be fully sodded, including all retention areas and conveyance swales. St.
Augustine and Argentine Bahia varieties shall be the acceptable sod types
within all single family zoning districts of the town. Artificial turf is
prohibited as acceptable grass sod to meet these requirements.
      (7)   Groundcover. The town reserves the right to require or accept
groundcover alternatives to grass sod in all single family zoning districts
within the town. Groundcover in lieu of grass sod shall be planted in such
manner as to present a finished appearance and reasonably complete coverage
within three months after planting. Those plants acceptable for use as
groundcover are listed in the Manual of Acceptable Plantings. Artificial
groundcover is prohibited as acceptable groundcover to meet these requirements.
      (8)   Planting beds. All planting beds shall be mulched with cypress,
pine bark, melaleuca, eucalyptus, natural stones or other equivalent substitute
material approved by the town a minimum of two inches in depth.
      (9)   Soils. Soils used in planting beds shall of acceptable quality as
determined by the town to allow for optimum plant growth. Soils shall be free
of large rock and other similar material or substances. The pH for soils shall
be in the range of the proposed plant material.
   (B)   Minimum tree plantings for single-family lots. A minimum of four trees
no less than six feet in height shall exist or shall be planted on each newly
developed residential lot of more than 10,000 square feet. A minimum of three
trees no less than six feet in height shall exist or shall be planted on each
newly developed residential lot of less than 10,000 square feet. Table 154.066
provides the summary of these requirements. A maximum of two common pine trees
can be used to fulfill the requirement. All required trees shall be of a
species included in the Manual of Acceptable Plantings set forth in this
chapter; provided, however, that one of the required trees may be a species of
the citrus family. Trees shall be compatible with the existing soil and
drainage condition and shall be provided with adequate water and fertilizer to
encourage growth. Trees shall be planted in locations so as not to cause danger
to or interference with existing structures or utilities at the time of
maturity. The remainder of the lawn shall be landscaped with sod or suitable
groundcover to alleviate resulting dust pollution.
TABLE 154.066: TREE PLANTINGS FOR SINGLE-FAMILY (as described above)
 
Lot Size                Minimum Requirements         Other Criteria
                                                     Any combination of trees
10,000 square feet or   4 trees that are 6 feet tall listed on the Manual of
larger                                               Acceptable Plantings is
                                                     acceptable
                                                     Any combination of trees
Less than 10,000 square 2 trees that are 6 feet tall listed on the Manual of
feet                                                 Acceptable Plantings is
                                                     acceptable
 
(Ord. 2014-03, passed 2-25-2014)
§ 154.999 PENALTY.
   In addition to any other remedies provided by this chapter, the designated
public agency for enforcement of this chapter shall have the following judicial
remedies available for violations of this chapter or any permit condition
promulgated under this chapter:
   (A)   The designated public agency may institute a civil action in a court
of competent jurisdiction to establish liability and to recover damages for any
injury caused by the contravention of the terms of this chapter;
   (B)   The town may institute a civil action in a court of competent
jurisdiction to impose and recover a civil penalty for each violation in an
amount of not more than $10,000 per offense;
   (C)   The town may institute a civil action in a court of competent
jurisdiction to seek injunctive relief to enforce compliance with this chapter
to enjoin any violation of this chapter; and to seek injunctive relief to
prevent irreparable injury to the trees or properties encompassed by the terms
of this chapter; and
   (D)   Where required under the provisions of this chapter, issuance of
subdivision certificates of completion and certificates of occupancy shall be
withheld by the appropriate officials until the provisions of this chapter,
including any conditions of any permits issued under this chapter, have been
fully met.
(2000 Code, § 62-37) (Ord. 86-04, passed 4-22-1986)
CHAPTER 155: DESIGN STANDARDS
Section
General Provisions
   
155.001   Streets
   
155.002   Alleys
   
155.003   Easements
   
155.004   Blocks
   
155.005   Lots
   
155.006   Public sites and open spaces
   
155.007   Mobile home parks
Engineering Standards and Guide Specifications for Secondary Roads and
Residential Streets; in General
   
155.020   Definitions
   
155.021   Guide
   
155.022   Streets
   
155.023   Drainage
   
155.024   Replacement of street pavement
   
155.025   Driveways, bike paths and sidewalks
Engineering Standards and Guide Specifications for Secondary Roads and
Residential Streets; Clearing and Grubbing of Rights-of-Way
   
155.040   Scope of work
   
155.041   Method
   
155.042   Disposal of materials
Engineering Standards and Guide Specifications for Secondary Roads and
Residential Streets; Excavation and Embankment
   
155.055   Description
   
155.056   Roadway excavation
   
155.057   Unsuitable material
   
155.058   Shoulders, ditches and slopes
   
155.059   Placing embankment
Engineering Standards and Guide Specifications for Secondary Roads and
Residential Streets; Subgrade
   
155.070   Description
   
155.071   Unsuitable material
   
155.072   Requirements
Engineering Standards and Guide Specifications for Secondary Roads and
Residential Streets; Limerock or Cemented Coquina
   
155.085   Limerock base construction
   
155.086   Cemented coquina base construction
   
155.087   Prime coat
   
155.088   Tack coat
Engineering Standards and Guide Specifications for Secondary Roads and
Residential Streets; Wearing Surface
   
155.110   Specifications
   
155.111   Limitations of laying operations
   
155.112   Placing the mixture
   
155.113   Control testing requirements
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 155.001 STREETS.
   (A)   The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all
streets shall conform to the general community plan and shall be considered in
their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to
public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the
proposed uses of the land to be served by those streets.
   (B)   Where there is not shown in the general community plan, the
arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall either:
      (1)   Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing
principal streets in surrounding areas; or
      (2)   Conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved or adopted by the
Planning and Zoning Board to meet a particular situation where topographical or
other conditions made continuance or conformances to existing streets
impracticable.
   (C)   Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic
will be discouraged.
   (D)   Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial
street, the Planning and Zoning Board may require marginal-access streets,
reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a nonaccess reservation
along the rear property line, deep lots with rear service alleys, or any other
treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties
and to afford separation of through and local traffic.
   (E)   Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way or
limited-access highway right-of-way, the Planning and Zoning Board may require
a street or alley approximately parallel to and on each side of the right-of-
way and a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land, as
for park purposes in residential districts or for commercial or industrial
purposes in appropriate districts for the distances also shall be determined
with due regard for the requirements of approach grades and future grade
separations.
   (F)   Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited
except where their control is definitely placed in the town under conditions
approved by the Planning and Zoning Board.
   (G)   Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall be
avoided.
   (H)   A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between reverse
curves on arterial streets where either of the curves deflects more than three
degrees.
   (I)   A minimum sight distance with clear visibility, on curves, measured
along the centerline, shall be provided of at least 300 feet on arterial
streets, 200 feet for collector streets and 100 feet on minor streets.
   (J)   Street intersections shall be laid out as to intersect as nearly as
possible at right angles, and no street shall intersect any other street at
less than 60 degrees. Streets shall have a minimum sight distance of at least
50 feet.
   (K)   Property lines at street intersections shall be rounded with a radius
of 25 feet; or of a greater radius where the Planning and Zoning Board may deem
it necessary, the Planning and Zoning Board may permit comparable cutoffs or
chords in place of rounded corners.
   (L)   Street right-of-way widths shall be as shown in the comprehensive land
use plan, and where not shown therein shall not be less than as follows:
 
Street Type                             Right-of-Way (feet)
Arterial                                100
Collector                               70
Minor, for multiple-occupancy dwellings 60
Minor                                   50
 
   (M)   Half streets shall be prohibited except where essential to the
reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the other
requirements of this chapter and
Chapter 156 and where the Planning and Zoning Board finds it will be
practicable to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining
property is subdivided. Wherever a half street is in existence and adjacent to
a tract to be subdivided, the other half of the street shall be platted within
the tract. A cul-de-sac will be required if determined necessary by the
Planning and Zoning Board.
   (N)   Dead-end streets designed to be permanent shall not be longer than 500
feet and shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having an
outside roadway diameter of at least 80 feet and a street property line
diameter of at least 100 feet. Measurements shall be from the right-of-way line
of the adjoining street to the tangent of the turnaround.
   (O)   No street names shall be used that will duplicate or be confused with
the names of existing streets. Street names shall be subject to the approval of
the Planning and Zoning Board and other regulatory agencies.
   (P)   No street grade shall be less than 0.10%.
   (Q)   No drainage grade (swales or curb and gutters) shall be less than
0.20%.
(2000 Code, § 58-146) (Ord. 88-01, passed 5-24-1988) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 155.002 ALLEYS.
   (A)   Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts except
that the Planning and Zoning Board may waive this requirement where other
definite and assured provisions is made for service access, such as off-street
loading, unloading and parking consistent with and adequate for the uses
proposed.
   (B)   The width of an alley right-of-way shall be a minimum of 20 feet.
   (C)   Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided;
but where necessary, corners shall be cut off sufficiently to permit safe
vehicular movement.
   (D)   Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if unavoidable
shall be provided with adequate turnaround facilities at the dead-end as
determined by the Planning and Zoning Board.
(2000 Code, § 58-147) (Ord. 88-01, passed 5-24-1988) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 155.003 EASEMENTS.
   (A)   Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be
provided for utilities, where necessary, and shall be at least seven and one-
half feet wide. The location and width of easements shall be drawn on the plat
and the easements intended use shall be clearly stated.
   (B)   Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way,
channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage
right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of the watercourse and
further width or construction, or both, as will be adequate for the purpose.
(2000 Code, § 58-148) (Ord. 88-01, passed 5-24-1988) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 155.004 BLOCKS.
   (A)   The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due
regard to:
      (1)   Provision to adequate building sites suitable to the special needs
of the type of use contemplated;
      (2)   Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions;
      (3)   Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of
street traffic; and
      (4)   Limitations and opportunities of topography.
   (B)   Block lengths shall not exceed 1,320 feet or be less than 400 feet.
   (C)   Pedestrian crosswalks, not less than ten feet wide, shall be required
where deemed essential to provide circulation or access to schools,
playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation and other community facilities.
(2000 Code, § 58-149) (Ord. 88-01, passed 5-24-1988) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 155.005 LOTS.
   (A)   The lot size, width, depth, shape, orientations and the minimum
building setback lines shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision
and for the type of development and use contemplated.
   (B)   Lot dimensions shall conform to the requirements of the zoning
ordinances.
      (1)   Residential lots where not served by public sewers shall be of
sufficient size to accommodate a septic tank and leaching field. State and
local health regulations and standards as well as soil conditions will control
lot size in these circumstances.
      (2)   Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for commercial
and industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street service
and parking facilities required by the type of use and development
contemplated.
   (C)   The subdivision of the land shall be such as to provide by means of a
public street each lot with satisfactory access to an existing public street.
   (D)   Double-frontage and reverse-frontage lots should be avoided except
where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic
arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. A
planting screen easement of at least ten feet, across which there shall be no
right of access, shall be provided along the line of lots abutting a traffic
artery or other disadvantageous use.
   (E)   Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to
street lines.
(2000 Code, § 58-150) (Ord. 88-01, passed 5-24-1988) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 155.006 PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACES.
   (A)   Where a proposed park, playground, school or other public use shown in
the comprehensive land use plan is located in a whole part or in part in a
subdivision, the Planning and Zoning Board may require the dedication or
reservation of the area within the subdivision in those cases in which the
Planning and Zoning Board deems the requirements to be reasonable.
   (B)   Where deemed essential by the Planning and Zoning Board, upon
consideration of the particular type of development proposed in the subdivision
and especially in large-scale neighborhood unit developments not anticipated in
the comprehensive land use plan dedication or reservation of other areas or
sites of a character, extent and location suitable to the needs created by the
development for schools, parks and other neighborhood purposes.
(2000 Code, § 58-151) (Ord. 88-01, passed 5-24-1988) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 155.007 MOBILE HOME PARKS.
   (A)   Mobile home parks must be a minimum of 15 acres, having a minimum
width of 300 feet measured along a public right-of-way. Mobile home lots shall
have a minimum of 7,000 square feet of land area with a minimum width of 60
feet.
 
Setback Feet
Front   15
Side    8
Rear    8
 
   (B)   A minimum of 15% of the mobile home park exclusive of required buffer
space and street rights-of-way shall be set aside and developed for
recreational purposes for residents of mobile home parks.
   (C)   Notwithstanding the regulations of this subchapter, it shall be
mandatory for any new mobile home park to provide a central water and sewer
system in compliance with the State and County Health Department requirements
and to maintain the facilities in accordance with the Department’s criteria.
   (D)   It is the intent of this subchapter that mobile home parks within the
town shall conform to the Florida Residential Landlord and Tenant Act, F.S. §§
83.40 through 83.682.
(2000 Code, § 58-152) (Ord. 88-01, passed 5-24-1988) Penalty, see §
10.99
ENGINEERING STANDARDS AND GUIDE SPECIFICATIONS FOR SECONDARY ROADS AND
RESIDENTIAL STREETS; IN GENERAL
§ 155.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONTRACTOR. The work forces of the owner, an individual or firm leasing
equipment and/or personnel to the owner, or an individual or firm doing work
for the owner under a contract, verbal or written, and licensed in the town.
   OWNER. The individual company or corporation owning the land to be
developed.
   TESTING LABORATORY. A recognized laboratory licensed to do business in the
state.
   TOWN ENGINEER. A professional engineer authorized to practice in the state
by virtue of registration. He or she will be retained by the town at the
expense of the owner to supervise the construction of the work covered by this
division.
   WORK. All construction called for as shown on the development plans.
(2000 Code, § 58-176) (Ord. 88-01, passed 5-24-1988)
§ 155.021 GUIDE.
   (A)   The standards listed in this subchapter are to be used by engineers as
a guide in preparing plans and specifications for construction of improvements
located within the town. All plans for construction of improvements must be
signed and sealed by an engineer registered in the state and submitted for
approval to the Town Engineer before start of construction.
   (B)   These specifications shall apply to all work done or being done for
the owner within the corporate limits of the town.
(2000 Code, § 58-177) (Ord. 88-01, passed 5-24-1988)
§ 155.022 STREETS.
   (A)   All streets, whether public or private, must be designed and
constructed in the manner described herein and in accordance with the American
Association of the State Highway Transportation Officials (AASHTO) Guide for
Design of Pavement Structures or Florida Department of Transportation (FDOT)
Flexible Pavement Design Manual. Parking lots and drives on private property
are required to have an improved surface and shall meet those requirements that
are deemed appropriate for the type of use involved.
   (B)   Pavement cross-section.
 
          Subbase Base Type S-I or Type S-III Surface
Local     8"      8"   1-1/2"
Collector 10"     10"  2"
Arterial  10"     12"  3"
 
      (1)   The base shall extend one foot beyond the surface course or back of
curbs.
      (2)   The subgrade shall extend two feet beyond the surface course.
      (3)   Streets constructed for use by commercial type facilities shall
meet collector road standards for the pavement cross section.
      (4)   Streets constructed for use by industrial type facilities shall
meet arterial road standards.
      (5)   Pavement specifications:
         (a)   Subgrade (FDOT Type B Stabilized): density - 98% of maximum
(AASHTO T - 180 Method D) Limerock Bearing Ratio (LBR) - (40) Minimum
         (b)   Base - (Ocala or Miami Formation Limerock or Cemented Coquina):
Density - 98% of maximum (AASHTO T-180 Method D) Limerock Bearing Ratio (LBR)
100 Minimum
         (c)   Surface coarse: FDOT Type S-I or S-III (or as otherwise approved
by the Town Engineer or their representative) Marshall Stability - 1500
minimum. Where Type S Asphalt Concrete is specified in the Plans, if approved
by the Engineer, Type SIM Asphalt Concrete may be selected as an alternate for
the final surface when no friction course is specified, and as the final layer
of structural course prior to the friction course.
   (C)   Curbs and curb and gutter sections shall be in conformance with the
details drawn on the plans or specified in accordance with FDOT, standard
specifications.
(2000 Code, § 58-178) (Ord. 88-01, passed 5-24-1988; Ord. 2010-05, passed 4-27-
2010) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 155.023 DRAINAGE.
   (A)   Materials and construction procedures shall meet minimum standards as
specified by the latest edition of the State Department of Transportation
Standard Specifications for Roads and Bridges unless specifically waived by the
Town Engineer.
   (B)   Curbs and curb and gutter sections shall also meet minimum standards
specified by the FHA and VA.
   (C)   All drainage structures shall be properly sized and designed to meet
FHA requirements. Head walls will be required at each end of culverts.
   (D)   Catch basins, spillways, valley gutters and the like, shall be
designed in accordance with good engineering design practice.
   (E)   Drainage swales where acceptable to the Town Council and/or Town
Engineer shall be properly designed to carry storm runoff and for easy
maintenance.
(2000 Code, § 58-179) (Ord. 88-01, passed 5-24-1988) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 155.024 REPLACEMENT OF STREET PAVEMENT.
   Where underground pipes, conduits and the like, require cutting of existing
pavement, it shall be repaired by thoroughly compacting the backfill and
filling the cut area with seven inches of compacted plant mix. Edges of the cut
shall be vertical.
(2000 Code, § 58-180) (Ord. 88-01, passed 5-24-1988) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 155.025 DRIVEWAYS, BIKE PATHS AND SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   Properly sized culverts shall be required where driveways block
drainage swales. Headwalls will be required at each end of the culvert.
   (B)   Bicycle paths and sidewalks shall be required as determined by the
town and are to be constructed to Brevard County standards.
(2000 Code, § 58-181) (Ord. 88-01, passed 5-24-1988; Ord. 2016-03, passed 3-22-
2016) Penalty, see §
10.99
ENGINEERING STANDARDS AND GUIDE SPECIFICATIONS FOR SECONDARY ROADS AND
RESIDENTIAL STREETS; CLEARING AND GRUBBING OF RIGHTS-OF-WAY
§ 155.040 SCOPE OF WORK.
   The work covered by this subchapter consists of clearing and grubbing and
the removal of the resultant products and debris within the areas of the
roadway right-of-way.
(2000 Code, § 58-201) (Ord. 88-01, passed 5-24-1988)
§ 155.041 METHOD.
   (A)   Clearing and grubbing shall consist of the complete removal and
disposal of all timber, brush, stumps, roots, grass, weeds, sawdust, rubbish
and all other obstructions resting on or protruding through the surface of the
excavated areas.
   (B)   In all areas where excavation will be done and where the excavated
material is to be used in the construction of roadway embankment or roadway
base or pavement, also in all areas where roadway embankments will be
constructed, all stumps, roots and other debris shall be removed to a depth of
not less than one foot below the subgrade.
(2000 Code, § 58-202) (Ord. 88-01, passed 5-24-1988) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 155.042 DISPOSAL OF MATERIALS.
   Timber, stumps, brush, roots, rubbish and objectionable material resulting
from clearing and grubbing shall be disposed of by hauling away and disposing
of materials in a suitable location. Burning will not be allowed except when
permission is obtained from the local government agencies and/or the State Fire
Marshal.
(2000 Code, § 58-203) (Ord. 88-01, passed 5-24-1988) Penalty, see §
10.99
ENGINEERING STANDARDS AND GUIDE SPECIFICATIONS FOR SECONDARY ROADS AND
RESIDENTIAL STREETS; EXCAVATION AND EMBANKMENT
§ 155.055 DESCRIPTION.
   The work covered by this subchapter consists of excavating, removing and
satisfactorily disposing of all material, of whatever character within the
limits of the work. It shall include all excavations, shaping and sloping
necessary for the construction, preparation and completion of all embankments,
shoulders, ditches, slopes, gutters, intersecting approaches and private
entrances and all in accordance with the required alignment grade and cross
sections shown on the plans or as directed by the Town Engineer.
(2000 Code, § 58-226) (Ord. 88-01, passed 5-24-1988)
§ 155.056 ROADWAY EXCAVATION.
   While the excavation is being done and until the work is finally accepted,
the contractor shall take the necessary steps to protect the work to prevent
loss of material from the roadway due to the action of wind or water. During
construction of the roadway, the road bed shall be maintained in a condition
that it will be well drained at all times.
(2000 Code, § 58-227) (Ord. 88-01, passed 5-24-1988) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 155.057 UNSUITABLE MATERIAL.
   Where muck, rock, clay or other material within the limits of the right-of-
way is in the opinion of the Engineer unsuitable in the original position, the
contractor shall excavate the material and backfill with suitable material,
which shall be shaped to conform to the required cross section.
(2000 Code, § 58-228) (Ord. 88-01, passed 5-24-1988) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 155.058 SHOULDERS, DITCHES AND SLOPES.
   (A)   When the work includes surfacing or paving, the earthwork, including
the slopes and all drainage structures, shall have been substantially completed
before the construction of the surface course or pavements is started.
   (B)   During the construction of the pavement, a shoulder shall be
maintained in place to properly support the edges of the pavement. Upon
completion of the pavement, the earth shoulders, slopes and side ditches shall
be completed and shaped to match the edge of the pavement, curb or sidewalk.
   (C)   Where streets do not have curb and gutter, shoulders shall be
stabilized and compacted to prevent erosion and rutting for a minimum width of
six feet on each side of the pavement.
(2000 Code, § 58-229) (Ord. 88-01, passed 5-24-1988) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 155.059 PLACING EMBANKMENT.
   (A)   Embankments shall be constructed true to lines, grades and cross
sections shown on the plans or ordered by the Town Engineer.
   (B)   Embankments shall be constructed of suitable materials placed in
successive level layers not more than 12 inches thick, loose measure, for the
full width of the embankments and shall be constructed in lengths of not less
than 300 feet or for the full length of the embankment.
(2000 Code, § 58-230) (Ord. 88-01, passed 5-24-1988) Penalty, see §
10.99
ENGINEERING STANDARDS AND GUIDE SPECIFICATIONS FOR SECONDARY ROADS AND
RESIDENTIAL STREETS; SUBGRADE
§ 155.070 DESCRIPTION.
   On completion of clearing operations, topsoil in the roadway shall be
removed and stored for use in filling and forming shoulders, embankments and
ditches. Soil shall not be removed from the project site except when directed
by the Engineer or representative.
(2000 Code, § 58-251) (Ord. 88-01, passed 5-24-1988; Ord. 2010-05, passed 4-27-
2010)
§ 155.071 UNSUITABLE MATERIAL.
   (A)   Where unsuitable material occurs within the limits of the roadway, the
contractor shall remove such material and refill with suitable excavated
material or authorized borrow. Where unsuitable material is removed, the
surface of the excavated area shall be compacted by rolling with a sheepsfoot
roller exerting a compression of at least 250 pounds per square inch on the
tamper feet, for the full width of the roadbed (subgrade and shoulders). Such
rolling shall be done before any refill is begun, and shall be continued until
the roller does not penetrate the surface more than one inch.
   (B)   When the plans contain the results of a soil survey, do not assume
such data is a guarantee of the depth, extent, or character of material
present.
   (C)   Where muck, rock, clay, or other material within the limits of the
roadway is unsuitable in its original position, excavate such material to the
cross-sections shown in the plans or indicated by the Engineer, and backfill
with suitable material. Shape backfill material to the required cross-sections.
   (D)   Where the removal of plastic soils below the finished earthwork grade
is required, meet a construction tolerance, from the lines shown in the plans
as the removal limits, of ± 0.2 feet [± 60 mm] in depth and ± 6 inches [± 150
mm] (each side) in width.
(2000 Code, § 58-252) (Ord. 88-01, passed 5-24-1988; Ord. 2010-05, passed 4-27-
2010) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 155.072 REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   On completion of the grading operations, a stabilized roadbed shall be
constructed. The roadbed shall be stabilized to a firm and unyielding subgrade
having the required bearing value specified in the plans.
   (B)   When the stabilizing is designated as Type B, the specialty engineer
will determine compliance with the bearing value requirements by the Limerock
Bearing Ratio (LBR) method. If approved by the specialty engineer and only for
materials requiring an LBR value of 40, the specialty engineer may omit
Sections 6.0 and 6.1 of Florida Method of Test for Limerock Bearing Ratio (FM
5-515) and perform an Unsoaked LBR Test. The engineer or the contractor may
request to use this method. If the Unsoaked LBR Test results in a failing test,
then the specialty engineer will perform a standard Soaked LBR Test.
   (C)   The required bearing value shall be obtained either by constructing
the roadbed of selected materials from the roadway or by stabilizing the
roadbed material by the addition and mixing-in of suitable stabilizing
materials. Such work shall be constructed in accordance with these
specifications and in accordance with the lines, grades and thickness shown on
the plans.
   (D)   The subgrade to be stabilized may be processed in one course, unless
the equipment and methods being used do not provide the required uniformity,
particle size limitation, compaction and other desired results, in which case,
the processing shall be done in more than one course.
   (E)   When additive stabilizing materials are required, they shall be spread
uniformly over the area to be stabilized.
   (F)   When the use of materials from an existing base is required as all, or
a portion of the stabilizing additives, the engineer will direct the location,
placement, and distribution of such materials. Perform this work prior to the
spreading of any additional commercial or local materials. Do not remove any
section of existing base until the need for it in maintaining traffic is
fulfilled.
   (G)   The mixing shall be done with rotary tillers, or other equipment
meeting the approval of the engineer. The contractor may mix the materials in a
plant of an approved type suitable for this work. The area to be stabilized
shall be thoroughly mixed throughout the entire depth and width of the
stabilizing limits. The mixing operations will be required regardless of
whether or not the existing soil has the required bearing value without the
addition of stabilizing materials.
   (H)   Regardless of the character or bearing value, all materials remaining
after the mixing operations that will not pass a 3-1/2-inch ring shall be
removed or broken down to a size not larger than 3-1/2 inches.
   (I)   Bearing value samples will be obtained and tested at completion of
satisfactory mixing of the stabilized area. For any area where the bearing
value obtained is deficient from the value specified in the contract documents,
additional stabilizing material shall be spread and mixed.
   (J)   This reprocessing shall be done for full width of the roadway being
stabilized and longitudinally for a distance of 50 feet beyond the limits of
the area in which the bearing value is deficient.
   (K)   After mixing operations have been completed and the requirements of
bearing value, uniformity and particle size have been satisfied, the stabilized
area shall be compacted to the specified density. The materials shall be
compacted at a moisture content permitting the specified compaction. If the
moisture content of the material is improper for attaining the specified
density, either water shall be added or the material shall be permitted to dry
until the proper moisture content for the specified compaction is reached.
   (L)   Within the entire limits of the width and depth of the areas to be
stabilized, the minimum density acceptable at any location will be 98% of the
maximum density as determined by Florida Methods (FM) 1-T 180 Method “D”.
Attainment of the minimum density specified is not required within the upper
six inches of areas to be grassed under the contract. These areas shall be
compacted to a reasonable firm condition as directed by the engineer.
   (M)   Use the following undertolerances from the specified bearing value, as
based on tests performed on samples obtained after completing mixing
operations:
 
Specified Bearing Value Tolerance
LBR 40                  5.0
LBR 35                  4.0
LBR 30 (and under)      2.5
 
   (N)   The following unsoaked bearing value requirement is based on tests
performed on samples obtained after completing mixing operations:
 
Specified Bearing Value Unsoaked Bearing Value Required Tolerance
LBR 40                  LBR 42                          0.0
 
   (O)   The completed stabilized subgrade shall be shaped to conform to the
finished lines, grades, and cross-section indicated on the plans.
   (P)   After the stabilizing and compacting operations have been completed,
the subgrade shall be firm and substantially unyielding to the extent that it
will support construction equipment and will have the bearing value required by
the plans. All soft and yielding materials, and any other portions of the
subgrade, which will not compact readily, shall be removed and replaced with
suitable materials and the whole subgrade brought to line and grade, with
proper allowance for subsequent compaction.
   (Q)   After the subgrade has been completed as specified above, the
contractor shall maintain it free from ruts, depressions, and any damage
resulting from the hauling or handling of materials, equipment, tools, and the
like. It shall be the contractor’s responsibility to maintain the required
density until the subsequent base or pavement is in place. Such responsibility
shall include any reports, replacement, and the like, of curb and gutter,
sidewalk and the like, which might become necessary in order to re-compact the
subgrade in the event of underwash or other damage occurring to the previously
compacted subgrade. Any such work required for re-compaction shall be at the
contractor’s expense. Ditches and drains shall be constructed and maintained
along the completed subgrade section.
(2000 Code, § 58-253) (Ord. 88-01, passed 5-24-1988; Ord. 2010-05, passed 4-27-
2010) Penalty, see §
10.99
ENGINEERING STANDARDS AND GUIDE SPECIFICATIONS FOR SECONDARY ROADS AND
RESIDENTIAL STREETS; LIMEROCK OR CEMENTED COQUINA
§ 155.085 LIMEROCK BASE CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   The work consists of the construction of a base course composed of
limerock. It shall be constructed on the prepared subgrade, in accordance with
these specifications and in conformity with the lines, grades, and cross-
section shown on the plans.
   (B)   The spreading of the rock shall be done by methods approved by the
Engineer. All shaping shall be done utilizing a motor grader.
   (C)   The limerock shall be transported to the point where it is to be used,
over rock previously placed, if practicable, and dumped on the end of the
preceding spread. No hauling over the subgrade or dumping on the subgrade shall
be permitted. If at any time the subgrade material should become mixed with the
base course material, the contractor shall without additional compensation, dig
out and remove the mixture, reshape and compact the subgrade and replace the
materials removed with clean base material, which shall be shaped and compacted
as specified above. All segregated areas of fine or coarse rock shall be
removed and replaced with properly graded rock.
   (D)   When the specified compacted thickness of the base is greater than
eight inches, the base shall be constructed in two courses. If, through field
tests, the contractor can demonstrate that the compaction equipment can achieve
density for the full depth of a thicker lift, and if approved by the engineer,
the base may be constructed in successive courses of not more than eight inches
compacted thickness. The thickness of the first course shall be approximately
one-half the total thickness of the finished base, or enough additional to bear
the weight of the construction equipment without disturbing the subgrade. At no
time shall more than three days’ work of the first course be spread ahead of
the second course.
   (E)   For single-course base, after the spreading is completed the entire
surface shall be scarified and then shaped so as to produce the required grade
and cross-section after compaction.
   (F)   For double-course base, the first course shall be bladed if necessary
to secure a uniform surface, and brought to a surface cross-section
approximately parallel to that of the finished base. Prior to the spreading of
any material for the upper course, the density tests for the lower course shall
have determined that the required compaction has been obtained. After the
spreading of the material for the second course is completed the surface of
such course shall be scarified and shaped so as to produce the required grade
and cross-section after compaction. When the material does not have the proper
moisture content to ensure the required density, wetting or drying will be
required. When water is added it shall be uniformly mixed in by discing to the
full depth of the course which is being compacted. Wetting or drying operations
shall involve manipulation, as a unit, of the entire width and depth of the
course, which is being compacted.
   (G)   As soon as proper conditions of moisture are attained, the material
shall be compacted to an average density not less than 98% of the maximum
density obtainable under FM 1-T 180, Method “D”. For double course base,
average density shall be determined separately for each course. Limerock base
for shoulder pavement shall be compacted to a density not less than 95% of
maximum density by FM 1-T 180, Method “D”. During final compacting operations,
if blading of any areas is necessary to obtain the true grade and cross-
section, the compacting operations for such areas shall be complete prior to
making the density determinations on the finished base. At least three density
determinations shall be made on each day’s final compaction operations on each
course, and the density determinations shall be made at more frequent intervals
if deemed necessary by the engineer.
   (H)   If cracks or checks appear in the base, either before or after
priming, which in the opinion of the engineer, would impair the structural
efficiency of the base course, the contractor shall remove such cracks or
checks by rescarifying, reshaping, adding base materials where necessary and
recompacting.
   (I)   The finished surface of the base course shall be checked with a
template cut to the required crown and with a 15-foot straightedge laid
parallel to the center line of the road. All irregularities greater than a
quarter-inch shall be corrected by scarifying and removing or adding rock as
required, after which the entire area shall be re-compacted as specified herein
before. In testing the surface, the measurements will not be taken in small
holes caused by individual pieces of rock having been pulled out by the grader.
   (J)   If, in the opinion of the Engineer, the surface of the base has a
glazed or cemented surface sufficient to prevent proper penetration of the
prime coat, and after he/she determines that the condition of the base meets
all requirements, he/she will direct that the surface be hard-planed with a
blade grader and broomed immediately prior to the application of the prime
coat. This hard-planning shall be done in such a manner that only the glazed or
cemented surface is removed, leaving a granular or porous condition that will
allow free penetration of the prime material. The material planed from the base
shall be removed from the base area. The hardplanning operations, when
required, shall follow the surface-testing operations specified below.
   (K)   The prime coat shall be applied only when the base meets the specified
density requirements and the moisture content does not exceed 90% of the
optimum moisture of the base material. At the time of priming, the base shall
be firm, unyielding and in such condition that no undue distortion will occur.
   (L)   The contractor will be responsible for assuring that the true crown
and template are maintained, with no rutting or other distortion, and that the
base meets all requirements, at the time the surface course is applied.
   (M)   Thickness of the base shall be measured at intervals of not more than
200 feet. Measurements shall be taken at various points on the cross-section
through holes not less than three inches in diameter.
   (N)   Where the compacted base is deficient by more than one-half inch from
the thickness called for on the plans, the contractor shall correct such areas
by scarifying and adding rock.
   (O)   The base shall be scarified and rock added for a distance of 100 feet
in each direction from the edge of the deficient area. The affected areas shall
then be brought to the required state of compaction and to the required
thickness and cross-section.
(Ord. 2010-05, passed 4-27-2010) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 155.086 CEMENTED COQUINA BASE CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   The work consists of the construction of a base course composed of
cemented coquina. It shall be constructed on the prepared subgrade, in
accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the lines, grades,
and cross-section shown on the plans.
   (B)   The spreading of the rock shall be done by methods approved by the
engineer. All shaping shall be done utilizing a motor grader.
   (C)   The cemented coquina shall be transported to the point where it is to
be used, over cemented coquina previously placed, if practicable, and dumped on
the end of the preceding spread. No hauling over the subgrade or dumping on the
subgrade shall be permitted. If at any time the subgrade material should become
mixed with the base course material, the contractor shall, without additional
compensation, dig out and remove the mixture, reshape and compact the subgrade,
and replace the materials removed with clean base material, which shall be
shaped and compacted as specified above. All segregated areas of fine or coarse
rock shall be removed and replaced with properly graded rock.
   (D)   When the specified compacted thickness of the base is greater than
eight inches, the base shall be constructed in two courses. The thickness of
the first course shall be approximately one-half the total thickness of the
finished base, or enough additional to bear the weight of the construction
equipment without disturbing the subgrade. At no time shall more than three
days’ work of the first course be spread ahead of the second course.
   (E)   For single-course base, after the spreading is completed the entire
surface shall be scarified and then shaped so as to produce the required grade
and cross-section after compaction.
   (F)   For double-course base, the first course shall be bladed if necessary
to secure a uniform surface, and brought to a surface cross-section
approximately parallel to that of the finished base, with the thickness of the
first course approximately one-half the total thickness of the base. Prior to
the spreading of any material for the upper course, the density tests for the
lower course shall have determined that the required compaction has been
obtained. After the spreading of the material for the second course is
completed, the surface of such course shall be scarified and shaped so as to
produce the required grade and cross-section after compaction.
   (G)   When the material does not have the proper moisture content to insure
the required density, wetting or drying will be required. When water is added
it shall be uniformly mixed in by discing to the full depth of the course which
is being compacted. Wetting or drying operations shall involve manipulation, as
a unit, of the entire width and depth of the course, which is being compacted.
   (H)   As soon as proper conditions of moisture are attained, the material
shall be compacted to an average density not less than 98% of the maximum
density obtainable under AASHTO T-180, Method “D”. For double course base
average density shall be determined separately for each course. Cemented
coquina base for shoulder pavement shall be compacted to a density not less
than 95% of maximum density by AASHTO T-180, Method “D”. During final
compacting operations, if blading of any areas is necessary to obtain the true
grade and cross section, the compacting operations for such areas shall be
completed prior to making the density determinations on the finished base.
   (I)   At least three density determinations shall be made on each day’s
final compaction operations on each course, and the density determinations
shall be made at more frequent intervals if deemed necessary by the engineer.
   (J)   If cracks or checks appear in the base, either before or after
priming, which, in the opinion of the engineer, would impair the structural
efficiency of the base course, the contractor shall remove such cracks or
checks by rescarifying, reshaping, adding base materials where necessary, and
recompacting.
   (K)   The finished surface of the base course shall be checked with a
template cut to the required crown and with a 15-foot straightedge laid
parallel to the center line of the road. All irregularities greater than one-
quarter inch shall be corrected scarifying and removing or adding rock as
required, after which the entire area shall be re-compacted as specified herein
before. In testing the surface, the measurements will not be taken in small
holes caused by individual pieces of rock having been pulled out by the grader.
   (L)   If, in the opinion of the engineer, the surface of the base has a
glazed or cemented surface sufficient to prevent proper penetration of the
prime coat, and after he or she determines that the condition of the base meets
all requirements, he or she will direct that the surface be hard-planed with a
blade grader and broomed immediately prior to the application of the prime
coat. This hardplanning shall be done in such a manner that only the glazed or
cemented surface is removed, leaving a granular or porous condition that will
allow free penetration of the prime material. The material planed from the base
shall be removed form the base area. The hard-planing operations, when
required, shall follow the surface-testing operations specified below.
   (M)   The prime coat shall be applied only when the base meets the specified
density requirements and the moisture content does not exceed 90% of the
optimum moisture of the base material. At the time of priming, the base shall
be firm, unyielding and in such condition that no undue distortion will occur.
   (N)   The contractor will be responsible for assuring that the true crown
and template are maintained, with no rutting or other distortion, and that the
base meets all the requirements at the same time the surface course is applied.
   (O)   Thickness of the base shall be measured at intervals of not more than
200 feet. Measurements shall be taken at various points on the cross-section,
through holes not less than three inches in diameter.
   (P)   Where compacted base is deficient by more than one-half inch from the
thickness called for in the plans, the contractor shall correct such areas by
scarifying and adding rock. The base shall be scarified and rock added for a
distance of 100 feet in each direction from the edge of the deficient area. The
affected areas shall then be brought to the required state of compaction and to
the required thickness and cross-section.
(Ord. 2010-05, passed 4-27-2010) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 155.087 PRIME COAT.
   (A)   The work consists of the application of a bituminous prime coat on
previously prepared bases in accordance with these specifications.
   (B)   The surface to be primed shall be cleaned of all loose material, dust,
dirt, caked clay and other foreign material which might prevent proper bonding
and the moisture content of the base shall not exceed 90% of the optimum
moisture. The temperature of the prime material shall be between 100° and 150°
F. The actual temperature shall be that which will insure uniform distribution.
The material shall be applied by means of a pressure distributor. The amount to
be applied will be dependent on the character of the surface and shall be
sufficient to coat the surface thoroughly and uniformly, with no excess.
   (C)   For limerock, limerock stabilized, and local rock bases: For these
bases, the rate of application shall be no less than 0.10 gallon per square
yard. Sand-clay, shell, and shell stabilized bases: The rate of application for
these bases shall be no less than 0.15 gallon per square yard.
   (D)   If required, the base shall be lightly sprinkled with water and rolled
with a traffic roller, in advance of the application of the prime.
   (E)   If warranted by traffic conditions, the application may be made on
only one-half the width of the bases at one time, in which case positive means
shall be used to secure the correct amount of bituminous material at the joint.
   (F)   If emulsified asphalt is used for prime coat, the primed base shall be
uniformly covered by an application of sand-bituminous hot mix or screenings,
at an appropriate rate of ten pounds per square yard. For the sand, meet the
requirements as specified in FDOT Standard Specifications Section 902-2 or 902-
6, and for the screenings, meet the requirements as specified in Section 902-5.
The entire surface of the sand-bituminous hot mix or screenings cover material
shall be rolled with a traffic roller as required to produce a reasonable dense
mat. If material other than emulsified asphalt is used for prime coat, the
primed base shall be covered by a light uniform application of cover material.
If considered necessary for proper distribution of spread, the cover material
shall be rolled with a traffic roller, for at least ten passes over the entire
area.
   (G)   Do not apply prime and tack coats when the air temperature in the
shade and away from artificial heat is less than 40° F. at the location where
the application is to be made or when weather conditions or the surface
conditions are otherwise unfavorable.
(Ord. 2010-05, passed 4-27-2010) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 155.088 TACK COAT.
   (A)   The work consists of the application of a bituminous tack coat on a
previously prepared base or on an existing pavement surface in accordance with
these specifications.
   (B)   In general, a tack coat will not be required on primed bases except in
areas that have become excessively dirty and cannot be cleaned, or in areas
where the prime has cured to the extent that it has lost all bonding effect.
Generally, a tack coat will be required on hot bituminous base courses before
placing the surface course.
   (C)   The tack coat shall be applied with a pressure distributor except
that, on small jobs, if approved by the Engineer, application may be by other
mechanical devises or by hand methods. The bituminous material shall be heated
to a suitable temperature and shall be applied in a thin, uniform layer.
   (D)   The rate of application shall be between 0.02 and 0.08 gallon per
square yard. For tack coat applied on concrete pavement, which is to be
surfaced, the rate of application may exceed the upper limit, if directed by
the engineer.
   (E)   The tack coat shall be applied sufficiently in advance of the laying
of the bituminous mix to permit drying but shall not be applied so far in
advance that it might lose its adhesiveness as a result as a result of being
covered with dust or other foreign material. The tack coat surface shall be
kept free from traffic until the subsequent layer of bituminous hot mix has
been laid.
(Ord. 2010-05, passed 4-27-2010) Penalty, see §
10.99
ENGINEERING STANDARDS AND GUIDE SPECIFICATIONS FOR SECONDARY ROADS AND
RESIDENTIAL STREETS; WEARING SURFACE
§ 155.110 SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   The work consists of the construction of an asphaltic concrete surface
course upon previously prepared base course in accordance with the requirements
of these specifications.
   (B)   The contractor shall submit a job mix formula, as it applies to Type
S-1 or S-111 Asphaltic Concrete.
(2000 Code, § 58-311) (Ord. 88-01, passed 5-24-1988; Ord. 2010-05, passed 4-27-
2010) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 155.111 LIMITATIONS OF LAYING OPERATIONS.
   (A)   General. The mixture shall be spread only when the surface upon which
it is to be laid has been previously prepared, is intact, firm, and properly
cured and is dry. No mixture shall be spread that cannot be finished and
compacted during daylight hours.
   (B)   Wind. The mixture shall not be spread when the wind is blowing to such
an extent that proper and adequate compaction cannot be maintained or when
sand, dust, and the like are being deposited on the surface being paved, to the
extent that the bond between layers will be diminished.
   (C)   Ambient temperature. Temperature shall be 45° F. and rising. The
mixture shall be transported in tight covered vehicles previously cleaned of
all foreign material. The inside surface of the truck bodies shall be thinly
coated with soapy water or an approved emulsion containing not over 5% oil, but
no excess of either shall be used. Kerosene, gasoline or similar products shall
not be used. After the truck bodies are coated and before any mixture is placed
therein, they shall be raised so that all excess liquids will be drained out.
Prior to the laying of the mixture, the surface of the base to be covered shall
be cleaned of all loose and deleterious material by the use of power brooms or
blowers, supplemented by hand brooming where necessary.
(Ord. 2010-05, passed 4-27-2010) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 155.112 PLACING THE MIXTURE.
   (A)   All asphaltic concrete mixtures, other than adjacent to curb and
gutter or other true edges, shall be laid by the stringline method to assure
the obtaining of an accurate, uniform alignment of the pavement edge. Control
the unsupported pavement edge to ensure that it will not deviate more than ±
1.5 inches from the stringline.
   (B)   The temperature of the mixture at the time of spreading shall be
within 25° F. of the temperature set by the engineer, which temperature shall
be between 270° F. and 350° F. Any load or portion of a load of asphalt mix on
the roadway with a temperature outside of the master range shall be rejected
for use on the project. The engineer will be immediately notified of the
rejection.
   (C)   Any mixture caught in transit by a sudden rain may be laid only at the
contractor’s risk. Should such mixture prove unsatisfactory, it shall be
removed and replaced with satisfactory mixture at the contractors expense. In
no case shall the mixture be laid while rain is falling or when there is water
on the surface to be covered.
   (D)   The depth of each layer shall be checked at frequent intervals, not to
exceed 25 feet. Any deviation from the required thickness, in excess of the
allowable tolerance, shall be immediately corrected. When making an adjustment,
allow the paving machine to travel a minimum distance of 32 feet [ten m] to
stabilize before the second check is made to determine the effects of the
adjustment.
   (E)   In limited areas where the use of the spreader is impossible or
impracticable, the mixture may be spread and finished by hand. Straight-edging
and back- patching shall be done after initial compaction has been obtained and
while the material is still hot. Upon arrival, the mixture shall be dumped into
the approved mechanical spreader and immediately spread and struck-off to the
full width required and to such loose depth for each course that, when the work
is completed, the specified thickness will be secured. An excess amount of
mixture shall be carried ahead of the screed at all times. Hand raking shall be
done behind the machine as required.
   (F)   If necessary due to the traffic requirements, the mixture shall be
laid in strips in such manner as to provide for the passage of traffic. Where
the road is closed to traffic, the mixture may be laid to the full width, by
machines traveling in echelon. Before any rolling is started, the surface shall
be checked. Correct any irregularities, remove all drippings, fat sandy
accumulations from the screed, and fat spots from any source, shall be removed
and replaced with satisfactory material. No skin patching shall be done. When a
depression is to be corrected while the mixture is hot, the surface shall be
well scarified before the addition of fresh mixture.
   (G)   Sections denoted in this division refer to sections in the State of
FDOT Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, 2000 Edition.
      (1)   Preparation of Asphalt Cement shall be in accordance with Section
330-4.
      (2)   Preparation of Aggregates shall be in accordance with Section 330-
5.
      (3)   Preparation of Mixture shall be in accordance with Section 330-6.
      (4)   Transportation of the Mixture in accordance with Section 330-7.
      (5)   The mixture shall be placed in accordance with Section 330-9.
      (6)   Compacting the Mixture shall be in accordance with Section 330-10.
   (H)   Monitor the mix spread rate at the beginning of each day's production,
and as needed to control the operations, at a minimum of once per 200 tons
placed to ensure that the spread rate is within 5% of the target spread rate.
When determining the spread rate, use an average of five truckloads of mix.
   (I)   Joints, transverse and longitudinal, shall be constructed in
accordance with Section 330-11.
   (J)   The provisions of Surface Requirements shall comply with Section 330-
12.
   (K)   Upon completion of the finished pavement, no dumping of any material
directly on the pavement will be permitted. Vehicular traffic shall not be
permitted on any pavement that has not set sufficiently to prevent rutting or
other distortion.
(Ord. 2010-05, passed 4-27-2010) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 155.113 CONTROL TESTING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The thickness shall be determined from the length of the core borings.
Minimum frequency of cores samples shall be three per day. The maximum
allowable deficiency from the specified thickness shall be as follows:
      (1)   For pavement of specified thickness of two and one-half inches or
more - one-half inch.
      (2)   For pavement of a specified thickness of less than two and one-half
inches - one-four inch.
   (B)   Where the deficiency in thickness is:
      (1)   In excess of three-eighths inch, for pavement of less than two and
one-half inches in specified thickness; or
      (2)   In excess of three-fourths inch, for pavement of specified
thickness of two and one-half inches or more.
   (C)   The contractor shall correct deficiency either by replacing the full
thickness for a length extending at least 50 feet from each end of the
deficient area or (when permitted by the engineer) by overlaying. The
contractor will receive no compensation for any pavement removed, nor for the
work of removing such pavement.
   (D)   When the deficiency in the thickness of the pavement is over one-
fourth inch but not more than three-eighths inch, for pavement of specified
thickness less than two and one-half inches: or when the deficiency in
thickness is over one-half inch but not more than three-fourths inch, for
pavement of specified thickness of two and one-half inches or greater; the
contractor will be allowed to leave such pavement in place, but without
compensation other than for the bituminous material contained therein. The
areas of pavement for which no square yard payment will be made shall be the
product of the total distance between acceptable cores, multiplied by the width
of the lane which was laid at the particular pass in which deficient thickness
was indicated. To determine the extent of the deficiencies, additional cores
will be taken as required.
   (E)   For any case of excess deficiency of the pavement the contractor will
be permitted, if approved by the Engineer for each particular location, to
correct the deficient thickness by adding new surface material and compacting
to the same density as the adjacent surface. The area to be corrected and the
thickness of new material added shall be as specified. All costs of the
overlaying and compacting shall be borne by the contractor.
   (F)   The thickness of the pavement shall be determined from the length of
cores, at least two inches in diameter, taken at random points on the cross-
section and along the roadway. Each core shall represent a section not longer
than 200 feet. The average thickness shall be determined from the measured
thickness, and in accordance with the procedure and criteria specified herein.
If the contractor believes that the number of cores taken is insufficient to
properly indicate the thickness of the pavement, he or she may request
additional borings at locations designated by him or her. The cost of these
additional borings shall be deducted from any sums due the contractor unless
such borings indicate that the pavement within the questioned area is of
specified thickness.
   (G)   Average thickness shall be calculated for the total length of project.
When the thickness as measured by the cores is more than 14 inches greater than
the specified thickness, it shall be considered in the calculation as the
specified thickness plus one-half inch.
   (H)   Areas of deficient-thickness pavement which are left in place with no
compensation shall not be taken into account in the calculations.
   (I)   Where areas of defected surface or deficient thickness are corrected
by overlaying with additional material, the thickness used in the calculations
shall be the specified thickness for the areas.
(Ord. 2010-05, passed 4-27-2010) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 156: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
156.01   Definitions
   
156.02   Intent
   
156.03   Jurisdiction
Plans and Plats; Preapplication Review Procedure
   
156.15   Preapplication procedure
   
156.16   Procedure of conditional approval or preliminary plat
   
156.17   Procedure for approval of final plat
   
156.18   Plans and data
Preliminary Plat
   
156.30   Data required for conditional approval
   
156.31   Key plan showing location of the tract
   
156.32   Preliminary plat
   
156.33   Draft protective covenant
   
156.34   Plans submitted to Council
   
156.35   Additional fees for extension of time
Final Plat
   
156.50   Requirements and contents
   
156.51   Costs
   
156.52   Security bond
   
156.53   Procedure for approval
   
156.54   Maintenance bond required
Required Improvements
   
156.65   Monuments
   
156.66   Utility systems
   
156.67   Stormwater
   
156.68   Sewage requirements
   
156.69   Central sewerage system
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 156.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. In the
event that any term used herein is not defined then the definition of such term
as used in the latest version of the Dictionary of Architecture and
Construction, by Cyril M. Harris, McGraw-Hill Publishing shall be used.
   BLOCK. The property abutting on a street on one side of the street and lying
between the two nearest intersecting streets and/or railroad rights-of-way or
waterway, golf course, campus, park or other park or other open space when used
otherwise than in a plotted description of specific property.
   BUILDING LINES. Lines established by
Chapter 157 along the front, rear and sides of a lot, which govern the location
of structures on a lot.
   CORNER LOT. Any lot situated at the intersection of two streets and abutting
the streets.
   DEVELOPMENT. The act of building structures and/or installing site
improvements.
   DIMENSIONS OF LOTS. For the:
      (1)   DEPTH OF A LOT. The distance between the midpoints of straight
lines connecting the foremost points of the side lot lines in front and the
rearmost points of the side lot lines in the rear.
      (2)   WIDTH OF A LOT. The distance between the side lines of the lot if
the side lines are parallel to each other; if side lines are not parallel,
width shall be construed as rear width.
   EASEMENT. A strip of land reserved for public utilities, drainage and other
public services, the title to which shall remain in the property owners,
subject to the right of use designated in the reservation of the servitude.
   FINAL PLAT. The final map or drawing on which the subdivisioner’s plan of
subdivision is presented to the Town Council for approval and when approved
will be submitted to the clerk of the circuit court of the county for
recording.
   FRONTAGE. The distance measured along a public street right-of-way.
   INTERIOR LOT. A lot other than a corner lot with only one frontage on a
street.
   LOT. A parcel of land of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning
requirements for use, coverage and area, and to provide yards and other open
space as are required in this chapter. The LOT shall have frontage on an
improved public street or an approved private street and may consist of:
      (1)   A single lot of record;
      (2)   A portion of a lot of record;
      (3)   A combination of complete lots of record, or complete lots of
record and portions of lots of record, or of lots of record; or
      (4)   A parcel of land described by metes and bounds, provided that in no
case of division of combination shall any residual lot or parcel be created
that does not meet the requirements of this chapter.
   LOT LINE. The boundary line of a lot.
   PRELIMINARY PLAT. A preliminary map, drawing or chart indicating the
proposed layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the Planning and Zoning
Board for recommendation and to the Town Council for approval.
   REVERSED-FRONTAGE LOT. A lot on which the frontage is at right angles or
approximately right angles (interior angle less than 120 degrees) to the
general pattern on the area. A REVERSED-FRONTAGE LOT may also be a corner lot,
an interior lot or a through lot.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. Land reserved, used or to be used for a street, alley,
walkway, drainage facility or other public purpose.
   STREETS AND ALLEYS. A way for a vehicular traffic, whether designated as a
street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard,
land, place or however otherwise designated.
      (1)   ALLEYS. Minor ways used primarily for vehicular service access to
the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting on a street.
      (2)   ARTERIAL STREETS FOR HIGHWAYS. Those used primarily for fast or
heavy traffic.
      (3)   COLLECTOR STREETS. Those that carry traffic from minor streets to
the motor system or arterial streets and highways, including the principal
entrance streets of a residential development and streets for circulation
within a development.
      (4)   MARGINAL ACCESS STREETS. Minor streets parallel to and adjacent to
arterial streets and highways, and provide access to abutting properties and
protection from through traffic.
      (5)   MINOR STREETS. Those used primarily for access to the abutting
properties.
   SUBDIVISION. Includes and encompasses the following:
      (1)   In those cases in which new public or approved private streets are
required to be constructed for access prior to building as required by
Chapter 157 of this code, all divisions of a tract or parcel of land into three
or more lots, parcels, building sites or other divisions of land for the
purpose of transfer of ownership or building development;
      (2)   In those cases involving the dedication of a new street or a change
of existing streets, all divisions of a tract or parcel of land in two or more
lots, parcels, building sites or other divisions of land for the purpose of a
transfer of ownership or building development;
      (3)   Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, the following
shall not be included within the definition of the term SUBDIVISION nor be
subject to the regulations prescribed by this chapter:
         (a)   The combination or recombination of portions of previously
platted plots where the total number of lots is not increased, the resultant
lots are equal to or exceed the standards of the town as required by
Chapter 157 of this code, and necessary adjustments in utilities and site
improvements meet the approval of the Building Official;
         (b)   The division of land into parcels greater than five acres where
no street right-of-way dedication is involved; and
         (c)   The public acquisition of strips of land for the widening or
opening of streets.
      (4)   Resubdivision, and when appropriate to the context, shall relate to
the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided; and
      (5)   A group development developed so that it might be broken into
smaller parcels at some future time, which shall also meet the requirements of
this chapter.
   THROUGH LOT. A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than one
street. Through lots abutting two streets may be referred to as a double-
frontage lot.
   UTILITIES. Means but is not limited to power systems, gas systems, sanitary
sewer systems, storm drainage systems, telephone systems and television cable
systems.
(2000 Code, § 58-1) (Ord. 88-01, passed 5-24-1988; Ord. 2014-04, passed 3-25-
2014)
§ 156.02 INTENT.
   (A)   The public health, safety, comfort, economy, good order, appearance,
convenience, morals and general welfare require the harmonious, orderly and
progressive development of land within the town. The intent of this chapter is
to secure or to ensure:
      (1)   The establishment of standards of subdivision design that will
encourage and lead to the development of sound and economically stable
communities, and the creation of healthful living environments;
      (2)   Installation to prescribed standards by the land developer of those
necessary improvements that ought not to become a charge on the citizens and
taxpayers of already existing communities;
      (3)   The efficient, adequate and economic supply of utilities and
services to new land developments;
      (4)   The prevention of traffic hazards and the establishment of safe and
convenient means for the circulation of traffic, both vehicular and pedestrian
within new land developments and from new land developments into and from
established communities;
      (5)   That for lands within the 100-year floodplain, subdivisions shall
be designed to minimize flood damage; and
      (6)   The provisions of public open spaces in new land developments
through the dedication or reservation of land for recreational, education and
other public purposes.
   (B)   The regulation of the subdivision of land is intended to:
      (1)   Aid in the coordination of land development in the town in
accordance with orderly physical patterns;
      (2)   Discourage land subdivisions without installation by the developer
of adequate and necessary physical improvements;
      (3)   Discourage haphazard, premature, uneconomic or scattered land
development to ensure that the citizens and taxpayers of the town will not have
to bear the costs resulting from haphazard subdivision of land and the lack of
authority to require installation by the developer of adequate and necessary
physical improvements;
      (4)   Ensure to the purchaser of land in a subdivision that necessary
improvements of lasting quality have been installed; and
      (5)   Serve as one of the several instruments of land use control for the
implementation of the comprehensive plan.
(2000 Code, § 58-2) (Ord. 88-01, passed 5-24-1988)
§ 156.03 JURISDICTION.
   This chapter shall govern all subdivisions of land within the town. However,
no requirements under this chapter shall be so applied as to result in
retroactive legislation or to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or
interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances, except those
specifically repealed, or with private restrictions placed upon property by
deed covenant or other private agreement, or with restrictive covenants running
with the land to which the town is a party. Where this chapter imposes a
greater restriction upon land than is imposed or required by existing
provisions of law, ordinance, contract or deed, the provisions in this chapter
shall control.
(2000 Code, § 58-3) (Ord. 88-01, passed 5-24-1988)
PLANS AND PLATS; PREAPPLICATION REVIEW PROCEDURE
§ 156.15 PREAPPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Prior to the filing of an application for conditional approval of the
preliminary plat (general subdivision plan), the subdivider shall submit to the
Planning and Zoning Board data as specified in §
156.18. This step does not require a formal application fee or filing of a plat
with the Planning and Zoning Board.
   (B)   Within 15 days, the Planning and Zoning Board shall inform the
subdivider that the plans and data as submitted or as so modified do or do not
meet the objectives of this chapter. If the Planning and Zoning Board finds the
plans and data do not meet with the objectives of this chapter, it shall
express its reasons for the finding.
(2000 Code, § 58-56) (Ord. 88-01, passed 5-24-1988)
§ 156.16 PROCEDURE OF CONDITIONAL APPROVAL OR PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   (A)   On reaching conclusions, informally as recommended in §
156.15, regarding his or her general program and objectives, the subdivider
shall prepare a preliminary plat, together with improvement plans and other
supplementary material as specified in §§
156.30 through
156.33.
   (B)   Four copies of the preliminary plat and supplementary material
specified shall be submitted to the Town Clerk with a written application for
conditional approval at least seven days prior to the meeting at which it is to
be considered. A filing fee in an amount on file in the Town Clerk’s office
plus any extraordinary costs shall accompany the submission of the preliminary
plat.
   (C)   Within 30 days following the review of the preliminary plat and other
material submitted for conformity to this chapter and negotiations with the
subdivider on changes deemed advisable and the kind and extent of improvements
to be made by him or her, the Planning and Zoning Board shall state on the plat
as submitted or modified their approval or disapproval. If approved, the
Planning and Zoning Board shall express its approval in writing to the Town
Council as conditional approval and state the conditions of the approval if
any; or if disapproved, it shall express its disapproval and the reasons for
disapproval to the Town Council in writing.
   (D)   The action of the Planning and Zoning Board shall be noted on four
copies of the preliminary plat, referenced and not attached to any conditions
determined. One copy shall be returned to the subdivider, two copies given to
the Town Council, and the other retained by the Planning and Zoning Board.
   (E)   The Town Council will inform the subdivider of the approval or
disapproval of the preliminary plat or conditional approval or disapproval of
the preliminary plat and state the conditions of the approval or disapproval
within two regular meetings thereafter or 30 days.
   (F)   Conditional approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute
approval of the final subdivision plat, but it shall be deemed an expression of
approval of the layout submitted on the preliminary plat as a guide of the
preparation of the final plat that will be submitted for approval by the
Planning and Zoning Board and for recording upon fulfillment of the
requirements of this chapter and the conditions of the conditional approval, if
any.
(2000 Code, § 58-57) (Ord. 88-01, passed 5-24-1988)
§ 156.17 PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF FINAL PLAT.
   (A)   No construction of any kind shall be permitted until final approval of
the plat by the Council, or until a security bond has been provided as per §
156.52.
   (B)   However, in no case shall construction begin until the Council has
approved the preliminary plat and final construction plans.
   (C)   In addition, all required permits must have been issued by the
appropriate regulatory agencies.
(2000 Code, § 58-58) (Ord. 88-01, passed 5-24-1988; Ord. 2004-07, passed 5-25-
2004) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 156.18 PLANS AND DATA.
   (A)   General subdivision information shall describe or outline the existing
conditions of the site and the proposed development as necessary to supplement
the drawings required by this chapter. This information may include data on
existing covenants, land characters, available community facilities and
utilities, and information describing the subdivision proposal such as number
of residential lots, typical lots, typical lot width and depth, price range,
business areas, playground, park and other public areas, proposed protective
covenants and proposed utilities and street improvements.
   (B)   A location map provided by the town at cost shall be altered by the
subdivider to show the relationship of the proposed subdivision to existing
community facilities that serve or influence it.
(2000 Code, § 58-59) (Ord. 88-01, passed 5-24-1988)
PRELIMINARY PLAT
§ 156.30 DATA REQUIRED FOR CONDITIONAL APPROVAL.
   Data required as a basis for the preliminary plat, §
156.32, shall include existing conditions as follows except when otherwise
specified by the Planning and Zoning Board:
   (A)   Boundary lines;
   (B)   Easements, their location, width and purpose;
   (C)   Street names on or adjacent to the tract and right-of-way width and
location;
   (D)   Utilities on and adjacent to the tract; location, size and invert
elevation of sanitary, storm and combined sewers; location and size of water
mains; location of fire hydrants, electric and telephone poles and
streetlights; if water mains and sewers are not on or adjacent to the tract,
indicate the directions and distance to and size of nearest ones, showing
invert elevation of sewers;
   (E)   Subsurface conditions on the tract, if required by the Planning and
Zoning Board; location and results of tests used to ascertain subsurface soil,
rock and groundwater conditions; depth to ground water unless test pits are dry
at a depth of five feet; location and results of soil percolation tests if
individual sewage disposal systems are proposed; and
   (F)   Other conditions on adjacent land; approximate direction and gradient
of ground slope including any embankments or retaining walls; for adjacent
platted land, refer to subdivision plat by book and page number and subdivision
title.
(2000 Code, § 58-81) (Ord. 88-01, passed 5-24-1988)
§ 156.31 KEY PLAN SHOWING LOCATION OF THE TRACT.
   The key plan showing the location of the tract shall contain the title and
certification, present tract designation according to official records in the
office of the appropriate recorder, title under which proposed subdivision is
to be recorded with names and addresses of owners and notation stating
approximate acreage, scale and north arrow.
(2000 Code, § 58-82) (Ord. 88-01, passed 5-24-1988)
§ 156.32 PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   The preliminary plat (general subdivision plat) shall be at a scale of 200
feet to one inch or larger (preferred scale of 50 feet to one inch). It shall
show all existing conditions required in §
156.30 and shall show all proposals, including the following:
   (A)   Street names and right-of-way widths;
   (B)   Other rights-of-way or easement locations, widths and purposes;
   (C)   Location of utilities, if not shown on other exhibits;
   (D)   Lot lines, lot numbers and block numbers;
   (E)   Sites, if any, for multi-family dwellings, shopping centers, churches,
industry or other nonpublic uses exclusive of single-family dwellings;
   (F)   Sites, if any, to be reserved or dedicated for parks, playgrounds or
other public uses;
   (G)   Site data, including number of residential lots, typical lot sizes and
approximate acres in parks and the like; and
   (H)   Title, scale and north arrow.
(2000 Code, § 58-83) (Ord. 88-01, passed 5-24-1988) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 156.33 DRAFT PROTECTIVE COVENANT.
   A draft protective covenant whereby the subdivider proposes to regulate land
use in the subdivision and otherwise protect the proposed development should be
included.
(2000 Code, § 58-84) (Ord. 88-01, passed 5-24-1988)
§ 156.34 PLANS SUBMITTED TO COUNCIL.
   (A)   If preliminary plans submitted meet the requirements of this chapter,
the Planning and Zoning Board may approve the plans as submitted and
immediately submit them to the Town Council.
   (B)   If preliminary plans submitted do not meet the specifications and/or
requirements of this chapter, the Planning and Zoning Board, upon request from
the developer, may grant an extension of 15 days or longer but not to exceed 30
days. The purpose of the extension is for the developer to add revisions to the
preliminary plat to meet the standards of this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 58-85) (Ord. 88-01, passed 5-24-1988)
§ 156.35 ADDITIONAL FEES FOR EXTENSION OF TIME.
   No additional fees are to be borne by the developer when the Planning and
Zoning Board grants an extension for revision of the preliminary plat.
(2000 Code, § 58-86) (Ord. 88-01, passed 5-24-1988)
FINAL PLAT
§ 156.50 REQUIREMENTS AND CONTENTS.
   (A)   Final plats shall be drawn in ink on tracing cloth on sheets no
smaller than 24 inches wide by 30 inches long and shall be at a scale of 200
feet to one inch or larger (preferred scale of 50 feet to one inch). Where
necessary the plat may be on several sheets accompanied by an index sheet. For
large subdivisions the final plat may be submitted for approval progressively
in contiguous sections satisfactory to the Planning and Zoning Board.
   (B)   The final plat shall show the following:
      (1)   Primary control points, approved by the Town Engineer or
descriptions and ties to control points to which all dimensions, angles,
bearings and similar data on the plat shall be referred;
      (2)   Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, easements and
other rights-of-way and property lines of residential lots and other sites,
with accurate dimensions, bearing or deflection angles, and radii, arcs and
central angles of all curves;
      (3)   Name and right-of-way width of each street or other right-of-way;
      (4)   Location, dimensions and purpose of any easement;
      (5)   Numbers or letters to identify each lot or site;
      (6)   Purpose for which sites, other than residential lots, are dedicated
or reserved;
      (7)   Location of monuments;
      (8)   Reference to recorded subdivision plat of adjoining platted land by
plat book, page and number;
      (9)   Certification by surveyor certifying to accuracy of survey and
plat;
      (10)   Certification of title showing that the applicant is the
landowner; and
      (11)   Statement by the owner dedicating streets, rights-of-way and any
sites for public uses. If the property platted is encumbered by a mortgage, the
mortgagee must join in signing the plat.
   (C)   The development plan shall be a white print on sheets 24 inches wide
by 30 inches long and shall be at a scale of 200 feet to one inch or larger.
Where necessary, the development plan may be on several sheets accompanied by
an index sheet showing the entire subdivision. For large subdivisions, the
development may be submitted for approval progressively in contiguous sections
satisfactory to the Planning and Zoning Board. It shall contain the following:
      (1)   Title, scale, north arrow and datum;
      (2)   Plans of streets and drainage showing grades approved by the Town
Engineer. The plans shall be drawn to town standard scales and elevations and
shall be based on a datum plan approved by the Building Department or a
registered engineer designated by the Town Council; and
      (3)   A certificate by the Building Department or a registered engineer
designated by the Council certifying that the subdivider has complied with one
of the following alternatives:
         (a)   All street and drainage improvements have been installed in
accord with the requirements of this chapter and with the recommendation of the
Town Council; or
         (b)   If the streets and improvements as built do not conform to the
plans on file with the town, whether by variances granted by the Town Council
or otherwise, new plans shall be submitted showing the subdivision as built.
The as-built plans shall supersede and replace the former plans upon approval
by the Town Council.
(2000 Code, § 58-111) (Ord. 88-01, passed 5-24-1988) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 156.51 COSTS.
   When the Town Council or Planning and Zoning Board is required to seek the
services of a registered engineer, inspection fees based on actual cost should
be charged in addition to a sliding scale of fees for reviewing subdivisions of
different sizes. The cost is to be borne by developer.
(2000 Code, § 58-112) (Ord. 88-01, passed 5-24-1988)
§ 156.52 SECURITY BOND.
   No plat shall be recorded unless the public or private road providing access
has been constructed, inspected and approved by the town or unless a security
bond has been provided for and securing to the public the actual construction
and installation of the improvements within a period required by the governing
body in the amount of 125% of the uncompleted construction cost.
(2000 Code, § 58-113) (Ord. 88-01, passed 5-24-1988; Ord. 2004-07, passed 5-25-
2004)
§ 156.53 PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL.
   (A)   When final revisions are received by the Planning and Zoning Board
from the developer on the preliminary plat, the Planning and Zoning Board will
assure that the conditions necessary to secure the objectives and requirements
of this chapter have been met.
   (B)   The revised preliminary plat shall be submitted to the Town Council,
along with recommendations from the Planning and Zoning Board.
   (C)   Final approval of the plan rests with the Town Council.
(2000 Code, § 58-114) (Ord. 88-01, passed 5-24-1988)
§ 156.54 MAINTENANCE BOND REQUIRED.
   A maintenance warranty bond in the amount 20% of the total cost of the
construction of infrastructure improvements is required. Said maintenance
warranty bond is to be in force for two years following the acceptance by the
town of the final improvements. The bond shall be from a company licensed as a
surety in the State of Florida, listed by the United States Treasury
Department, and rated A: AAA in Best's Insurance Guide.
(Ord. 2018-05, passed 9-25-2018)
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
§ 156.65 MONUMENTS.
   Concrete monuments P.R.M.s shall be placed at all block corners.
(2000 Code, § 58-346) (Ord. 88-01, passed 5-24-1988) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 156.66 UTILITY SYSTEMS.
   (A)   If community water systems and sewage systems are installed, they will
be installed per State Board of Health specifications.
   (B)   New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems. Water supply systems
shall be located, elevated and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage.
   (C)   New or replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharges from the system into floodwaters, and on-site waste disposal systems
so as to avoid impairment of them or contamination shall be located, elevated
and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
   (D)   All utilities and facilities such as gas and electrical systems shall
be located, elevated and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
(2000 Code, § 58-347) (Ord. 88-01, passed 5-24-1988) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 156.67 STORMWATER.
   (A)   Treatment of stormwater runoff. All drainage facilities shall include
design features, such as catchment basins at storm sewer outfalls, retention
ponds or swales, that are capable of retaining on-site the first inch of rain
falling on the subdivision in order to remove oils, suspended solids and other
objectionable material in stormwater runoff.
   (B)   Site retention ponds. Stormwaters in areas that have no physically or
environmentally permissible drainage outlet shall drain into in site retention
ponds that are capable of holding stormwater from the 100-year flood.
(2000 Code, § 58-348) (Ord. 88-01, passed 5-24-1988)
§ 156.68 SEWAGE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Septic tank permits shall not be issued for lots where central sewage
is available or can reasonably be made available. Prior to submitting a new
subdivision to the County Health Department for approval, the developer shall
first determine the location of the nearest or most adequate existing central
sewage system and shall contact the utility to determine the availability and
feasibility of obtaining service. The utility’s reply to the inquiry shall be
in writing, with a copy to the Health Department. Where an existing utility is
not available to provide central sewerage service, the developer shall have an
engineer registered in the state determine the feasibility of providing a
central sewerage system to serve the proposed subdivision. A copy of the report
of the feasibility determination shall be submitted to the County Health
Department for review.
   (B)   Where it is shown to the satisfaction of the County Health Department
that central sewerage service cannot be feasibly provided either from an
existing system or by development of a subdivision system, the developer may
submit four sets of completed subdivision analysis forms, including submittals
outlined in the instructions of the forms, to the County Health Department for
review. Forms may be obtained from any of the offices of the County Health
Department. The completed forms shall constitute an application pending the
future availability of central sewerage service.
   (C)   No subdivision shall be approved for waste disposal by individual
septic tank systems except when the septic tank suitability requirements of the
rules, regulations and standards of the County Health Department are met by the
buildable area of each lot in the subdivision.
   (D)   Where the County Health Department’s septic tank suitability
requirements can be met and the central sewerage service is not considered
available and feasible, individual septic tank disposal systems may be allowed
for single-family dwellings according to the following schedules:
      (1)   With public water supply, septic tank density ratio equals one gray
water tank per half acre of lot area and one black water tank; and
      (2)   With individual wells, one gray water tank per half acre of lot
area and one black water tank.
   (E)   Multi-family and commercial installation requirements shall be
determined individually by the County Health Department.
(2000 Code, § 58-349) (Ord. 88-01, passed 5-24-1988)
§ 156.69 CENTRAL SEWERAGE SYSTEM.
   (A)   The maintenance cost of the central sewerage system shall be assessed
against each property benefitted.
   (B)   Where plans for future public sanitary sewerage systems exist (not to
exceed 15 years), the applicant shall install sanitary sewer lines, laterals
and mains from the street curb to a point in the subdivision boundary where a
future connection with the public sewer main shall be made. Sewer lines shall
be laid from the house to the street line, and a connection shall be available
in the home to connect from the individual disposal system to the sewer system
when the public sewers become available. The sewer systems shall be capped
until ready for use and shall conform to all plans for installation of the
public sewer system, where the exists, and shall be ready for connection to the
public sewer main.
   (C)   Intensive development that does occur in marginal lands should utilize
central sewage collection and treatment facilities. Low-intensity development
should utilize sewage facilities appropriate to the conditions. Any structure
built in floodplains should be designed to allow free flow of water. Floodplain
development in a manner that would significantly impede the flow of floodwaters
and cause floodwaters to back up should not be permitted unless it is clearly
shown that the increase upstream will not impede the flow of floodwaters and
cause floodwaters to back up.
(2000 Code, § 58-350) (Ord. 88-01, passed 5-24-1988)
CHAPTER 157: ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
157.001   Interpretation
   
157.002   Scope
   
157.003   Definitions
   
157.004   Annexed territory
   
157.005   Vacations of built-up land
   
157.006   Establishment of use districts
   
157.007   Application for special zoning
   
157.008   Payment of required advertising costs
   
157.009   Payment of costs required for permit or certificate
   
157.010   Provisions declared to be minimum requirements
   
157.011   Complaints regarding violations
   
157.012   Remedies
Administration; General Provisions
   
157.025   Duties of administrative official, Board of Adjustment, Town Council
and courts on matters or appeal
   
157.026   Amendments
   
157.027   Administration and enforcement by Building Official; penalty
Planning and Zoning Board
   
157.040   Creation of Board
   
157.041   Organization and members
   
157.042   Meetings; records
   
157.043   Authority and duties of the Planning and Zoning Board
Board of Adjustment
   
157.055   Establishment and procedure
   
157.056   Proceedings
   
157.057   Powers and duties
   
157.058   Appeals from the Board of Adjustment
Permits and Certificate of Occupancy
   
157.070   Building permits required
   
157.071   Application for building permit
   
157.072   Certificate of occupancy required
   
157.073   Expiration of building permits
   
157.074   Construction and use to be as provided in applications, plans,
permits and certificates of occupancy
   
157.075   Special inspector
Nonconformities
   
157.090   Intent
   
157.091   Extension and enlargement
   
157.092   Nonconforming lots of record
   
157.093   Nonconforming uses of land
   
157.094   Nonconforming structures
   
157.095   Nonconforming uses of structures or of structures and premises in
combination
   
157.096   Abandonment
   
157.097   Repairs and maintenance
   
157.098   Special exceptions
   
157.099   Temporary uses
   
157.100   Adult entertainment establishments
Amendments
   
157.115   Conditional uses
   
157.116   Procedure
   
157.117   Limitations
   
157.118   Protest by property owners
   
157.119   Modification of district boundary changes
   
157.120   Reconsideration of district boundary changes
   
157.121   Procedures for quasi-judicial hearings; ex parte communications, site
visits; receipt of expert opinion and review of mail and other communications
Site Development Plans
   
157.135   Purpose and intent
   
157.136   Definitions
   
157.137   Applicability and developments requiring site plan review
   
157.138   Fee
   
157.139   Application requirements
   
157.140   Sufficient application; review time; staff report
   
157.141   Staff report; Planning Board review
   
157.142   Duration of approved site plan; extension; phasing
   
157.143   Modifications to a site or to an approved site plan
   
157.144   Site standard variances
   
157.145   Exceptions
   
157.146   Appeals
   
157.147   Enforcement
   
157.148   Required improvements
   
157.149   Applicability
   
157.150   Site maintenance obligations
   
157.151   Violation
Districts Generally
   
157.165   Interpretation of district boundaries
   
157.166   Application of district regulations
   
157.167   Schedule of district regulations
R-A Residential Agricultural
   
157.180   District and intent
R-1AAA Single-Family Residential
   
157.195   District and intent
R-1A Single-Family Residential
   
157.225   District and intent
R-2 One-, Two- and Multiple-Family Residential
   
157.240   District and intent
C-1 Neighborhood Commercial
   
157.270   District and intent
C-2 General Commercial
   
157.285   District and intent
C-P Commercial Parkway
   
157.300   District and intent
M-1 Light Industrial
   
157.315   District and intent
TR-1 Mobile Home Parks
   
157.330   District and intent
TTP Travel Trailer Park
   
157.360   Definitions
   
157.361   Permitted uses
   
157.362   Accessory uses
   
157.363   Special exceptions
   
157.364   (Reserved)
   
157.365   Design standards for travel trailer parks
   
157.366   Design requirements for travel trailer sites
   
157.367   Provision of services in travel trailer parks
   
157.368   Operation of travel trailer park
   
157.369   Regulation of travel trailer parks
Adult Entertainment
   
157.380   District and intent
   
157.381   Principal uses and structures
   
157.382   Location requirements for adult entertainment uses
   
157.383   Accessory uses and structures
   
157.384   Special exceptions
   
157.385   Prohibited uses
   
157.386   Lot and structure requirements
   
157.387   Site plan required
   
157.388   Buffering/screening requirements
   
157.389   Variances and appeals
Government Managed Lands
   
157.400   Purpose and intent
   
157.401   Permitted principal uses
   
157.402   Accessory uses
   
157.403   Prohibited uses
   
157.404   Height, yard and area requirements
   
157.405   Special controls
Planned Developments; Generally
   
157.420   Planned Commercial Developments; permitted
   
157.421   Planned Industrial Developments; permitted
Supplementary District Regulations
   
157.490   Building setback lines
   
157.491   Erection of more than one principal structure on a lot
   
157.492   Parcels of land divided by public right-of-way
   
157.493   Yard encroachments
   
157.494   Accessory structures
   
157.495   Air conditioning units in residential districts
   
157.496   Vision clearance at corners, curb cuts and railroad crossings
   
157.497   (Reserved)
   
157.498   Structures to have access
   
157.499   Parking, storage or use of major recreational equipment
   
157.500   Minimum width of courts
   
157.501   Water areas
   
157.502   Visual screens
   
157.503   Buildings required
   
157.504   Driveways and curb breaks in commercial districts
   
157.505   Prohibited uses east of the eastern right-of-way line of U.S.
Highway-1
   
157.506   Riverfront breezeway/visual corridor
   
157.507   Fences, walls and entranceways and related structures
   
157.508   (Reserved)
   
157.509   Additional yard requirements abutting residential areas
   
157.510   Medical marijuana treatment center dispensing facilities
Off-Street Parking and Loading
   
157.515   Definition
   
157.516   Requirements for off-street parking
   
157.517   Location of off-street parking spaces
   
157.518   Requirements for off-street loading spaces
   
157.519   Location and dimension of off-street loading space
Home-Based Businesses
   
157.530   Regulations
Telecommunications Towers and Antennas
   
157.545   Purpose and intent
   
157.546   Definitions
   
157.547   Location priority
   
157.548   Permitted uses
   
157.549   Conditional use permit
   
157.550   Development standards
   
157.551   Permit application
   
157.552   Administrative permit
   
157.553   Abandonment of communication towers
   
157.554   Towers allowed as permitted uses or special exceptions or conditional
uses in the following zoning district classifications
   
157.555   Expectations and applicability
   
157.556   Town owned or government lands
   
157.557   Fees
   
157.558   Structural requirements
   
157.559   Tower separation requirements
   
157.560   Method of determining tower height
   
157.561   Access
   
157.562   Certifications and inspections
 
   
157.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 157.001 INTERPRETATION.
   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of
public health, safety and welfare. To protect the public, among other purposes,
the provisions are intended to provide for adequate light, pure air, safety
from fire and other danger, undue concentration of population and ample parking
facilities.
(2000 Code, § 66-1) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975)
§ 157.002 SCOPE.
   It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way
impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances,
except those specifically repealed by this chapter, or with private agreement
of record, or with restrictive covenants running with the land to which the
town is a party. Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon land,
buildings or structures than is imposed or required by the existing provisions
of law, ordinance, contract or deed, the provisions of this chapter shall
control.
(2000 Code, § 66-2) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975)
§ 157.003 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. In the
event that any term used herein is not defined then the definition of such
terms as used in the latest version of the Dictionary of Architecture and
Construction, by Cyril M. Harris, McGraw-Hill Publishing shall be used.
   ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE. A use or structure on the same lot with, and of
a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or
structure.
   ADULT ARCADE. An establishment where, for any form of consideration, one or
more motion picture projectors, slide projectors, videotape or playback and
viewing devices, or similar machines, for viewing by five or fewer persons
each, are used to show films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions that are characterized by emphasis on the depiction
or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
For the purpose of this chapter, the term ADULT ARCADE is included with the
definition of ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER.
   ADULT BOOKSTORE. An establishment that sells, leases or rents adult material
for any form of consideration unless the adult material is accessible only by
employees and either the gross income from the sale or rental of adult material
comprises less than 10% of the gross income from the sale or rental of goods or
services at the establishment or the individual items of adult material offered
for sale or rental comprises less than 15% of the individual items publicly
displayed at the establishment as stock in trade. It is an affirmative defense
to an alleged violation of this chapter regarding operating an adult bookstore
without an adult entertainment license if the alleged violator shows that the
adult material is accessible only by employees and either the gross income from
the sale or rental of adult material comprises less than 10% of the gross
income from the sale or rental of goods or services at the establishment and
the individual items of adult material offered for sale or rental comprise less
than 15% of the individual items publicly displayed at the establishment as
stock in trade.
   ADULT BOOTH. A small enclosure within an adult entertainment establishment
accessible to any person (regardless of whether a fee is charged for access)
for the purpose of viewing adult materials. The term ADULT BOOTH includes, but
is not limited to, a peep show booth. The term ADULT BOOTH does not include a
hallway/foyer used primarily to enter or exit the establishment or its
restrooms. However, only one person shall be allowed to occupy a booth at any
time.
   ADULT CARE FACILITIES. Any facility regulated by the State of Florida Agency
for Health Care Administration including, but not limited to, long term care
facilities, F.S. § 400.0060(5), as amended from time to time; nursing homes,
F.S. § 400.011, as amended from time to time; intermediate, special services,
and transitional living facilities, F.S. § 400.701, as amended from time to
time; intermediate care facilities for developmentally disabled persons, F.S. §
400.960, as amended from time to time; assisted living facilities, F.S. §
429.02(5), as amended from time to time; adult day care centers, F.S. § 429.901
(1); adult family-care homes, F.S. § 429.65(2); and health care facilities,
F.S. § 408.032(8), as amended from time to time.
   ADULT DANCING ESTABLISHMENT. An establishment that permits, suffers or
allows dancers to display or expose specified anatomical areas. Any
establishment on which premises any employee, agent or independent contractor
displays or exposes specified anatomical areas shall be deemed an ADULT DANCING
ESTABLISHMENT and shall be required to obtain a license pursuant to town
regulations and ordinances.
   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT. An adult motion picture theater, a
leisure spa establishment, an adult bookstore or an adult dancing
establishment.
   ADULT MATERIALS. Either of the following:
      (1)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter or
photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other visual
representations or recordings, novelties and devices that have as their primary
or dominant theme matter depicting, illustrating describing or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or
      (2)   Instruments, devices or paraphernalia designed for use in
connection with specified sexual activities.
   ADULT MOTEL. Any hotel or motel, boardinghouse, roominghouse or other
lodging that includes the word “adult” in any name it uses, and otherwise
advertises outside the individual rooms the presentation of film, video or any
other visual material or methods that has as its primary or dominant theme
matters depicting, illustrating or relating to specified sexual activities for
observation by its patrons. For the purposes of this chapter, an ADULT MOTEL is
included within the definition of ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER.
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. An enclosed building or a portion or part of
an enclosed building or an open-air theater designed to permit viewing by
patrons seated in automobiles or other seating provisions, for any form of
consideration, film, video or any other visual material or method that has as
its primary or dominant theme matters depicting, illustrating or relating to
specified sexual activities for observation by its patrons, and includes any
hotel or motel, boardinghouse, roominghouse or other lodging for any form of
consideration that advertises the presentation of the film material. For the
purposes of this chapter, an ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER includes an adult
arcade, an adult motel and an adult motion picture booth.
   ALLEY. Any public or private right-of-way set aside for secondary public
travel and servicing that is less than 30 feet in width, is not generally used
for general traffic circulation, and is not otherwise officially designated as
a street.
   AMUSEMENT PARK. A commercially operated recreational complex containing one
or more indoor or outdoor entertainment facilities. See also §
157.180(D)(3).
   APARTMENT. The same as DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY.
   ARCADE AMUSEMENT CENTERS. Shall have the same meaning as provided in F.S. §
849.161, as amended from time to time.
   AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR FACILITIES. Includes all mechanical overhaul or repair and
body work and painting of automotive vehicles.
   AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLE. Any self-propelled vehicle or conveyance designed and
used for the purpose of transporting or moving persons, animals, freight,
merchandise or any substance. The term shall include passenger cars, trucks,
buses, motorcycles, scooters and station wagons, but shall not include
tractors, construction equipment or machinery or any device used for performing
a job except as stated above.
   AWNING. A detachable, rooflike cover, supported by the walls of the building
for protection from sun and weather.
   BEDROOM. A room enclosed by permanent walls and including a clothes closet.
   BREEZEWAY. Includes the area not obstructed by any building or accessory
structure and is essentially free and clear from the ground to the sky.
Swimming pools, parking lots and other recreational structures that do not
require buildings shall be permitted within the BREEZEWAY areas.
   BUFFER. A wall, fence or vegetative screen placed within the yard area with
the express purpose of screening, both in terms of noise and sight, the
particular area from the adjacent property. The type of BUFFER shall be
determined at the time of site plan approval or the issuance of a building
permit.
   BUILDABLE AREA. The portion of a lot remaining after required yards have
been provided.
   BUILDING or STRUCTURE. Any structure constructed or used for residence,
business, industry or other private or public purposes or accessory to the
purposes, including sheds, tents, lunch wagons, trailers, mobile homes,
garages, carports, animal kennels, storerooms, billboards, fences, gasoline
pumps and similar structures, whether stationary or movable.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL. The official charged with the administration and
enforcement of this chapter as provided for in §
157.027.
   BULKHEAD. A retainer wall or structure designed to prevent the erosion of
land by water action or acts of nature.
   BULKHEAD LINE. An artificial line established in or along the ocean, river,
canal or other body of water in order to fix and establish the maximum distance
from the existing shoreline.
   BUSINESS STRUCTURE. Any separate freestanding commercial building that may
contain any number of business establishments having a common roof or façade.
   CANAL. An artificial watercourse, trench or ditch in the earth for confining
water to a defined channel.
   CARPORT. A roofed shelter for one or more automobiles with or without side
walls, but without a door.
   CLINIC. An establishment where patients are not lodged overnight, but are
admitted for examination and treatment by a group of physicians or dentists
practicing medicine together. The term does not include a place for the
treatment of animals.
   COURT. An open space on the same lot with the principal building and fully
enclosed on at least three adjacent sides by walls of the principal building.
   COURTESY NOTICE. A notice of public hearing, not required by law, mailed at
the town’s discretion to property owners within 500 feet of property that is
the subject of a hearing.
   CYBERCAFE. See ELECTRONIC GAMING ESTABLISHMENT.
   DENSITY. The number of dwelling units allowable within a zoning district per
gross acre of private property.
   DISTRICT. A zone within the town so designated on the official zoning map.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A residential building designed for three or more
families, with the number of families in residence not exceeding the number of
dwelling units provided.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A detached residential dwelling unit other than a
mobile home and a manufactured home, a tiny home and a shipping container home,
designed for and occupied by one family only.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY (DUPLEX). A detached residential building containing
two dwelling units, designed for occupancy by two families.
   DWELLING UNIT or LIVING UNIT. One or more rooms, containing independent
cooking and sleeping facilities connected together, constituting a separate,
independent housekeeping establishment for owner occupancy, rental or lease and
physically separated from any other rooms or dwelling units that may be in the
same structure. A hotel or motel room/unit is not considered a residential
DWELLING or LIVING UNIT.
   ELECTRONIC GAMING ESTABLISHMENT. A business operation, whether a principal
use or accessory use, where persons utilize electronic machines or devices,
including but not limited to, computers and gaming terminals, to conduct games
of chance and/or a game promotion pursuant to F.S. § 849.094, including
sweepstakes, and where cash, prizes, merchandise or other items of value are
redeemed or otherwise distributed, whether or not the value of such redeemed or
distributed items are determined by the electronic games played or by
predetermined odds. This term includes, but is not limited to internet cafes,
internet sweepstakes cafes, cybercafes or sweepstakes cafes. This definition is
applicable to any ELECTRONIC GAMING ESTABLISHMENT, whether or not the
electronic machine or device utilized:
      (1)   Is server-based;
      (2)   Uses a simulated game terminal as a representation of the prizes
associated with the results of the sweepstakes entries;
      (3)   Uses software such that the simulated game influences or determines
the winning or value of the prize;
      (4)   Selects prizes from a predetermined finite pool of entries;
      (5)   Uses a mechanism that reveals the content of a predetermined
sweepstakes entry;
      (6)   Predetermines the prize results and stores those results for
delivery at the time the sweepstakes entry results are revealed;
      (7)   Uses software to create a game result;
      (8)   Requires deposit of any money, coin, or token, or the use of any
credit card, debit card, prepaid card, or any other method of payment to
activate the electronic machine or device;
      (9)   Requires direct payment into the electronic machine or device, or
remote activation of the electronic machine or device;
      (10)   Requires purchase of a related product, regardless if the related
product, if any, has legitimate value;
      (11)   Reveals the prize incrementally, even though it may not influence
if a prize is awarded or the value of any prize awarded;
      (12)   Determines and associates the prize with an entry or entries at
the time the sweepstakes is entered; or
      (13)   A slot machine or other form of electrical, mechanical, or
computer game. It is the intent of this definition to classify any mechanism
utilized at any ELECTRONIC GAMING ESTABLISHMENT that seeks to avoid application
of this definition through the use of any subterfuge or pretense whatsoever.
ELECTRONIC GAMING ESTABLISHMENTS do not include arcade amusement centers,
regulated pursuant to F.S. § 849.161, or the official Florida Lottery. The term
PRIZE as used herein shall mean any gift, award, gratuity, good, service,
credit, or anything else of value, which may be transferred to a person,
whether possession of the prize is actually transferred, or placed on an
account or other record as evidence of the intent to transfer the prize.
   ESTABLISHMENT. The site, physical plant or premises upon which certain
activities or operations are being conducted for commercial or pecuniary gain.
Operated for commercial or pecuniary gain shall not depend upon actual profit
or loss and shall be presumed where the ESTABLISHMENT has an occupational
license.
   FAMILY. An individual or a group of persons related to each other by blood,
adoption or marriage and/or a group of not more than four persons who are not
necessarily so related, living together under one roof as a single household
unit.
   FILLING STATION. The same as SERVICE STATION.
   FLOOR AREA. The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a
building measured from exterior faces of exterior walls or from the centerline
of walls separating two attached buildings. The required minimum FLOOR AREA
within each district shall not apply to accessory uses.
   FRONT BUILDING LINE. A line extending from side lot line to side lot line at
the frontmost portion of the lot’s principal structure.
   GARAGE. An enclosed structure accessory to a main structure secure from
intrusion, protected from the elements, for the purpose of storing automotive
vehicles and not used for habitation, and in which no occupation or business
for profit is carried on.
   GUEST COTTAGE. The same as MOTEL.
   GUEST HOUSE. Living quarters within a detached accessory building located on
the same lot with the main building for use by temporary guests of the
occupants of the premises, the quarters having no kitchen facilities or
separate utility meters, and not rented or otherwise used as a separate
dwelling.
   HEDGE. A row of bushes or small trees planted close together in a manner as
to form a boundary or barrier.
   HEIGHT OF BUILDING.
      (1)   The vertical distance from a point measured from the crown of the
street or road on which a building has its frontage to the:
         (a)   Highest point of a flat roof, excluding elevator, mechanical
equipment, screens, and parapets not exceeding four feet.
         (b)   Peak of a mansard, gable, hip or gambrel roof.
      (2)   However, architectural embellishments, including, but not limited
to, spires, belfries, cupolas, water tanks, ventilators, antennas, chimneys and
mechanical equipment, including, but not limited to, elevator shafts, air
conditioning and heating units, and cooling towers, shall be allowed to exceed
the maximum building height in the applicable zoning district by not more than
15 feet. Furthermore, no part of such architectural embellishments or equipment
shall be used for human occupancy except for the maintenance, repair or
replacement of such architectural improvements or equipment. For purposes of
this definition, the elevation of the crown of the street or road on which the
building in question has its frontage shall be measured in the center of the
street or road at the highest point between the side lot lines extended to the
center of such street or road.
      (3)   For properties east of U.S. 1, the property owners may request a
modification to the vertical distance measurement requirement above from the
Town Council due to hardships resulting from severe elevation changes. In the
event the Town Council determines a hardship exists then the building height
shall not exceed 25 feet as measured from the center of the U.S. 1 sidewalk at
the highest point between the side lot lines extended to the center of such
sidewalk.
      (4)   Under no circumstances shall the height of a building exceed the
maximum height allowed in the zoning category for the property upon which the
building exists.
   HOME OCCUPATION. Any occupation conducted entirely within a dwelling unit
and carried on by an occupant of the dwelling unit, which occupation is clearly
incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and
does not change the residential character of the dwelling unit.
   HOSPITAL. A building or group of buildings, having room facilities for one
or more overnight patients, used for providing services for the in-patient
medical or surgical care of sick or injured humans, and which may include
related facilities such as laboratories, out-patient departments, training
facilities, central service facilities and staff offices; however, it is
coordinate to the main use and must be an integral part of the hospital
operations.
   HOTEL. A building in which lodging or boarding and lodging, are provided and
offered to the public for compensation, and in which ingress and egress to and
from all rooms are made through an inside lobby or office supervised by a
person in charge at all times. As such, a HOTEL is open to the public, in
contradiction to a boardinghouse or lodginghouse, apartment hotel or multiple
dwelling.
   INTERNET CAFE. See ELECTRONIC GAMING ESTABLISHMENT.
   INTERNET SWEEPSTAKES CAFE. See ELECTRONIC GAMING ESTABLISHMENT.
   LEISURE SPA ESTABLISHMENT. A site or premises upon which any of the
treatments, techniques or methods of treatment referred to in this chapter are
administered, practiced, used, given or applied, but shall not include the
following:
      (1)   Licensed health care facilities;
      (2)   Licensed physicians or nurses engaged in the practice of their
professions;
      (3)   Educational or professional athletic facilities if the treatment or
service is a normal and usual practice in the facilities; or
      (4)   Establishments exempted under F.S. Ch. 400 or 480.
   LIVING AREA. The area under roof designated primarily for habitation and
specifically excluding garages. As used in this chapter, the total LIVING AREAS
shall be computed as follows. The exterior dimensions of all enclosed space
within the framework of the building unit (length and width) multiplied and
totaled, as follows:
      (1)   Any room or area accessible from any other room or area within the
framework shall constitute living area;
      (2)   A room or area must be totally enclosed by walls and covered by
roofing;
      (3)   A room or area must be protected from the elements; and
      (4)   A utility room within the framework of the main building and
accessible within the main living area constitutes living area.
   LIVING UNIT. The same as DWELLING UNIT.
   LOADING SPACE, OFF-STREET. Space logically and conveniently located for bulk
pickups and deliveries, scaled to delivery vehicles expected to be used, and
accessible to the vehicles when required off-street parking spaces are filled.
Required OFF-STREET LOADING SPACE is not to be included as off-street parking
space in computation of required off-street parking space.
   LODGINGHOUSE. The same as ROOMINGHOUSE.
   LOT.
      (1)   A parcel of land of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning
requirements for use, coverage and area, and to provide the yards and other
open spaces as are required in this chapter. The LOT shall have frontage on, or
access to, a public or an approved private street, and may consist of:
         (a)   A single lot of record;
         (b)   A portion of a lot of record;
         (c)   A combination of complete lots of record, of complete lots of
record and portions of lots of record, or of portions of lots of record; or
         (d)   A parcel of land described by metes and bounds.
      (2)   In the case of a division of a lot or combination of lots which
results in any lot being created which does not meet the requirements of this
chapter, such resulting or residual lot is declared nonconforming and shall not
be eligible for a development permit.
   LOT COVERAGE. The area of a lot that is covered by an enclosed structure.
These are normally the principal and accessory structures.
   LOT FRONTAGE. The portion nearest the street. For the purposes of
determining yard requirements on corner lots and through lots, all sides of a
lot adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage; and yards shall be
provided as indicated under that definition in this section.
   LOT MEASUREMENTS. As follows:
      (1)   DEPTH OF A LOT. Considered to be the distance between the midpoints
of straight lines connecting the foremost points of the side lot lines in front
and the rearmost points of the side lot lines in the rear.
      (2)   WIDTH OF A LOT. Considered to be the distance between straight
lines connecting front and rear lot lines at each side of the lot, measured
across the rear of the required front yard; however, width between side lot
lines at their foremost points (where they intersect with the street line)
shall not be less than 80% of the required lot width except in the case of lots
on a turning radius, where the 80% requirement shall not apply.
   LOT OF RECORD. A lot that is a part of a subdivision recorded in the office
of the clerk of the circuit court, county recorder, or a lot or parcel
described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded.
   LOT TYPES.
      (1)   CORNER LOT. A lot located at the intersection of two or more
streets. A lot abutting on a curved street or streets shall be considered a
CORNER LOT if straight lines drawn from the foremost points of the side lot
lines to the foremost point of the lot meet at an interior angle of less than
135 degrees.
      (2)   INTERIOR LOT. A lot other than a corner lot with only one frontage
on a street.
      (3)   THROUGH LOT. A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more
than one street. THROUGH LOTS abutting two streets may be referred to as
double-frontage lots.
      (4)   REVERSED FRONTAGE LOT. A lot on which the frontage is at right
angles or approximately right angles (interior angles less than 135 degrees) to
the general pattern in the area. A REVERSED FRONTAGE LOT may also be a corner
lot or a through lot.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. Shall include a MODULAR HOME, PRE-FABRICATED HOME or
FACTORY-BUILT HOME and means a closed structure, building assembly, or system
of subassemblies, which may include structural, electrical, plumbing, heating,
ventilating, or other service systems manufactured in manufacturing facilities
for installation or erection as a finished building or as part of a finished
building for residential purposes.
   MARINA. A place for docking pleasure boats or providing services to pleasure
boats and their occupants, including servicing and repair of boats, sale of
fuel and supplies, and provision of food and beverages as accessory uses. A
hotel, motel or similar use where docking of boats and provision of services to
boats is incidental to activities shall not be considered a MARINA, nor boat
docks accessory to a multiple dwelling where no boat-related services are
rendered.
   MINI-STORAGE FACILITY. A fully enclosed structure used for short or long-
term self-storage and meeting the criteria of §
157.285. This may be a multi-unit complex or a series of detached structures.
   MOBILE HOME. A detached residential dwelling unit designed for
transportation after fabrication on streets or highways on its own wheels or on
flatbed or other trailers, and arriving at the site where it is to be occupied
as a dwelling unit complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and
incidental unpacking and assembly operations, location on jacks or other
temporary or permanent foundations, connections to utilities and the like. A
travel trailer is not to be considered as a MOBILE HOME.
   MOBILE HOME PARK. A single parcel of land six acres or more in an area upon
which there are mobile home sites to be leased or rented to occupants on the
parcel.
   MOTEL. A building in which lodging, or boarding and lodging, are provided
and offered to the public in contradistinction to a boardinghouse or
lodginghouse, or a multiple-family dwelling; same as a hotel, except that the
buildings are usually designed to serve tourists traveling by automobile,
ingress to rooms need not be through a lobby or office, and parking usually is
adjacent to the dwelling unit. See TOURIST AND TRANSIENT LIVING ACCOMMODATIONS.
   MOTOR VEHICLE shall have the same meaning as F.S. § 320.001(1)(a).
   NONCONFORMITY. Any lot, use of land, use of structure, use of structure and
premises, or characteristic of any use which was lawful on July 14, 1975, but
which does not conform with the provisions of the district in which it is
located.
   NURSING HOME.  Any facility licensed by the State of Florida as a nursing
home facility or as an assisted living facility.
   OCCUPIED. The use of a building or land for any purpose, including occupancy
for residential, business, industrial and public use. This shall include the
use of land or buildings for manufacturing and storing facilities.
   PARKING SPACE, OFF-STREET. A minimum paved area of 220 square feet with
minimum dimensions of 11 feet by 20 feet for parking an automobile, exclusive
of access drives or aisles to the space.
   PATIO. The same as TERRACE.
   PREMISES. A tract of land with a structure on the tract.
   PRINCIPAL USE OF STRUCTURE. A building in which is conducted the principal
use of the lot on which it is situated. In a residential district, any dwelling
shall be deemed to be the principal building on the lot on which situated. An
attached carport, shed, garage or any other structure with one or more walls or
a part of one wall being a part of the principal building and structurally
dependent, totally or in part, on the principal building shall comprise a part
of the principal building and be subject to all regulations applied to the
principal building. A detached and structurally independent carport, garage or
other structure shall conform to the requirements of an accessory building. A
detached and structurally independent garage, carport or other structure
conforming as an accessory building may be attached to the principal building
by an open breezeway.
   PRIVATE CLUB. Includes associations and organizations of fraternal or
special character, or which are maintained in connection with a golf course or
tennis facility, and shall not include casinos, nightclubs or other similar
institutions operated on a commercial basis.
   PUBLIC USE. Any use of land or structures owned and operated by a
municipality, county, state or the federal government or any of their agencies
for a public service or purpose.
   RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT (MAJOR). Boats and boat trailers, travel trailers,
pickup campers or coaches (designed to be mounted on automotive vehicles),
motorized dwellings, tent trailers and the like, and cases or boxes used for
transporting recreational equipment, whether occupied by the equipment or not,
any motor vehicle, watercraft, or equipment designed for outdoor recreational,
and recreational vehicles. Such equipment may also include, but is not limited
to airboats, jet boats, personal watercraft, all-terrain vehicles (ATVs), dirt
bikes, go carts, golf carts, and any similar vehicles, vessels or equipment.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A cargo trailer modified as living quarters, or a
house trailer, motor home, camper, bus, mobile home, collapsible camping
trailers, tent trailers, truck campers mounted on a standard pickup truck or
similar vehicle or equipment, including any vehicle or part of a vehicle or
equipment designed for temporary living quarters for recreation, camping, or
travel vehicle.
   RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION. A building used primarily for religious worship and
related religious activities.
   RESIDENTIAL AREA. An area zoned for any residential purpose as allowed by
this chapter.
   RESTAURANT. Any building or structure or portion of a building or structure
in which food is prepared and served for pay to any person not residing on the
premises.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. A path or route that may lawfully be used for the purpose of
roads, streets or alleys, utility and transmission lines or canals.
   RIVERFRONT BREEZEWAY/VISUAL CORRIDOR. An open passageway for movement of air
and creating visual access running from the mean low water line of the Indian
River Lagoon, as the eastern boundary of the breezeway to the first north/south
public right-of- way westward of the Indian River Lagoon. This minimum
breezeway/visual corridor requirement shall include all riverfront properties.
No buildings, structures, berms or solid fences, or any combination thereof,
more than four feet in height shall be permitted in the breezeway/visual
corridor.
   ROAD. The same as STREET.
   ROOMINGHOUSE. A building other than an apartment, hotel, motel or motor
lodge where, for compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods,
lodging, meals or lodging and meals are provided for three or more persons.
   SCHOOL. An institution for learning for minors, whether public or private,
that offers instruction in those courses of study required by F.S. Chs. 1000
through 1013. This definition includes a nursery school, kindergarten,
elementary school, junior high school, middle school, senior high school or any
special institution of learning under the jurisdiction of the State Department
of Education; but it does not include a vocational or professional institution
or an institution of higher education, including community or junior college,
college or university. This definition of SCHOOL shall also include any
educational facility at which minor children reside in conjunction with their
educational experience, including but not limited to United States Space Camp.
   SEMIPUBLIC USE. Any use of land or buildings owned and operated by an
individual, firm, corporation, lodge or club, either as a profit or nonprofit
activity, for a public service or purpose. This shall include privately owned
utilities, transportation, recreation, and cultural activities and services.
   SERVICE STATION or FILLING STATION.
      (1)   Buildings and premises where gasoline, oil, grease, batteries,
tires and automotive accessories may be supplied and dispensed at retail, and
where in addition the following general services may be rendered and sales
made:
         (a)   Sale and servicing of spark plugs, batteries, distributors and
distributor parts;
         (b)   Tire servicing and repair, but not recapping or regrooving;
         (c)   Replacement of mufflers and tailpipes, water hoses, fan belts,
brake fluid, lightbulbs, fuses, floor mats, seat covers, windshield wipers and
wiper blades, grease retainers, wheel bearings and mirrors;
         (d)   Radiator cleaning and flushing;
         (e)   Washing and polishing, and sale of automotive washing and
polishing materials;
         (f)   Greasing and lubrication;
         (g)   Providing and repair of fuel pumps, oil pumps and lines;
         (h)   Minor servicing and repair of carburetors;
         (i)   Emergency wiring repairs;
         (j)   Adjusting and repairing brakes;
         (k)   Minor motor adjustment and tuneups;
         (l)   Sales of cold drinks, package foods, tobacco and similar
convenience goods for service station customers, as accessory and incidental to
the principal operation;
         (m)   Provision of road maps and other informational material to
customers; provision of restroom facilities; and
         (n)   Rental vehicles.
      (2)   Uses permissible at a service station do not include major
mechanical and body work, straightening of body parts, painting, welding,
storage of automobiles or other work involving noise, glare, fumes, smoke or
other characteristics to an extent greater than normally found in SERVICE
STATIONS. A SERVICE STATION is neither a repair garage nor a body shop.
   SIGN. Any device to inform or attract the attention of persons not on the
premises on which the sign is located; however, the following shall not be
included in the application of the regulations in this chapter:
      (1)   Signs not exceeding one square foot in area and bearing only
property numbers, post box numbers, names of occupants of premises, or other
identification of premises not having commercial connotations;
      (2)   Flags and insignia of any governmental level except when displayed
in connection with commercial promotion;
      (3)   Legal notices, identification, informational or directional signs
erected or required by governmental bodies;
      (4)   Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings, except
letters, trademarks, moving parts or flashing lights;
      (5)   Signs directing and guiding traffic and parking on private
property, but bearing no advertising matter; or
      (6)   “For Sale” and “For Rent” signs exceeding one square foot, by
permit only.
   SPECIAL EXCEPTION. A use that would not be appropriate generally or without
restriction throughout the zoning division or district but which, if controlled
as to number, area, location or relation to the neighborhood, would promote the
public health, safety, welfare, morals, order, comfort, convenience,
appearance, prosperity or general welfare.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.
      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered:
         (a)   Human genitals or pubic region;
         (b)   The cleavage of the human buttocks;
         (c)   A portion of the human female mammary gland (commonly referred
to as the female breast) including the nipple and the areola (the darker
colored area of the breast surrounding the nipple) and an outside area of the
gland wherein the outside area is:
            1.   Reasonably compact and contiguous to the areola; and
            2.   Contains at least the nipple and the areola and one-fourth of
the outside surface area of the gland.
            3.   This definition shall not be interpreted to include any
portion of the cleavage of the breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt,
leotard, bathing suit or other wearing apparel, provided the areola is not so
exposed.
      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
   SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACT. An offense under F.S. Ch. 800, relating to lewdness
and indecent exposure; an offense under F.S. § 806.01, § 806.10, § 806.111 or §
806.13(2)(c), relating to arson and criminal mischief; an offense under F.S.
Ch. 796, relating to prostitution; an offense under F.S. § 847.013 or §
847.0145, relating to obscenity; an offense under F.S. § 877.03, relating to
breach of the peace; an offense under F.S. § 893.13, relating to possession or
sale of controlled substances; or an offense under F.S. § 849.09(2), § 849.10
or § 849.25(3), relating to gambling, F.S. Ch. 794, relating to sexual battery,
F.S. Ch. 826, relating to bigamy or incest; or violation of analogous laws or
ordinances of another city or state or of the federal government or successor
statutes to these statutes.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.
      (1)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or
tumescence.
      (2)   Acts of human anilingus, bestiality, buggery, cunnilingus,
coprophagy, coprophilia, fellation, flagellation, masochism, masturbation,
necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, sadism, sadomasochism, sexual intercourse,
sodomy, urolagnia or zooerastia.
      (3)   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttock, anus or female breast.
      (4)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in divisions (1) through (3) of this definition.
   STORY. The portion of a building included between the surface of any ceiling
or roof and the upper surface of the floor immediately below it.
   STREET. A public or private right-of-way set aside for public travel that
includes roadway uses, easements for utilities, sidewalks and drainage which in
combination provides for a minimum width of 50 feet. Street right-of-way line
means the property line that bounds the right-of-way set aside for use as a
street.
   STRUCTURE. The same as BUILDING.
   SWIMMING POOL. Any portable pool or permanent structure containing a body of
water 18 inches or more in depth and 150 square feet or more of water surface
area, intended for recreational purposes, including a wading pool, but not
including an ornamental reflecting pool or fish pond or other type of pool
regardless of size unless it is located and designed so as to create a hazard
or to be used for swimming or wading.
   TERRACE or PATIO. An open space on the same lot, adjacent to the main
building on at least one side, prepared with a hard, semihard or improved
surface, designated for the purpose of outdoor living.
   TOTAL FLOOR AREA or GROSS FLOOR AREA. The area of all floors of a building,
including finished attics, finished basements and all covered areas, including
porches, sheds, carports and garages.
   TOURIST AND TRANSIENT LIVING ACCOMMODATIONS. Any place where tourists,
transients, travelers or persons desiring temporary residence may be provided
with sleeping, sanitary or cooking facilities; i.e., hotel and motel; a group
of tourist accommodation units under one management or upon one tract of land.
See TRAVEL TRAILER PARK.
   TOWNHOUSE. A single-family dwelling unit constructed in a series or group of
attached units with property lines separating the units.
   TRAILER. Any conveyance without motive power designed for carrying persons
or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle. The term TRAILER, as used
in this section, shall expressly include all recreational vehicles and campers
which are not self-propelled and all boats and water vessels mounted on
trailers, regardless of size.
   TRAVEL TRAILER or MOBILE CAMPER. A self-powered or non-self-powered vehicle
capable of being towed by an ordinary automobile or by the self-powered vehicle
upon which it is constructed, whose primary use is temporary lodging while
traveling or camping, and is not used for habitation except in designated areas
while within the corporate limits of the town.
   TRAVEL TRAILER PARK. A tract of land wherein tourists, transients, travelers
or persons desiring temporary residence may be provided with designated spaces
for parking travel trailers or equivalent facilities constructed in or on
automotive vehicles, tents or other short-term housing devices.
   VACANT. A building or parcel of land that is neither occupied nor used, or
is in a nonusable state for a period of six months.
   VARIANCE. A relaxation of the terms of this chapter where the variance will
not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar
to the property or lot of record and not the result of the actions of the
applicant, prior to filing of application, a literal enforcement of this
chapter would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. A VARIANCE is
authorized only for height, area, size of structure, or size of yards and open
spaces. Establishment or expansion of a use otherwise prohibited shall not be
allowed by variance, nor shall a variance be granted because of the presence of
nonconformities in the zoning district or uses in an adjoining zoning district.
No VARIANCE shall be allowed for financial or self-imposed hardship.
   VETERINARY CLINIC. A place for the treatment of animals.
   VIOLATION OF THIS CHAPTER. An act prohibited by any provision of this
chapter as found by a jury or other trier of fact. Each violation occurring
shall be considered a separate and distinct violation from any other occurring
on the same day or in the same establishment or by the same person.
   WATERCRAFT. Any water vessel, canoe, boat, jet skis or similar water vessel
regardless of size and mode of power.
   YARD. An open space on the same lot with a principal building, unoccupied
and unobstructed by buildings from the ground to the sky except as otherwise
provided in this chapter.
      (1)   FRONT YARD. The yard extending across the entire width of the lot
between the back of curb and the nearest part of a principal building,
including covered porches, sheds and carports. Unless otherwise provided for,
this distance shall be the shortest distance between the structure and the
right-of-way line abutting the property. For all existing development permitted
prior to October 1, 2022 the shortest distance may be between the structure and
the back of the curb.
      (2)   REAR YARD. The yard extending across the entire width of the lot
between the rear lot line and the nearest part of the principal building,
including covered porches, sheds, carports, garages and storage areas.
      (3)   SIDE YARD. The yard extending along the side lot line from the
front yard to the rear yard, and lying between the side lot line and the
nearest part of the principal building, including covered porches, sheds,
carports and storage areas.
(2000 Code, § 66-3) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975; Ord. 96-01, passed 1-29-
1996; Ord. 97-01, passed 3-11-1997; Ord. 2004-07, passed 5-25-2004; Ord. 2006-
15, passed 1-23-2007; Ord. 2009-05, passed 7-28-2009; Ord. 2011-06, passed 8-
23-2011; Ord. 2011-12, passed 11-1-2011; Ord. 2012-12, passed 11-27-2012; Ord.
2012-13, passed 9-25-2012; Ord. 2013-01, passed 2-26-2013; Ord. 2013-02, passed
3-26-2013; Ord. 2014-01, passed 2-25-2014; Ord. 2014-04, passed 3-25-2014; Ord.
2017-01, passed 2-28-2017; Ord. 2018-02, passed 6-26-2018; Ord. 2021-03, passed
- -2021; Ord. 2022-05, passed 11-22-2022; Ord. 2023-03, passed 9-26-2023)
§ 157.004 ANNEXED TERRITORY.
   All territory annexed to the town shall be reviewed by the Planning and
Zoning Board prior to the annexation, and the Board shall recommend appropriate
zoning districts of the Town Council; however, after the territory shall have
been annexed, the amendment procedure set forth in this chapter shall be
followed before the official zoning map is amended.
(2000 Code, § 66-4) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975)
§ 157.005 VACATIONS OF BUILT-UP LAND.
   Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official action
of the Town Council, the use district and area regulations governing the
property abutting upon each side of the street, alley or public way shall be
automatically extended to the center of the vacation; and all area included
within the vacation shall thereafter be subject to all appropriate regulations
of the extended use districts. In all cases where land is built up by fill,
upon areas formerly under water, the use district and area regulations applying
to the land immediately adjoining the built-up land shall be automatically
extended to the land.
(2000 Code, § 66-5) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975)
§ 157.006 ESTABLISHMENT OF USE DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Use and area districts established. For the purposes of this chapter,
the town is divided into use districts as provided in this chapter.
   (B)   Maps and boundaries.
      (1)   The boundaries of these districts are established as shown on a map
entitled “The Official Zoning Map of the Town of Palm Shores,” on file in the
office of the Town Clerk, which map, with all its explanatory matter, shall be
deemed to accompany, be and is made a part of this chapter.
      (2)   The official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the
Mayor attested by the Town Clerk and bear the seal of the town under the
following words: “This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map
referred to in §
157.006 of the code of ordinances of the Town of Palm Shores, Florida,”
together with the date of the adoption of the ordinance, July 14, 1975.
      (3)   If, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, changes are
made in district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the official zoning
map, the changes shall be made on the official zoning map promptly after the
amendment has been approved by the Town Council. A zoning number and an
ordinance number shall be given to each change and a file of the changes kept
by the Building Official. The amending ordinance shall provide that the changes
or amendments shall not become effective until they have been duly recorded
upon the official zoning map.
      (4)   If the official zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or
difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and
additions, the Town Council may by ordinance adopt a new official zoning map,
which shall supersede the prior official zoning map. The new official zoning
map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior official
zoning map, but no correction shall have the effect of amending the original
zoning ordinance or any subsequent amendment to the ordinance. The new official
zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor attested by the
Town Clerk and bear the seal of the town under the following words: “This is to
certify that this official zoning map supersedes and replaces the official
zoning map adopted (date of adoption of map being replaced) as part of
Ordinance No. 75-01 of the Town of Palm Shores, Florida.” Unless the prior
official zoning map has been lost, or has been totally destroyed, the prior map
or any significant parts remaining shall be preserved, together with all
available records pertaining to its adoption or amendment.
(2000 Code, § 66-6) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975; Ord. 96-01, passed 1-29-
1996)
§ 157.007 APPLICATION FOR SPECIAL ZONING.
   Applicants requesting rezoning, conditional land uses, special exceptions,
variances, administrative appeals, site plan approval, plat approval or PUD
zoning shall file a written application; and the applicant shall be required to
pay a fee in an amount on file in the Clerk’s office for the following requests
at the time of filing the application:
   (A)   Request for zoning change, base fee, plus advertising costs, planner
and engineering fees per zoning district change;
   (B)   Request for land use amendment, base fee, plus advertising costs,
planner and engineering fees per land use classification or textual change;
   (C)   Request for any Board of Adjustment action, base fee, plus advertising
costs, planner and engineering fees per each request;
   (D)   Request for conditional use, base fee, plus advertising costs, planner
and engineering fees per each request; and
   (E)   Request for annexation, base fee, plus advertising costs, planner and
engineering fees per each parcel.
(2000 Code, § 66-7) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975; Ord. 81-5, passed 6-9-1981;
Ord. 84-03, passed 11-27-1984; Ord. 97-05, passed 6-27-1997)
§ 157.008 PAYMENT OF REQUIRED ADVERTISING COSTS.
   All of the application fees contained in §
157.007 shall be accompanied by a sum equivalent to the cost of all advertising
required by law. No permit or certificate shall be issued and no inspection,
public notice or other action relative to zoning, petitions for changes in
zoning, or appeals shall be instituted until after the fees, costs and charges
have been paid. When, in accordance with the provisions of this section, a fee
is paid and application is filed, there shall be no return or rebate of any
funds so received, regardless of the town’s determination in the matter
involved. All fees, costs and charges shall be, upon collection, deposited in
the General Fund of the town.
(2000 Code, § 66-8) (Ord. 84-03, passed 11-27-1984; Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-
1975)
§ 157.009 PAYMENT OF COSTS REQUIRED FOR PERMIT OR CERTIFICATE.
   No permit or certificate shall be issued and no inspection, public notice or
other action relative to zoning, petitions for changes in zoning, or appeals
shall be instituted until after the fees, costs and charges have been paid.
When, in accordance with the provisions of this section, a fee is paid and
application is filed, there shall be no return or rebate of any funds so
received, regardless of the town’s determination in the matter involved. All
fees, costs and charges shall be, upon collection, deposited in the General
Fund of the town.
(2000 Code, § 66-9) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975)
§ 157.010 PROVISIONS DECLARED TO BE MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.
   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the protection of the
public health, safety, morals and general welfare. Whenever the requirements of
this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully
adopted rules, regulations, ordinances, deed restrictions or covenants, the
more restrictive or that imposing the higher standards shall govern.
(2000 Code, § 66-10) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975)
§ 157.011 COMPLAINTS REGARDING VIOLATIONS.
   Whenever a violation of this chapter occurs, or is alleged to have occurred,
any person may file a complaint. The complaint shall state fully the causes and
basis of the complaint and shall be filed with the Building Official. He or she
shall record properly the complaint, immediately investigate, and take action
on the complaint as provided by this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 66-11) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975)
§ 157.012 REMEDIES.
   If any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed,
altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land
is used in violation of this chapter or any other ordinance or lawful
regulation, the proper authorities of the town, in addition to the remedies
provided for in this chapter, may institute any appropriate action or
proceeding to prevent the unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use, or to impose a penalty for
the violation in order to prevent the occupancy or use of the building,
structure or land, contrary to the provisions of this chapter, or to prevent
any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about the premises.
(2000 Code, § 66-12) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975) Penalty, see §
157.999
ADMINISTRATION; GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 157.025 DUTIES OF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIAL, BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT, TOWN COUNCIL
AND COURTS ON MATTERS OR APPEAL.
   (A)   It is the intent of this chapter that:
      (1)   All questions of interpretation and enforcement shall be first
presented to the Building Official;
      (2)   The questions shall be presented to the Board of Adjustment only on
appeal from the decision of the Building Official; and
      (3)   Recourse from the decisions of the Board of Adjustment shall be to
the courts as provided by law.
   (B)   It is further the intent of this chapter that the duties of the Town
Council in connection with this chapter shall not include hearing and deciding
questions of interpretation and enforcement that may arise. The procedure for
deciding the questions shall be as stated in this section and this chapter.
Under this chapter, the Town Council shall have only the duties of:
      (1)   Considering and adopting or rejecting proposed amendments or the
repeal of this chapter, as provided by law; and
      (2)   Establishing a schedule of fees and charges.
(2000 Code, § 66-46) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975)
§ 157.026 AMENDMENTS.
   The regulations, restrictions and boundaries set forth in this chapter may,
from time to time, be amended, supplemented, changed or repealed in the manner
prescribed by law.
(2000 Code, § 66-47) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975)
§ 157.027 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT BY BUILDING OFFICIAL; PENALTY.
   (A)   The Building Official under the supervision of the Town Council shall
administer and enforce this chapter. He or she may be provided with assistance
of other officers and employees of the town as may be necessary to enforce the
provisions of this chapter. If the Building Official finds that any of the
provisions of ordinances are being violated, he or she shall notify in writing
the person responsible for the violations, indicating the nature of the
violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. He or she shall
order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings or structures or of
additions, alterations or structural changes thereto; discontinuance of any
illegal work being done; or shall take any other action authorized by this
chapter to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions.
   (B)   Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to
comply with, or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be punished as provided in §
157.999.
(2000 Code, § 66-48) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975) Penalty, see §
157.999
PLANNING AND ZONING BOARD
§ 157.040 CREATION OF BOARD.
   A Planning and Zoning Board is hereby established which shall consist of
five members who shall be appointed by the Town Council. In addition, the Town
Council may appoint not more than two alternate members, designating them as
such. Alternate members may attend complete Board meetings regardless of
whether a quorum of regular members is seated. Alternate members may
participate in Board deliberations and debate, but they may only make motions
and vote in the absence of voting member or in the event of disqualification of
a regular member or the vacancy in a regular member’s seat. The longer serving
alternate member shall be given first priority in sitting in a member’s absence
and voting.
(2000 Code, § 66-71) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975; Ord. 99-02, passed 3-23-
1999)
§ 157.041 ORGANIZATION AND MEMBERS.
   (A)   The members of the Planning and Zoning Board shall elect one of its
non-alternate members to serve as Chairperson and one as Vice-Chairperson. The
term of the Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson shall be for a period of one year,
provided, however, nothing shall prevent the Board from re-electing the same
persons to succeed themselves.
   (B)   Each member or alternate member shall be a resident of the town and be
a registered elector at the time of appointment and have resided in the town
for at least six months immediately preceding appointment.
   (C)   Each member and each alternate member shall serve a term of two years.
Any member or alternate member of the Board may be removed or suspended from
office as provided in F.S. § 112.501 or § 112.51. Any vacancy occurring during
the unexpired term of office of any member shall be filled by the Council for
the remainder of the term.
(2000 Code, § 66-72) (Ord. 99-02, passed 3-23-1999)
§ 157.042 MEETINGS; RECORDS.
   (A)   The Planning and Zoning Board shall meet upon the call of the
Chairperson, the Vice- Chairperson, the Town Mayor, the Town Clerk, or the town
planner, or pursuant to a motion adopted at a meeting of the Board. The Board
may hold regular, special or workshop meetings. The regular meeting dates of
the Board shall be set by motion of a quorum of the Board and may be so
changed. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. The time and
place of meetings, and other order of business and procedures to be followed at
meetings, shall be prescribed by the Board, and at a minimum will be governed
by Robert’s Rules of Order.
   (B)   The presence at a meeting of three regular or alternate members of the
Board shall constitute a quorum. The affirmative vote of a majority of the
regular and sitting alternate members present and voting shall be necessary for
the adoption of any motion.
   (C)   A written record of the proceedings of the Board shall be kept by the
Town Clerk, showing its action on each question considered. The record shall be
filed in the office of the Town Clerk and shall be open for public inspection
during regular town business hours. The individual charged with the
responsibility of maintaining Board records shall be the Board Secretary.
(2000 Code, § 66-73) (Ord. 99-02, passed 3-23-1999)
§ 157.043 AUTHORITY AND DUTIES OF THE PLANNING AND ZONING BOARD.
   The Planning and Zoning Board shall have the following authority and duties:
   (A)   To act in an advisory capacity to the Town Council on questions
relating to zoning, comprehensive planning and land use, and to conduct
investigations on matters of proposals to change zoning and land development
regulations and to report its findings and recommendations on the proposals to
the Council;
   (B)   Recommend to the Town Council the amendments to any land development
code as the Board may deem to be necessary in the promotion of the public
health, safety, welfare, economic order, or aesthetics or necessary to clarify
or to carry into effect the purposes of the land development codes or the
town’s comprehensive plan; and
   (C)   (1)   Hear applications and submit recommendations to the Town Council
on the following:
         (a)   Proposed change of the permitted use of any specifically
designate property;
         (b)   Applications for conditional use;
         (c)   Proposed amendment to the zoning or land development codes;
         (d)   Proposed subdivision plats and subdivision variances;
         (e)   Review annexation requests;
         (f)   Site plan review;
         (g)   Telecommunication tower requests for site plan and conditional
use;
         (h)   Vested rights petitions; and
         (i)   Adoption of and amendments to the city’s comprehensive plan.
      (2)   In connection with any recommendation by the Planning and Zoning
Board, the Board shall include any conditions, requirements or limitations
which the Board may believe to be necessary or desirable to protect adjacent
properties and the surrounding neighborhood, or to promote the public health,
safety, welfare, economic order or aesthetics or environment.
(2000 Code, § 66-74) (Ord. 99-02, passed 3-23-1999)
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
§ 157.055 ESTABLISHMENT AND PROCEDURE.
   A Board of Adjustment is established, which shall consist of the Town
Council or five members to be appointed by the Town Council. The term of office
of the members of the Board of Adjustment shall be for a staggered term of
three years for each member. Members of the Board of Adjustment may be removed
by the Town Council for cause and after a public hearing held on written
charges. Vacancies shall be filled by the Town Council for the unexpired term
of the member affected. The Chairperson of the Planning and Zoning Board shall
be an ex officio member of the Board of Adjustment.
(2000 Code, § 66-91) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975)
§ 157.056 PROCEEDINGS.
   The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules necessary to the conduct of its
affairs, and in keeping with the provisions of this chapter. Meetings shall be
held at the call of the Chairperson and at any other times as a majority of the
Board of Adjustment may determine. The Chairperson, or in his or her absence
the acting Chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of
witnesses. All meetings shall be open to the public. The Board of Adjustment
shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon
each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating the fact, and shall
keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall
be a public record and be immediately filed in the office of the Town Clerk for
the Board of Adjustment.
(2000 Code, § 66-92) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975)
§ 157.057 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers and duties:
   (A)   Administrative review. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged
there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the
Building Official in the enforcement of this chapter.
      (1)   Hearings; appeals; notice. Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may
be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer or bureau of the Town
Council affected by any decision of the Building Official in the interpretation
of any portion of this chapter. The appeal shall be taken within a reasonable
time not to exceed 60 days by filing with the Building Official and with the
Board of Adjustment a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds. The Building
Official shall forthwith transmit to the Board of Adjustment all papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. The
Board of Adjustment shall fix a time for hearing of the appeal within 30 days
and give public notice at least 15 days in advance of public hearing as well as
due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the appeal within a
reasonable time. At the hearing any party may appear in person or by agent or
attorney.
      (2)   Stay of proceeding. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance
of the action appealed from unless the Building Official from whom the appeal
is taken certifies to the Board of Adjustment after the notice of appeal is
filed with him or her that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay
would, in his or her opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In the
case proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order, which
may be granted by the Board of Adjustment or by a court of record on
application, on notice to the Building Official from whom the appeal is taken
and on due cause shown.
   (B)   Variances; conditions governing applications; procedures. To authorize
upon appeal in specific cases the variance from the terms of this chapter as
will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions,
the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter would result in unnecessary
hardship. A variance from the terms of this chapter shall not be granted by the
Board of Adjustment until:
      (1)   A written application for a variance is submitted demonstrating
that:
         (a)   Special conditions and circumstances exist that are peculiar to
the land, structure or building involved and are not applicable to other lands,
buildings or structures in the same district;
         (b)   Literal interpretation of the provisions of this chapter would
deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the
same district under the terms of this chapter;
         (c)   The special conditions and circumstances referred to in division
(B)(1)(a) above do not result from the actions of the applicant;
         (d)   Granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant
any special privilege that is denied by this chapter to other lands, structures
or buildings in the same district; and
         (e)   No nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures or
buildings in the same district and no permitted use of lands, structures or
buildings in other districts shall be considered grounds for the issuance of a
variance.
      (2)   Notice of public hearing shall be given as specified for special
exceptions;
      (3)   A courtesy notice shall be mailed to the property owners of record
within a radius of 500 feet; however, failure to mail or receive the courtesy
notice shall not affect any action or proceedings taken under this chapter;
      (4)   Any party may appear in person, or be represented by an agent or by
attorney at the public hearing;
      (5)   The Board of Adjustment shall make findings whether the
requirements of division (B)(1)(a) above have been met by the applicant for a
variance;
      (6)   The Board of Adjustment shall determine whether the reasons set
forth in the application justify the granting of the variance, and whether the
variance is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of
the land, building or structure;
      (7)   The Board of Adjustment shall further determine whether the
granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent
of this chapter or will not be injurious to the neighborhood, or otherwise
detrimental to the public welfare;
      (8)   In granting any variance, the Board of Adjustment may prescribe
appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this chapter.
Violation of the conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under
which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and
punishable as provided by this chapter; and
      (9)   Under no circumstances shall the Board of Adjustment grant a
variance to permit a use not generally or by special exception permitted in the
district involved, or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the
terms of this chapter in that district.
   (C)   To hear and decide such special exceptions as the Board of Adjustment
is specifically authorized to pass on under the terms of this Article XV; to
decide such questions as are involved in the determination of when special
exceptions should be granted; and to grant special exceptions with appropriate
conditions and safeguards or to deny special exceptions when not in harmony
with the purpose and intent of this act or any ordinance enacted under the
authority of this act.
      (1)   In granting any special exception, the Board shall find that such
grant will not adversely affect the public interest.
      (2)   In granting any special exception, the Board of Adjustment may
prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with these
regulations and any ordinance enacted under these regulations. Violation of
such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the
special exception is granted, shall be deemed a violation of these regulations.
      (3)   The Board of Adjustment may prescribe a reasonable time limit
within which the action for which the special exception is required shall be
begun or completed or both.
      (4)   In granting any special exception, the Board of Adjustment shall
find that such grant will not adversely affect the public interest, and the
Board of Adjustment shall specifically find the following:
         (a)   The special exception is consistent with the goals, objectives
and policies of the Comprehensive Plan.
         (b)   The special exception is consistent with the intent of the
zoning district within which the special exception is sought.
         (c)   The special exception does not create any adverse impacts to
adjacent property through the creation of noise, light, vibrations, traffic,
utility requirements, or stormwater runoff that would not have been created had
the property been developed for a principal use permitted in the applicable
zoning district.
         (d)   The special exception will not create any unusual police, fire
or emergency services requirements.
         (e)   That the special exception meets all the requirements of the
zoning district in which it is located, such as lot requirements, building
setback requirements, lot coverage, height, buffer yards, off-street parking,
signs, storage, landscaping, etc.
   (D)   Applicants. All hearings for special exceptions or variances before
the Board of Adjustment shall be initiated by:
      (1)   The owners of at least 75% of the property described in the
application;
      (2)   Tenants, with owners’ sworn-to consent;
      (3)   Duly authorized agents evidenced by a written power of attorney;
      (4)   Town Council;
      (5)   Planning and Zoning Board; or
      (6)   Any department or agency of the town.
   (E)   Decisions of the Board of Adjustment.
      (1)   In exercising any of the powers given in this section, the Board of
Adjustment may, so long as the action is in conformity with the terms of this
chapter, reverse or affirm wholly or partly, or may modify the order,
requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make the order,
requirement, decision or determination as should be made, and to that end shall
have all of the powers of the Building Official from whom the appeal was taken.
      (2)   The concurring vote of four members of the Board of Adjustment
shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination
of the Building Official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter
upon which it is required to pass under this chapter, or to effect any
variation in the application of this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 66-93) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975; Ord.99-02, passed 3-23-
1999; Ord. 2012-12, passed 11-27-2012)
§ 157.058 APPEALS FROM THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   Any persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the Board of
Adjustment, or any taxpayer, or any officer, department, board or bureau of the
Town Council may present to a circuit court a petition for issuance of a writ
of certiorari, duly verified, setting forth that the decision is illegal, in
whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality in the manner and
within the time provided by state appellate rules.
(2000 Code, § 66-94) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975)
PERMITS AND CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
§ 157.070 BUILDING PERMITS REQUIRED.
   (A)   No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to or
structurally altered without a permit issued by the Building Official. No
building permit shall be issued except in conformity with the provisions of
this chapter, except after written order from the Board of Adjustment in the
form of an administrative review, special exception or variance as provided by
this chapter.
   (B)   The issuance of a permit upon plans and specifications shall not
prevent the Building Official from thereafter requiring the correction of
errors in the plans and specifications or preventing the building operations
being carried on thereunder when in violation of this chapter or any town
ordinance.
(2000 Code, § 66-117) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.071 APPLICATION FOR BUILDING PERMIT.
   All applications for building permits for any structure and its accessory
buildings shall be accompanied by a scale drawing at a scale acceptable to the
Building Official in duplicate showing the following:
   (A)   The actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon, including
the location and actual boundaries of abutting watercourses and water bodies;
   (B)   The exact sizes and locations on the lot of buildings already existing
if any;
   (C)   The location and dimensions of the proposed buildings or alterations;
   (D)   The location and layout of the proposed sewage disposal system;
   (E)   When applicable, the required parking spaces, loading and unloading
spaces, maneuvering space and openings for ingress and egress;
   (F)   When applicable, grading and drainage plans showing any and all cuts,
fills and provisions for adequately carrying off surface water on premises plus
provisions for any surface water that would naturally flow over or through the
area, the plans to be reviewed and approved by the Town Engineer;
   (G)   Other information as lawfully may be required by the Building
Official, including:
      (1)   Existing or proposed uses of the building and land;
      (2)   The number of families, housekeeping units or rental units the
building is designed to accommodate;
      (3)   Conditions existing on the lot; and
      (4)   Other matters as may be necessary to determine conformance with and
provide for the enforcement of this chapter.
   (H)   One copy of the plans shall be returned to the applicant by the
Building Official after he or she shall have marked the copy either as approved
or disapproved, attested by his or her signature on the copy. The original,
similarly marked, shall be retained by the Building Official.
(2000 Code, § 66-118) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975)
§ 157.072 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY REQUIRED.
   No land or building erected or altered in its use of structure shall be used
until the Building Official shall have issued a certificate of occupancy
stating that the land or building and its proposed use are found to be in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter. Within three days after
notification that a building or premises is ready for occupancy or use, it
shall be the duty of the Building Official to make a final inspection and to
issue a certificate of occupancy if the land or building and its proposed use
are found to conform with the provisions of this chapter; or, if the
certificate is refused, to state the refusal in writing with the cause. A
temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued by the Building Official for a
period not exceeding six months during alterations or partial occupancy of a
building pending its completion, provided that the temporary certificate may
require the conditions and safeguards as will protect the safety of the
occupants and the public.
(2000 Code, § 66-119) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.073 EXPIRATION OF BUILDING PERMITS.
   If the work described in any building permit has not begun within 90 days
from its date of issuance, the permit shall expire. If the work described in
any building permit has not been substantially completed within two years of
its issuance, the permit shall expire.
(2000 Code, § 66-120) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975)
§ 157.074 CONSTRUCTION AND USE TO BE AS PROVIDED IN APPLICATIONS, PLANS,
PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY.
   Building permits or certificates of occupancy issued on the basis of plans
and applications approved by the Building Official authorize only the use,
arrangement and construction. Use, arrangement or construction at variance with
that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 66-121) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975)
§ 157.075 SPECIAL INSPECTOR.
   Special inspector and shoring and reshoring requirements:
   (A)   Threshold buildings shall be inspected by a special inspector who
shall be a registered architect or engineer who has qualified as same with the
department of professional regulation;
   (B)   The duly authorized representatives of special inspectors shall have
at least five years’ experience as a building inspector, builder, engineer,
architect, or as a superintendent, foreperson or competent mechanic in charge
of construction;
   (C)   Documented proof of the above qualifications and experience must be
furnished to the local code enforcement agency for approval. The authorized
representatives must sign daily inspection reports;
   (D)   A special inspector may also be a person certified or registered under
the Building Officials’ Association of Florida, the Southern Building Code
Congress, the Council of American Building Officials and Dade or Broward County
Inspector of Certification; and
   (E)   All shoring and reshoring procedures, plans and details shall be
prepared and sealed by a state registered engineer and a signed and sealed copy
of all shoring documents shall be submitted to the architect, structural
engineer, and the local code enforcement agency prior to issuance of permit.
All shoring and reshoring installations shall be supervised, inspected, and
certified to be in compliance with the shoring documents by the contractor. The
same shall also be inspected by the special inspector.
(Ord. 2002-03, passed 6-25-2002)
NONCONFORMITIES
§ 157.090 INTENT.
   Within the districts established by this chapter, or amendments that may
later be adopted, there exist lots, structures, uses of land and structures and
characteristics of use which were lawful before this chapter was passed or
amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated or restricted under the terms
of this chapter or future amendments. It is the intent of this subchapter to
permit these nonconformities to continue until they are removed, but not to
encourage their continuation. The uses are declared by this chapter to be
incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved. It is further the
intent of this subchapter that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon,
expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or
uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district.
(2000 Code, § 66-141) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975)
§ 157.091 EXTENSION AND ENLARGEMENT.
   (A)   A nonconforming use of a structure, a nonconforming use of land, or a
nonconforming use of a structure and land shall not be extended or enlarged
after July 14, 1975, by attachment on a building or premises of additional
signs intended to be seen from off the premises, or by the addition of other
uses of a nature that would be prohibited generally in the district involved;
nor shall the use of the premises revert to a former use that is prohibited
under this chapter.
   (B)   To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to
require a change in the plan, construction or designated use of any building on
which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of
adoption of this chapter.
   (C)   Actual construction includes the placing of construction materials in
permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner.
   (D)   Where excavation or demolition or removal of an existing building has
been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, the excavation or
demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction.
(2000 Code, § 66-142) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975)
§ 157.092 NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD.
   In any district in which dwelling units are permitted, notwithstanding
limitations imposed by other provisions of this chapter, dwelling units and
customary accessory buildings may be erected on any lot of record at the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter. The lot must be in
separate ownership and not of continuous frontage with other lots in the same
ownership. This provision shall apply even though the lot fails to meet the
requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the
district, provided that yard dimensions and other requirements not involving
area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the
district in which the lot is located. Variance of area, width or yard
requirements shall be obtained only through action of the Board of Adjustment.
If two or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots with
continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the time of passage or
amendment of this chapter, the lands involved shall be considered to be an
undivided lot for the purposes of this chapter; and no lot or portion of the
lot shall be eligible for a development permit that does not meet lot width,
depth and area requirements established by this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 66-143) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975; Ord. 2012-13, passed 9-25-
2012)
§ 157.093 NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND.
   Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter,
lawful use of land exists that is made no longer permissible under the terms of
this chapter as enacted or amended, the use may be continued, so long as it
remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions.
   (A)   No nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended to
occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this chapter unless the use is changed to a use
permitted in the district in which use is located.
   (B)   No nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any other
portion of the lot or parcel occupied by the use at the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this chapter.
   (C)   If any nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of
more than 60 consecutive days, subsequent use of the land shall conform to the
regulations specified by this chapter for the district in which the land is
located.
   (D)   No additional structure that does not conform to the requirements of
this chapter shall be erected in connection with the nonconforming use of land.
(2000 Code, § 66-144) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.094 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.
   Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this chapter that could not be built under the terms of this
chapter by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards or other
characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot, the structure may
be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following
provisions.
   (A)   No structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its
nonconformity.
   (B)   Any structure or portion of the structure may be altered to decrease
its nonconformity.
   (C)   Should the structure be destroyed by any means to any extent of more
than 50% of its construction cost at the time of destruction, it shall not be
reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   Should the structure be moved for any reason and distance whatever, it
shall thereafter conform to the regulations of the district in which it is
located after it is moved.
(2000 Code, § 66-145) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.095 NONCONFORMING USES OF STRUCTURES OR OF STRUCTURES AND PREMISES IN
COMBINATION.
   (A)   If a lawful use involving individual structures, or of a structure and
premises in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment
of this chapter, that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of
this chapter, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise
lawful, subject to the following provisions.
      (1)   No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this
chapter in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended,
constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in changing
the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is
located.
      (2)   Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a
building that were manifestly arranged or designed for the use at the time of
adoption or amendment of this chapter, but no use shall be extended to occupy
any land outside the building.
      (3)   Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which
a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use shall thereafter conform
to the regulations for the district in which the structure is located; and the
nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed.
      (4)   Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises
in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the
nonconforming status of the land.
      (5)   All nonconforming use of structures or of structures and premises
in combination, except for residential uses, shall be discontinued; except that
for each $500 of its assessed value on the date of issuance of a certificate of
nonconforming use, the nonconformity shall be permitted to continue for a
period of one year. In no event, however, shall any nonconformity involving a
structure be required to discontinue before a period of three years; nor shall
any nonconformity be permitted to continue for a period longer than 50 years,
regardless of its assessed value.
   (B)   Nonconformities not involving the use of a principal structure, e.g.,
open storage, building supplies, vehicle, mobile home, implement and machinery
storage, junkyards, commercial animal yards and the like, shall be discontinued
within two years of the effective date of this chapter or amendment.
(2000 Code, § 66-146) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.096 ABANDONMENT.
   A nonconforming use of a building or premises that has been abandoned shall
not thereafter be returned to the nonconforming use. A nonconforming use shall
be considered abandoned when the:
   (A)   Intent of the owner to discontinue the use is apparent; or
   (B)   Characteristic equipment and the furnishings of the nonconforming use
have been removed from the premises and have not been replaced by similar
equipment within six months, unless other facts show intention to resume the
nonconforming use, or when it has been replaced by a conforming use, or where
the use is discontinued or abandoned six months or for 18 months during any
three-year period.
(2000 Code, § 66-147) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975)
§ 157.097 REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE.
   On any building devoted in whole or in part to any nonconforming use,
ordinary repairs, or repair or replacement of non-load-bearing walls, fixtures,
wiring or plumbing, may be done provided that the cubic content of the building
as it existed at the time of passage or amendment of this chapter shall not be
increased. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening
or restoring to a safe condition of any building declared to be unsafe by any
official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of the official.
(2000 Code, § 66-148) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975)
§ 157.098 SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS.
   Any special exception use as provided in this chapter shall not be deemed a
nonconforming use but shall without further action be deemed a conforming use
in the district; however, the special exception shall not be extended or
expanded unless a special ordinance granting permission for the expansion or
extension has been passed and adopted by the Town Council as required by the
terms of this chapter in connection with the special exception procedure.
(2000 Code, § 66-149) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975)
§ 157.099 TEMPORARY USES.
   The casual, intermittent, temporary or illegal use of land or structures
shall not be sufficient to establish the existence of a nonconforming use. The
use shall not be validated by the adoption of this chapter unless it complies
with the terms of this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 66-150) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975)
§ 157.100 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS.
   The distance and dispersal requirements of section 66-15, shall not apply to
adult entertainment establishments legally and lawfully existing and operating
on the effective date of this chapter, but these establishments shall be deemed
nonconforming. If any nonconforming adult entertainment establishment
voluntarily ceases to do business for a period of 15 consecutive days, it shall
be deemed abandoned and thereafter shall not reopen except in conformance with
these distance and dispersal standards. However, no adult entertainment
establishment shall expand the square footage or cubic footage of the
establishment beyond its current dimensions.
(2000 Code, § 66-151) (Ord. 96-01, passed 1-29-1996) Penalty, see §
157.999
AMENDMENTS
§ 157.115 CONDITIONAL USES.
   (A)   The Town Council may permit a conditional use as provided herein, by
ordinance granting permission for the use after a public hearing before the
Planning and Zoning Board at which persons interested shall be accorded an
opportunity to be heard. Any ordinance permitting conditional uses as provided
herein shall be construed as permitting only the specifically named or
described conditional use, and not any other conditional use. Any property or
premises designated upon the zoning map by the letter symbol “CU” alone shall
be restricted to the specific conditional use permitted and may used for no
other use whatsoever. Any property or premises designated by the letter symbol
“CU” before and in conjunction with the letter symbol for a zoning district
shall be restricted to a use for that particular conditional use specified or
the use permitted in the designated use district, i.e. the letter “C-R-1A”
shall denote a conditional use permitted in an R-1A use district and the
premises so designated may be used only for the specific conditional use
permitted in that district.
   (B)   In granting any conditional use, the Town Council shall prescribe any
conditions that it deems necessary to or desirable for, the public interest. A
conditional use shall not be permitted by the Town Council unless and until:
      (1)   A written application for the conditional use, on a form prescribed
by the town, and a site plan drawn to scale, signed and sealed by any of the
following professionals registered in the state as a land surveyor, landscape
architect, architect or engineer shall be required;
      (2)   All applications for a conditional use shall be reviewed for
sufficiency by the Town Clerk, forwarded to the town planner for review,
recommendation, report, scheduling and submittal to the Planning and Zoning
Board who shall study and make written recommendations to the Council, which
recommendations shall become a part of the official record of the town in
connection with the application;
      (3)   Upon receipt of the application, a date shall be set for a public
hearing before the Planning and Zoning Board at which parties in interest and
citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. The Clerk shall cause a copy of
the notice to be posted on the property by the applicant for which a
conditional use is sought and at the Town Hall. Public hearing notice before
the Town Council for the adoption of a proposed ordinance approving the
conditional land shall be provided as required by F.S. Ch. 166, as amended from
time to time. In addition notice of public hearing for the adoption of a
proposed ordinance approving the conditional land use shall be posted at least
seven days in advance of such hearing before the Town Council at the Town Hall.
All notices shall state in substance the conditional use desired and a legal
description of the property;
      (4)   The applicant shall provide a map, along with the names and
addresses of all property owners within a 500 foot radius and will be
responsible for paying for notices to be sent to all adjacent owners of record.
However, failure of an adjacent owner to receive notice as mailed by the Town
Clerk shall not affect any action or proceedings taken hereunder; or
      (5)   At the time and place set forth in the notice herein above referred
to, the Planning and Zoning Board shall conduct a public hearing to consider
the request for the conditional use desired. Any party may appear in person or
be represented by counsel at the public hearing. At the time of the public
hearing and in no event later than one week from the date thereof, the Board
shall cause the submittal of the request for a conditional use together with
their written recommendations to be forwarded to the Town Council. As a
conditional use request is a quasi-judicial hearing, the Board and Town Council
may only act upon the evidence produced at the public hearing and shall
disclose for the record any ex-parte communications regarding the request.
   (C)   No conditional use shall be recommended by the Planning and Zoning
Board, nor granted by the Council, unless a determination be made that the
conditional use requested will not be injurious to the neighborhood or
otherwise detrimental to the public welfare, and will be in harmony with the
general purpose of this chapter. In making this determination, the Planning and
Zoning Board and Council shall take into account the character and uses of
adjoining buildings and lands and those in the vicinity, the number of persons
residing or working in the buildings or upon the land and traffic conditions in
the vicinity.
   (D)   Before any conditional use is recommended by the Planning and Zoning
Board or approved by the Town Council, each body shall make written findings
certifying compliance with the specific rules governing individual conditional
uses which at a minimum include consideration of the following provisions:
      (1)   Ingress and egress to the property and proposed structures thereon
with particular reference to automotive and pedestrian safety and convenience,
traffic flow and control, access in case of fire or catastrophe;
      (2)   Off-street parking and loading areas where required;
      (3)   Economic, noise, glare or odor effects of the request on adjoining
properties and properties generally in the district;
      (4)   Refuse and services areas;
      (5)   Utilities, with reference to locations, availability and
compatibility;
      (6)   Screening and buffering with reference to type, dimensions and
character;
      (7)   Signs, proposed exterior lighting with reference to glare, traffic
safety, economic effect, and compatibility and harmony with properties in the
district;
      (8)   Required yards and other open space;
      (9)   Height;
      (10)   Landscaping;
      (11)   Renewal and/or termination dates; and
      (12)   The use will be reasonably compatible with surrounding uses in its
function, its hours of operation, the type and amount of traffic to be
generated, and building size and setbacks, its relationship to land values,
consistency with the town’s comprehensive plan and future land use map and
other factors that may be used to measure compatibility with the surrounding
areas.
   (E)   After the public hearing before the Planning and Zoning Board and upon
receipt of their written recommendation, the Council may by ordinance grant
permission for the conditional use and in doing so may prescribe appropriate
conditions and safeguards in conformity with this chapter.
   (F)   Violations of the conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the
terms under which the conditional use is granted shall be deemed a violation of
this chapter and punishable as provided by law. The Council may provide a time
period with which action must be commenced in connection with the conditional
use, and may further provide that upon failure to implement or cessation of the
conditional use for a continuous period of six months, the use of the premises
shall revert to the previous and more restricted use classification.
(2000 Code, § 66-170) (Ord. 99-02, passed 3-23-1999; Ord. 2013-05, passed 3-26-
2013) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.116 PROCEDURE.
   The procedure for amendment of this chapter shall be as follows:
   (A)   A district boundary change may be initiated by:
      (1)   The owners of at least 75% of the property described in the
application;
      (2)   Tenants, with the owner’s sworn-to consent;
      (3)   Duly authorized agents, evidenced by a written power of attorney;
      (4)   Town Council;
      (5)   Planning and Zoning Board; and/or
      (6)   Any department or agency of the town.
   (B)   Any amendment to this chapter other than a district boundary change
may be proposed by:
      (1)   The Town Council;
      (2)   The Planning and Zoning Board;
      (3)   Any department or agency of the town; and/or
      (4)   Any individual, corporation or agency.
   (C)   All proposed amendments shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning
Board, which shall study the proposals to determine:
      (1)   The need and justification for the change;
      (2)   When pertaining to the rezoning of land, the effect of the change,
if any, on the particular property and on surrounding properties;
      (3)   When pertaining to the rezoning of land, the amount of undeveloped
land in the general area and in the town having the same classification as that
requested; and
      (4)   The relationship of the proposed amendment to the purpose of the
town plan for development, with appropriate consideration as to whether the
proposed change will further the purposes of this chapter and the plan.
   (D)   No recommendation for change or amendment may be made by the Planning
and Zoning Board until due public notice has been given of a public hearing.
Public hearing notice before the Planning and Zoning Board shall be given at
least 15 days in advance of the hearing by posting such notice at the Town
Hall. Public hearing notice before the Town Council for the adoption of an
ordinance amending
Chapter 157 shall be provided as required by F.S. Ch. 166, as amended from time
to time. In addition notice of public hearing shall be posted at least seven
days in advance of such hearing before the Town Council at the Town Hall.
   (E)   A notice shall be mailed to the property owners of record within a
radius of 500 feet; however, failure to receive the notice shall not affect any
action or proceedings taken under this section.
   (F)   When any proposed change of a zoning district boundary lies within 500
feet of the boundary of an incorporated or unincorporated area, notice shall be
forwarded to the Planning Board or governing body of the incorporated or
unincorporated areas in order to give the body an opportunity to appear at the
hearing and express its opinion on the effect of the district boundary change.
   (G)   The Planning and Zoning Board shall submit the request for change or
amendment to the Town Council with written reasons for its recommendation.
   (H)   The Town Council shall hold public hearings on the recommendation of
the Planning and Zoning Board, giving public notice under the same procedure
specified in divisions (D) through (F) above of this section.
(2000 Code, § 66-171) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975; Ord. 2013-05, passed 3-26-
2013)
§ 157.117 LIMITATIONS.
   No proposal for zoning change or amendment affecting particular property
shall contain conditions, limitations or requirements not applicable to all
other property in the district to which the particular property is proposed to
be rezoned.
(2000 Code, § 66-172) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975)
§ 157.118 PROTEST BY PROPERTY OWNERS.
   In case of a protest petition against a change in zoning classification of a
particular property signed by the owners of 20% or more either of the area of
the lots included in the proposed change, or of those immediately adjacent
extending 500 feet from the property, the amendment shall not become effective
except by the favorable vote of four members of the Town Council.
(2000 Code, § 66-173) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975)
§ 157.119 MODIFICATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARY CHANGES.
   If a request for a district boundary change is for a district more liberal
than the existing district, and the Planning and Zoning Board or Town Council
determines that the request should be denied, the Planning and Zoning Board may
recommend and/or the Town Council may change the district classification for
the property to any district classification that is less restrictive than the
requested zoning classification.
(2000 Code, § 66-174) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975)
§ 157.120 RECONSIDERATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARY CHANGES.
   When a proposed change in district boundaries has been acted upon by the
Town Council and disapproved or failed to pass, the proposed change, in the
same or substantially similar form, shall not be reconsidered by the Town
Council for a period of six months. The restriction shall not apply to the
property owner if the original request was initiated by the Town Council,
Planning and Zoning Board or any department or agency of the town.
(2000 Code, § 66-175) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975)
§ 157.121 PROCEDURES FOR QUASI-JUDICIAL HEARINGS; EX PARTE COMMUNICATIONS, SITE
VISITS; RECEIPT OF EXPERT OPINION, AND REVIEW OF MAIL AND OTHER COMMUNICATIONS.
   (A)   Intent. Pursuant to F.S. § 286.0115(1), it is the intent of the Town
Council that this section is intended to remove the presumption of prejudice
from ex parte communications with town officials and to permit site visits, the
receipt of expert opinion, and the review of mail and other communications
relating to certain quasi-judicial proceedings by the town officials. No
permission pursuant to F.S. § 286.0115, to engage in ex parte communications or
to conduct site visits, receive expert opinion at other than an advertised
public hearing, or to review mail and other communications is authorized by the
Town Council pursuant to this section, except for the quasi-judicial matters
set forth herein and only to the extent set forth below
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      EX PARTE COMMUNICATION. A communication involving a town official and a
member of the public, town staff or a town consultant regarding a pending
quasi-judicial permit application or appeal, the that the town official may be
exposed to only one perspective or part of the evidence with regard to a quasi-
judicial matter pending before the Council or Board on which the town official
serves
      MEMBER OF THE PUBLIC. Any person interested in a quasi-judicial permit
application or appeal, including but not limited to a permit applicant, an
appellant from a Town Administrator’s decision, an officer or member of a
homeowners’ association, an officer or member of an environmental,
homebuilding/development or concerned citizens’ organization, an official or
employee of a governmental entity other than the town, a developer, a property
owner or an interested citizen, or a representative or attorney for any of the
foregoing
      QUASI-JUDICIAL. Refers to a zoning or building-related permit or appeal
or the opening, diverting, narrowing, straightening, widening or vacating of
any roadway, alley, easement, public highway, street or right-of-way, as set
forth below, in which town officials give notice and an opportunity to be heard
to certain substantially affected persons, investigate facts, ascertain the
existence of facts, hold hearings, weigh evidence, draw conclusions from the
facts, and apply the law to the facts, as the basis for their decision. The
following are the only quasi-judicial matters subject to this section:
         (a)   Site specific rezonings of land pursuant to the town code, which
rezoning will have an impact on a limited number of persons or property owners,
on identifiable parties and interests, where the decision is contingent on a
fact or facts arrived at from distinct alternatives presented at a hearing, and
where the decision can be functionally viewed as policy application rather than
policy setting;
         (b)   Applications for approval or amendment of a conditional use
permit pursuant to the town code;
         (c)   Applications for approval, amendment or extension of time of an
approval of a site plan considered by the Town Council and the Planning and
Zoning Board pursuant to the town code;
         (d)   Applications for a special permit issued pursuant to the town
code;
         (e)   Applications for plat approval (preliminary and final) pursuant
to the town code;
         (f)   Applications for a vested rights special permit pursuant to the
town code;
         (g)   Variances considered by the Board of Adjustment:
            1.   Pursuant to the town code (Zoning Code);
            2.   Pursuant to the town code (standards for walls and fences);
and
            3.   Pursuant to the town code (signs and advertising).
         (h)   Variances considered by the Building Board of Adjustment and
Appeals:
            1.   Pursuant to the town code (flood prevention and protection);
            2.   Pursuant to Town Building Code;
            3.   Pursuant to Town Plumbing Code;
            4.   Pursuant to Town Gas Code;
            5.   Pursuant to Town Mechanical Code; and
            6.   Pursuant to Town Fire Prevention Code.
         (i)   Subdivision variances considered by the Town Council and
Planning and Zoning Board;
         (j)   Appeals heard by the Board of Adjustment from an:
            1.   Interpretation by the code enforcement officer of the
vegetation provisions,
Chapter 154 of the town code, pursuant to §
31.36 of the town code; and
            2.   Interpretation of the Zoning Code by the town planner pursuant
to the town code.
         (k)   Appeals heard by the building Board of Adjustments and appeals
from a:
            1.   Determination of the Town Engineer relating to stormwater
regulation in the town code;
            2.   Determination of the Building Official relating to the Town
Building Code;
            3.   Determination of the Building Official relating to the Town
Plumbing Code;
            4.   Determination of the Building Official relating to the Town
Gas Code;
            5.   Determination of the Building Official relating to the Town
Mechanical Code; and
            6.   Determination of the fire official relating to the Town Fire
Prevention Code.
         (l)   Appeals heard by the Town Council from an interpretation of the
comprehensive plan by the town planner;
         (m)   Appeals from planning, zoning, building or other staff officials
whose decisions are subject to appeal to the Town Council or other Town Board;
         (n)   Appeals heard by the Town Council and the local planning agency
from a determination regarding concurrency by town staff; and
         (o)   Applications for the opening, diverting, narrowing,
straightening, vacation or widening of any alley, street, public highway,
right-of-way, roadway or easement (preliminary and final) pursuant to the town
code or F.S. Chs. 166 or 177, or other provisions of law.
      SITE VISIT. An inspection of real property subject to an application for
any quasi-judicial permit or appeal prior to a public hearing on the permit
application or appeal conducted by a town official. The mere act of driving by
a site in the daily course of driving to a particular location, such as work or
a particular store, which act is not undertaken for the purpose of inspecting a
particular parcel of real property is not a site visit for purposes of this
section
      TOWN OFFICIAL. Refers to a member of the Town Council, the Planning and
Zoning Board, the local planning agency, the Board of Adjustment, or the
Building Board of Adjustment and Appeals.
   (C)   Ex parte communications between town officials and members of the
public.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(4) below, a member of
the public not otherwise prohibited by statute, charter provision or ordinance
may have an ex parte communication with any town official regarding any quasi-
judicial matter on which action may be taken by the Council or Board on which
the town official serves; provided, that the town official adheres to the
disclosure requirements set forth in division (C)(3) below.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(4) below, by statute,
charter provision, or ordinance, any town official may have an ex parte
communication with any expert witness or consultant regarding any quasi-
judicial matter on which action may be taken by the Council or Board on which
the town official serves; provided, that the town official adheres to the
disclosure requirements set forth in division (C)(3) below.
      (3)   Disclosure.
         (a)   The town official shall disclose the occurrence of all ex parte
communications involving the town official which relate to the quasi-judicial
action pending before the Council or Board on which the town official serves.
         (b)   Disclosure of the ex parte communication. Disclosure shall occur
by no later than the commencement of the final public hearing, or if no formal
public hearing is held, then at the commencement of any hearing at which the
final decision regarding the quasi-judicial matter is made. The town official
shall disclose the ex parte communication verbally or by memorandum. Any
memorandum disclosing the occurrence of the ex parte communication shall be
placed in the official file regarding the pending quasi-judicial matter which
file shall be maintained in the Planning and Zoning Department. By no later
than the commencement of the final hearing leading to a final decision on the
pending quasi-judicial matter by the town official’s Council or Board, the
memorandum shall be made a part of the record.
         (c)   At the time of disclosure, the town official shall identify the
person, group or entity with whom the ex parte communication took place, the
substance of the ex parte communication, and any matters discussed which are
considered by the town official to be material to the town official’s decision
in the pending quasi-judicial matter.
      (4)   Town officials who are members of the Town Board of Adjustment or
the Building Board of Adjustments and Appeals shall not be permitted to engage
in ex parte communications with members of the public or to discuss or receive
opinions from an expert witness or consultant regarding a quasi-judicial matter
pending before the town official’s Board at other than a formally noticed
hearing of the Council or Board on which the member serves. In the event that a
town official who is a member of the Town Board of Adjustment or the Building
Board of Adjustments and appeals engages in an ex parte communication with a
member of the public or receives an opinion from an expert witness or
consultant, regarding a matter pending before the Board on which the town
official serves as a member, the town official is required to disclose the ex
parte communication or opinion received from the expert witness or consultant
in the manner set forth in division (C)(3) above.
   (D)   Oral or written communications between town staff and town officials.
Town officials may discuss quasi-judicial matters pending before the Council or
Board on which the town official serves with town staff; provided that the town
official makes a disclosure pursuant to division (C)(3) above.
   (E)   Site visits by town officials. Any town official may conduct a site
visit of any property related to a quasi-judicial matter pending before the
Council or Board on which the town official serves; provided, that the town
official adheres to the disclosure requirements set forth in division (C)(3)
above. Any disclosure of a site visit pursuant to division (C)(3) above shall
disclose the existence of the site visit, and any information obtained by
virtue of the site visit considered by the town official to be material to the
official’s decision regarding the pending quasi-judicial matter.
   (F)   Review of mail, correspondence, and written communications by town
officials. Any town official may review mail, correspondence or written
communications, related to a quasi-judicial matter pending before the Council
or Board on which the town official serves. Immediately upon review of the
mail, correspondence or written communication, the document shall be placed in
the official file regarding the pending quasi-judicial matter and maintained in
the Planning and Zoning Department.
   (G)   Planning and Zoning Department file. All correspondence, mail or
written communications reviewed by town officials prior to the final hearing on
a pending quasi-judicial matter shall be placed in the official file regarding
the matter and maintained by the Planning and Zoning Department. The
correspondence, mail or written communications reviewed by town officials prior
to the final hearing on a pending quasi-judicial matter or any disclosure
memoranda as described in division (C)(3)(b) above, shall be available for
public inspection. By no later than the commencement of the final public
hearing, or if no formal public hearing is held, then at the commencement of
any hearing at which the final decision regarding the quasi-judicial matter is
made, the town planner shall make the correspondence, mail, written
communications or other matters, and any disclosure memoranda placed in the
official, a part of the record. All of the foregoing documents shall be
received by the Council or Board as evidence, with the exception of disclosure
memoranda, subject to any objections interposed by participants at the hearing.
   (H)   Opportunity to comment upon substance of disclosure. At a time that a
disclosure regarding an ex parte communication, receipt of an expert opinion,
site visit or review of mail, correspondence or other written communication is
made a part of the record at a hearing, persons who may have opinions or
evidence contrary to those expressed in the ex parte communication, expert
opinion or mail, correspondence or other written communication, or noted during
the site visit, shall be given a reasonable opportunity to refute or respond
and provide contrasting information, evidence or views.
(Ord. 2002-02, passed 6-25-2002)
SITE DEVELOPMENT PLANS
§ 157.135 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   As the general welfare, health, safety and convenience of the community are
directly affected by the use of land, it is in the direct interest of the
public that developments be conceived, designed and developed in accordance
with sound rules and proper minimum standards. The purpose and intent of this
subchapter is to serve as one of the instruments of land use control for the
town and to provide:
   (A)   Proper traffic circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian;
   (B)   Fire and police protection;
   (C)   Protection from flooding and provide proper storm water management;
   (D)   Coordination with existing and proposed development;
   (E)   Protection of natural resources and the environment;
   (F)   Adequate open space and recreation, when applicable;
   (G)   The adequate and efficient supply of utilities, streets and services
to new land developments; and
   (H)   The maintenance of minimum standards for visual, design and aesthetic
development of properties in the town.
(Ord. 2002-03, passed 6-25-2002)
§ 157.136 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY (CO). A document, certified by the Chief Building
Official, that certifies that a particular building may now be used or occupied
because that building has been constructed in accordance with all provisions of
the Building Code, an approved site development plan and all other ordinances
and laws applicable thereto.
   COMMERCIAL. Buildings, structures or uses designed or intended for business,
retail or professional activities of any kind. For purposes of this subchapter,
COMMERCIAL shall also include hotels and motels.
   DEVELOPER. Any person proposing a development which requires site plan
approval pursuant to this section. The term is used interchangeably with
APPLICANT or PETITIONER.
   DEVELOPMENT. The construction, installation, demolition or removal of a
structure, impervious surface, including adding, removing, exposing,
excavating, leveling, grading, digging, furrowing, dumping, piling, dredging,
or otherwise significantly disturbing or altering soil, mud, sand or rock of a
site. The clearing, scraping, grubbing, killing or otherwise removing
vegetation from a site shall also be considered DEVELOPMENT.
   DEVELOPMENT ORDER. Any order granting, denying or granting with conditions
an application for a development permit.
(F.S. § 163.3164)
   DEVELOPMENT PERMIT. Includes any building permit, zoning permit, subdivision
approval, rezoning, certification, special exception, variance or any other
official action of local government having the effect of permitting the
development of land.
(F.S. § 163.3164)
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. Those hard-surfaced areas which either prevent or retard
the entry of water into soil mantle, as it entered under natural conditions
prior to development and/or cause water to run off the surface in greater
quantities or at an increased rate of flow from that present under natural
conditions, prior to development. Common impervious surfaces include, but are
not limited to, rooftops, sidewalks, patio areas, driveways, parking lots,
storage areas and other surfaces which similarly impact the natural
infiltration or runoff patterns which existed prior to development, including
normal water inn ponds or lakes.
   INSTITUTIONAL. Public and quasi-public buildings and uses, buildings for
public assemblage, libraries, fire stations, hospitals, sanitariums,
convalescent homes, private schools, private camps and clubs and similar type
uses.
   MULTI-FAMILY. Buildings, structures and uses designed or intended for
residential occupancy, which includes three or more living dwelling units,
including apartments, efficiencies, townhouses and condominiums. MULTI-FAMILY
does not include motels or hotels.
   OWNER. The owner or owners of record of the property that is the subject of
a request.
   STANDARD SITE VARIANCE. A variance that grants relief to technical and
design requirements of the town code, or those code requirements found in all
sections of the town code other than §§
157.165 through
157.389.
   SUBSTANTIAL OR MAJOR CONSTRUCTION. Construction activity which has occurred
on a site which meets or exceeds 50% of the required construction expenditure
for fulfillment of the development order, or when at least 25% of the required
construction expenditure for fulfillment of the development order occurs in any
calendar year.
   TRAFFIC IMPACT STATEMENT. A traffic report/study to identify that the impact
of the traffic generation and flow will not adversely affect the community. The
statement must be signed and sealed by a state registered professional
engineer. Minimum information must include a.m. and p.m. peak hour trips,
traffic volume counts, turning movements, traffic assignment studies, accident
analysis and geometric design, traffic safety effects, traffic signal studies,
pedestrian activity and safety/site distance with respect to subject property
accesses.
(Ord. 2002-03, passed 6-25-2002)
§ 157.137 APPLICABILITY AND DEVELOPMENTS REQUIRING SITE PLAN REVIEW.
   The procedures contained in this subchapter are applicable to all projects
involving land development (other than subdivisions), including those without
structures such as parking lots, and those which involve the construction of
any facility. Also included are projects which involve the alteration or
conversion of existing structures or the change of use of a structure where the
site and/or structure does not meet the current criteria of this regulation.
The provisions of this code, where appropriate, are to be applied to on-site
and off-site development activity. Exceptions from applicability of this
subchapter are:
   (A)   Single-family dwellings or major appurtenances thereto;
   (B)   Three or less duplex units in a subdivision where a certificate of
completion for the subdivision has been issued by the town;
   (C)   Subdivision procedures which involves land development which involves
the subdividing or platting of land covered by formal platting and replat
procedures, pursuant to
Chapter 156; and
   (D)   Modifications to approved site development plans in accordance with
and as provided in §
157.143 of this subchapter.
(Ord. 2002-03, passed 6-25-2002)
§ 157.138 FEE.
   Application fees for site development plan review, concurrency fees, site
variance application fees and/or any other fees for review of applications
provided in this subchapter, as may be adopted from time to time by resolution
of the Town Council, must be paid to the town at the time the submittals/
applications are made to the Town Clerk.
(Ord. 2002-03, passed 6-25-2002)
§ 157.139 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Generally. The petitioner must submit seven copies of a site plan
prepared, signed and sealed by an architect or professional engineer, licensed
by the state, seven copies of a reduced site plan (minimum of 11 inches by 17
inches ), seven copies of boundary survey (of which three must be signed and
sealed by a licensed surveyor), seven copies of an existing tree survey, seven
copies of landscape plan proposed in accordance with the landscape regulations
of the town, §§
154.055 through
154.065, seven copies of traffic impact statement signed and sealed by a state
registered professional engineer when determined to be needed by the town
planning or engineering consultants, two complete copies of the stormwater
management plan and calculations per SJRWMD or other town standards and a site
plan review fee. An application that meets all of these requirements must be
considered a sufficient application. Additionally, prior to issuance of a
building permit, the petitioner must execute and record a stormwater
maintenance agreement, as required by the code of ordinances of the town. In
keeping with the requirements specified above, all site plans shall include the
items listed in the required submittals check list as adopted by resolution by
the Town Council. The required submittal checklist shall be made available in
the office of the Town Clerk and/or town planning or engineering consultant.
   (B)   Pre-application conference. A pre-application conference can be
requested by the applicant and is suggested in order to become aware of the
town’s requirements. Site plans may be submitted as preliminary plans, in order
to obtain a preliminary review prior to making expenditures on final
engineering and construction documents. Preliminary plans at a minimum shall
include: boundary survey, site layout, preliminary utility locations, ingress
points, dimensions (setbacks, parking, aisles, buildings and the like); site
data calculations; open space; retention areas and other information deemed
necessary by the town for a particular use. Preliminary plans are required
submittals for conditional use permit applications.
   (C)   Final site plans. Requests for final approval and issuance of a
development order shall be made for final site plans containing all required
information on the site, engineering, construction and permitting as described
herein
(Ord. 2002-03, passed 6-25-2002)
§ 157.140 SUFFICIENT APPLICATION; REVIEW TIME; STAFF REPORT.
   (A)   Sufficient application. A sufficient application for site plan review
must be filed with the Town Clerk a minimum of 45 days prior to the date of the
Planning Board meeting in the month applicant desires to be heard. On that
submittal date, the town planner shall transmit the copies to various review
agencies/departments for their review and comment.
      (1)   The Fire Department shall review the plan to ensure that the size
and spacing of water mains and fire hydrants are adequate; that the location of
buildings and service roads are adequate to permit ingress and egress for
firefighting equipment.
      (2)   The Engineer shall review the plan to ensure that an orderly and
safe traffic flow is permitted within the site, that no traffic problems are
created by the proposed ingress and egress routes, and that the plan provides
adequate parking; shall verify easements and their adequacy, and shall review
the plan to ensure adequate stormwater management facilities; shall review the
sanitary sewer system to ensure that the mains and laterals are adequate; trash
and garbage pickup facilities and access thereto.
      (3)   The town planner shall review the plans to ensure its compliance
with the zoning ordinance, the comprehensive plan, site plan review and other
ordinances of the town.
   (B)   Report; changes by applicant. Within ten working days, from the
submittal date of a sufficient application, the various review agencies must
submit, in writing, to the town planner recommendations on the factors relating
to the site plan which bear upon the public interest. The comments shall then
be forwarded to the applicant. The applicant shall have an opportunity to
review the comments and make any changes on the site plan to conform to the
recommendations. The corrections must be submitted to the town planner at least
18 working days prior to the Planning Board meeting and staff will have eight
working days to review this first revision. Eight days prior to the Planning
Board meeting, each staff agency must make a recommendation of either approved,
approved with conditions or deny, with that written report.
   (C)   Continuance. The applicant may request in writing one continuance of
the time frames indicated above. A requested continuance may be no greater than
60 days.
   (D)   Revised plans. Revised plans to meet the conditions/comments of staff
review must be submitted within 60 calendar days from the date those
conditions/comments were delivered to the applicant. Failure to submit revised
plans shall result in an automatic withdrawal of the application.
(Ord. 2002-03, passed 6-25-2002)
§ 157.141 STAFF REPORT; PLANNING BOARD REVIEW.
   (A)   Staff report. Based on all comments, the town planner shall place the
item on the first Town Council meeting after the Planning Board review. The
Town Council shall make findings of fact and may approve, approve subject to
conditions or disapprove the site plan. If the site plan is denied, the town
planner shall provide written notice of the reasons for denial and inform the
applicant of the applicant’s right of appeal.
   (B)   Building permit. No building permit shall be issued by the town until
a development order has been issued (which constitutes a letter from the town
planner, showing Town Council approval) and construction plans for the
development have been approved and accepted by the Chief Building Official and
his or her designee(s).
   (C)   Development order. No work of any nature shall commence on the
property until a development order has been issued. Upon site development plan
approval, construction plan approval and issuance of a building permit, the
development shall be built in accordance with the approved site development
plan. The Town Engineer shall at a minimum conduct two site inspections while
site development is under construction.
   (D)   As-built survey-site development. After site development construction
and prior to receiving a building permit, the developer must provide the Town
Engineer with three copies of an as-built survey. The Town Engineer shall
certify in writing that the site development substantially conforms to the
approved site development plan. In addition, all state or federal agency
permits applicable to the project shall be filed with the town, including, but
not limited to, SJRWMD, FDEP, FCOE and the like.
   (E)   As-built survey-building construction. Prior to issuance of a final
certificate of occupancy by the Chief Building Official, the developer must
provide three copies of an as-built survey.
   (F)   Development schedule. The developer must provide a development
schedule which includes, at a minimum, the schedule of development activity,
anticipated date of commencement, schedule of construction activity and
anticipated date of completion to the Chief Building Official.
(Ord. 2002-03, passed 6-25-2002)
§ 157.142 DURATION OF APPROVED SITE PLAN; EXTENSION; PHASING.
   (A)   Duration of approved site plan. Following issuance of a development
order by the town, the applicant shall have one calendar year to commence
construction on the site. Where substantial construction has not begun within
one calendar year or where substantial progress has not been made during any
six-month period following commencement of construction, the site plan approval
shall expire and the site plan may be subject to re-evaluation by the town.
   (B)   Extension; application for. One extension of one calendar year may be
granted by the Planning Board following review and recommendation by staff on
request of the applicant. Consideration of an extension may occur only if an
application for an extension is made prior to the expiration of the site plan
and where conditions or codes have not changed during the first year so as to
affect the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the town.
   (C)   Development of site under an approved site plan. If the final
certificate of occupancy (CO) on the site has not been issued within three
years from the original site plan approval date, the site plan approval shall
be deemed to have expired and the petitioner must make application for a new
site plan review approval to continue with construction.
   (D)   Phasing of site development.
      (1)   General. If a request for phasing is approved at the time of
issuance of the development order, the dates for each phase shall be adhered to
or the development order shall expire.
      (2)   Determination of phasing.
         (a)   The following guidelines shall be used for determining
eligibility for phasing:
            1.   Sites greater than three acres; and
            2.   Buildings greater than 15,000 square feet.
         (b)   Phasing shall not be granted for more than three calendar years.
      (3)   Concurrency. Each phase shall be required to receive a separate
certificate of capacity under concurrency management provisions of this code,
§§
152.30 through
152.32, prior to commencement of construction.
(Ord. 2002-03, passed 6-25-2002)
§ 157.143 MODIFICATIONS TO A SITE OR TO AN APPROVED SITE PLAN.
   (A)   When a site plan on a single lot, tract or parcel of land is approved,
any subdivision of or augmentation to the land assemblage included in the site
plan must be resubmitted for the site plan review process as set forth in this
chapter. Additionally, any substantial changes to landscaping, traffic flow and
accesses, utility requirements and/or the stormwater management plan shall
require resubmittal for site plan review approval through the procedures set
forth in this subchapter. The Mayor shall make the initial determination if
there was a substantial change to the landscaping, traffic flow and accesses,
utility requirements and/or the stormwater management plan on the submitted
site plan in consultation with and upon the recommendation of the town planner
and/or Town Engineer.
   (B)   Revisions and/or modifications to approved site development plans
while under construction which do not increase the number of buildings or
adversely impact compliance with the approved site development plan, and would
not alter the required infrastructure and improvements necessary to serve the
site, may be approved in writing by the Mayor, upon review and recommendation
by the town planner, Town Engineer or Chief Building Official provided the
additions and/or modifications fully conform to all existing town regulations.
Prior to final acceptance of the site, as-built drawings shall be submitted
indicating the revisions and/or modifications prior to site acceptance.
   (C)   Changes in use shall be evaluated by the town planner or designee as
to the need for a complete site development plan review and possible
modifications, based on the nature of the change in use or occupancy and the
need for compliance with current regulations. The following items shall be
provided for review of a change of use:
      (1)   Type of business;
      (2)   Previous use;
      (3)   Hours of operation;
      (4)   Square footage of all structures; and
      (5)   Scaled drawing of the site and structure. Drawing to include:
         (a)   Parking (with dimensions) including handicapped spaces;
         (b)   Loading;
         (c)   Ingress/egress to the site;
         (d)   Traffic circulation pattern;
         (e)   Adjacent roadways;
         (f)   Dumpster location;
         (g)   Existing and proposed signage; and
         (h)   Any other information pertinent to the operation of the site.
      (6)   State accessibility standards for entrance and restrooms.
   (D)   Following receipt of the information noted above, the town planner or
his or her designee shall have ten working days to provide his or her
recommendation and determination as to whether a change in use will require a
site development plan submittal. The applicant/petitioner shall be notified in
writing of the town planner’s determination.
(Ord. 2002-03, passed 6-25-2002; Ord. 2022-05, passed 11-22-2022)
§ 157.144 SITE STANDARD VARIANCES.
   The Planning Board may recommend to the Council, who may grant a standard
site variance from the applicability or specific terms of these regulations,
exclusive of zoning regulations which shall only be heard by the Board of
Adjustment, when the standard site variance will not be contrary to the public
interest and where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the
provisions of this section would result in unnecessary hardship. The terms
shall only include the following waivers: 10% reduction in parking or
alterations of the landscaping or buffering requirements. Applications for
standard site variances must be applied for in accordance with the code of
ordinances, and must be duly advertised in accordance with applicable law.
(Ord. 2002-03, passed 6-25-2002)
§ 157.145 EXCEPTIONS.
   The standards and requirements set forth in these regulations may be
modified by the Town Council in the case of a plan and program for a complete
community or a planned development which in the judgment of the Town Council
provides adequate public or private spaces and improvements for the
circulation, recreation, light, air and service needs of the tract when fully
developed and populated, and which also provides the covenants or other legal
provisions as will assure conformity to the implementation of the plan. In
granting the modification, the Town Council shall require the reasonable
conditions and standards as will secure substantially the objectives and
standards of this chapter. The Council may use a development agreement to
formalize this situation.
(Ord. 2002-03, passed 6-25-2002)
§ 157.146 APPEALS.
   Appeals to terms or implementation of this chapter are as provided for in
the code of ordinances.
(Ord. 2002-03, passed 6-25-2002)
§ 157.147 ENFORCEMENT.
   Within the jurisdiction of these regulations, no site development plan shall
be approved, nor shall any building permit or certificate of occupancy be
issued, unless the development meets all the requirements of these regulations
and have been approved in accordance with the requirements as herein provided.
(Ord. 2002-03, passed 6-25-2002)
§ 157.148 REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS.
   The town shall require a performance and maintenance bond in the amount of
5% of the approved site development improvements, which shall be posted prior
to construction commencement. The town shall enforce any required improvement
or maintenance bond by resort to legal and equitable remedies if required
improvements have not been satisfactorily installed in accordance with the
approved site development plan, unless extended by the Town Council for cause
and provided the surety consents to the extension. The town shall notify the
owner of the project a minimum of 60 calendar days prior to the expiration of
the improvement or maintenance bond. The owner of the property shall have all
improvements complete, or ensure proper maintenance of the improvements, a
minimum of 30 calendar days prior to the expiration of the improvement or
maintenance bond or request an extension and renew the bond. Upon satisfactory
completion of the approved improvements, the bond will be returned to the owner
of the bond.
(Ord. 2002-03, passed 6-25-2002)
§ 157.149 APPLICABILITY.
   The owners and successors of property developed under an approved site
development plan shall not remove, destroy, modify, subvert or render
inoperable through act or omission any of the improvements, designs, standards
or conditions required either directly or indirectly the these regulations.
(Ord. 2002-03, passed 6-25-2002)
§ 157.150 SITE MAINTENANCE OBLIGATIONS.
   The owner and successors shall not remove, destroy, modify, subvert or
render inoperable through act or omission any of the improvements, designs,
standards or conditions required either directly or indirectly by these
regulations.
(Ord. 2002-03, passed 6-25-2002)
§ 157.151 VIOLATION.
   It shall be a violation of this subchapter for any person to construct,
open, modify or dedicate any street, sanitary sewer, water main or stormwater
management structure without first having obtained site development plan
approval and otherwise having complied with the provisions of these
regulations.
(Ord. 2002-03, passed 6-25-2002) Penalty, see §
157.999
DISTRICTS GENERALLY
§ 157.165 INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the
official zoning map, the following rules shall apply:
   (A)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of
streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow the centerlines;
   (B)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines
shall be construed as following the lot lines;
   (C)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following town limits shall be
construed as following town limits;
   (D)   Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to
follow the high water mark and in the event of change in the shoreline shall be
construed as moving within the high water mark; boundaries indicated as
approximately following the centerlines of streams, rivers, canals, lakes or
other bodies of water shall be construed to follow the centerlines;
   (E)   Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features
indicated in divisions (A) through (D) above of this section shall be so
construed. Distance not specifically indicated on the official zoning map shall
be determined by the use of the scale shown on the zoning map;
   (F)   In cases where the actual location of physical features varies from
those shown on the official zoning map or in other circumstances not covered by
divisions (A) through (E) above, the Town Council shall interpret the district
boundaries;
   (G)   Where a district boundary divides a lot that was in single ownership
on July 14, 1975, the Town Council may permit, as a special exception, the
extension of the regulations for either portion of the lot not to exceed 50
feet beyond the district line into the remaining portion of the lot;
   (H)   All areas within the corporate limits of the town that are under water
and are not shown as included within any district shall be subject to all of
the regulations of the district that immediately adjoins the water area. If the
water area joins two or more districts, the boundaries of each district shall
be construed to extend into the water area in a straight line until they meet
the other district; and
   (I)   Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to
be midway between the main tracks.
(2000 Code, § 66-246) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975)
§ 157.166 APPLICATION OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   The regulations set by this chapter within each district shall be minimum
regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or
land, except:
   (A)   No building, structure or land shall be used or occupied, and no
building or structure shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or
structurally altered unless in conformity with all of the regulations specified
in §§
157.165 through
157.389 for the district in which it is located;
   (B)   No building or other structure shall be erected or altered to exceed
the heights, accommodate or house a greater number of families, occupy a
greater percentage of yard area or have narrower or smaller rear yards, front
yards, side yards or other open spaces than required in §§
157.165 through
157.389 or in any manner contrary to the provisions of this chapter;
   (C)   No part of a yard or other open space required in connection with any
building for the purpose of complying with this chapter, shall be included as
part of a yard, open space or off-street parking or loading space similarly
required for any other building;
   (D)   No yard or lot existing on July 14, 1975, shall be reduced in
dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth in this chapter.
Yards or lots created after the effective date of this chapter shall meet the
minimum requirements established by this chapter;
   (E)   Within each district, the regulations set by this chapter shall be
minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of
structure, land or water; and
   (F)   Every building erected or structurally altered shall be on a lot
adjacent to a public street, or with access to a public street.
(2000 Code, § 66-247) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.167 SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of classifying, regulating and restricting the
location of trades and industries and the location of buildings designed for
industry, business, residence and other uses, the town is divided into use
districts and has set forth regulations in subsequent subchapters of this
chapter.
      (1)   R-A Residential Agricultural;
      (2)   R-1AAA Single-Family Residential;
      (3)   R-1A Single-Family Residential;
      (4)   R-2 One-, Two- and Multiple-Family Residential;
      (5)   C-1 Neighborhood Commercial;
      (6)   C-2 General Commercial;
      (7)   C-P Commercial Parkway;
      (8)   M-1 Light Industrial;
      (9)   TR-1 Mobile Home Parks;
      (10)   TRC-1 Mobile Home Cooperative;
      (11)   TTP Travel Trailer Park; and
      (12)   Adult Entertainment.
   (B)   The use districts referred to in division (A) above of this section
are designated upon the official zoning map and expressly made a part of this
chapter. No building shall be erected, nor shall buildings or premises be used
for any purpose other than a purpose permitted by this chapter in the use
district in which the building or premises are located. The designation of use
districts and uses by letter symbols when used throughout this chapter and upon
the zoning map shall have the same effect as if the full description of the
districts was stated.
(2000 Code, § 66-248) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975; Ord. 2022-05, passed 11-
22-2022)
R-A RESIDENTIAL AGRICULTURAL
§ 157.180 DISTRICT AND INTENT.
   (A)   The provisions of the R-A District are intended to apply to a sparsely
developed area capable of supporting single-family residences at very low
densities in conjunction with agricultural, conservation and related
activities. Large lot sizes are required to maintain the low density and open
space character, prevent unsanitary conditions, and keep the various principal
uses in the area at a level of compatible land use intensity.
   (B)   Permitted principal uses and structures in this district are:
      (1)   Single-family dwellings;
      (2)   General agricultural activities such as farming, grove agriculture,
truck and flower gardening, commercial nurseries and greenhouses, dairying and
similar activities;
      (3)   Keeping or raising for sale of horses, ponies, cows, provided that
the total of all animals shall not exceed one to each half acre of the area in
the lot;
      (4)   Keeping or raising for sale of small domestic animals, birds or
fish; and
      (5)   Clubs and lodges, including golf and country clubs and similar
activities.
   (C)   Permitted accessory uses and structures are:
      (1)   Home occupations; and
      (2)   Customary accessory uses of a noncommercial nature clearly
incidental and subordinate to one or more of the principal uses.
   (D)   Permitted conditional uses are:
      (1)   Sale of products grown or raised on the same lot, providing the
following conditions are met:
         (a)   No structure for the sale of the products shall contain a floor
area greater than 200 square feet;
         (b)   All parking spaces, loading spaces and drives shall be located
off the street; and
         (c)   The area for the display of farm products for sale shall not
exceed 200 square feet, exclusive of the area for the permitted structure.
      (2)   Airports;
      (3)   Recreation amusement facilities, exhibitions, outdoor shows and all
operations, avocations or businesses operating in tents or temporary buildings
or structures, providing the following conditions are met:
         (a)   The use is not in operation for a period exceeding 30 days;
         (b)   Adequate sanitary facilities are provided for the anticipated
number of people to be served, as determined by an on-site inspection by the
Building Official;
         (c)   All enclosures, displays, structures, tents, equipment and other
facilities that will house or be visited by people shall be erected and
maintained at all times in a safe, sanitary and sightly condition, as
determined by an on-site inspection by the Building Official and Fire Chief;
and
         (d)   All facilities included in a temporary use shall meet the
requirements of performance standards.
      (4)   Commercial radio and television broadcasting transmitters, towers
and antennas;
      (5)   Commercial dog kennels and commercial poultry farms; and
      (6)   Cemeteries.
   (E)   Prohibited uses and structures are:
      (1)   All uses not specifically or provisionally permitted in this
section; and
      (2)   All uses not in keeping with the agricultural and/or residential
character of this district.
   (F)   Lot and structure requirements are:
Minimum lot area          1 acre
Minimum lot width         150 feet
Minimum lot depth         200 feet
Maximum lot coverage      25%
Minimum living area       1,200 square feet
Maximum height            25 feet
Minimum yard requirements
   Front               50 feet
   Side interior       25 feet
   Side corner lot     30 feet
   Rear                30 feet, 25 feet when abutting an alley
 
(2000 Code, § 66-271) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975; Ord. 99-02, passed 3-23-
1999; Ord. 2012-12, passed 11-27-2012)  Penalty, see §
157.999
R-1AAA SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
§ 157.195 DISTRICT AND INTENT.
   (A)   The provisions of the R-1AAA District are intended to apply to an area
of estate-density single-family residential development. Large lot sizes and
other restrictions are intended to promote and protect high-quality residential
development.
   (B)   Permitted principal uses and structures are single-family dwellings.
   (C)   Permitted accessory uses and structures are:
      (1)   Noncommercial nurseries and greenhouses; and
      (2)   Customary accessory uses of a residential nature, clearly
incidental and subordinate to the principal use, including garages, carports
and the like, in keeping with the residential character of the district.
   (D)   Permitted conditional uses are:
      (1)   Public parks and recreational buildings;
      (2)   Golf courses and country clubs;
      (3)   Sewer lift stations; and
      (4)   Schools, churches, neighborhood libraries and community centers.
   (E)   Prohibited uses and structures are all uses not specifically or
provisionally permitted in this division.
   (F)   Lot and structure requirements are:
Minimum lot area          12,000 square feet
Minimum lot width         100 feet
Minimum lot depth         120 feet
Maximum lot coverage      30%
Minimum living area       1,600 square feet
Maximum height            25 feet
Minimum yard requirements
                          25 feet or average depth of existing front yards on
   Front               developed lots within 100 feet each side, but not
                          less than 35 feet
   Side interior lot   15 feet
   Side corner lot     25 feet
   Rear                25 feet; 20 feet when abutting an alley
 
(2000 Code, § 66-291) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975; Ord. 99-02, passed 3-23-
1999) Penalty, see §
157.999
R-1A SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
§ 157.225 DISTRICT AND INTENT.
   (A)   The provisions of the R-1A District are intended to apply to an area
of low-density single-family residential development. Lot sizes and other
restrictions are intended to promote high-quality residential development.
   (B)   Permitted principal uses and structures are single-family dwellings.
   (C)   Permitted accessory uses and structures are as for R-1AAA and in
addition, home occupations subject to the provisions of §§
157.180 through
157.369.
   (D)   Permitted conditional uses are as for R-1AAA, §
157.195.
   (E)   Prohibited uses and structures are as for R-1AAA, except home
occupations are permitted as accessory uses.
   (F)   Lot and structure requirements are:
Minimum lot area          7,500 square feet
Minimum lot width         75 feet
Minimum lot depth         100 feet
Maximum lot coverage      35%
Minimum living area       1200 square feet
Maximum height            25 feet
Minimum yard requirements
   Front               25 feet
   Side interior lot   7.5 feet or 10% of width of lot up to 15 feet,
                          whichever is greater
   Side corner lot     25 feet
   Rear                25 feet; 20 feet when abutting an alley
 
   (G)   All riverfront properties with building construction plans submitted
after September 1, 2011 are subject to the breezeway/visual corridor
requirements as described in §
157.506 of the supplementary district regulations.
(2000 Code, § 66-331) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975; Ord. 99-02, passed 3-23-
1999; Ord. 2011-12, passed 11-1-2011; Ord. 2021-03, passed - -2021) Penalty,
see §
157.999
R-2 ONE-, TWO- AND MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
§ 157.240 DISTRICT AND INTENT.
   (A)   The provisions of the R-2 District are intended to apply to an area of
medium-density residential development with a variety of housing types. Lot
sizes and other restrictions are intended to promote and protect medium-density
residential development, maintaining an adequate amount of open space for the
development. Some nonresidential uses compatible with the character of the
district are also permitted.
   (B)   Permitted principal uses and structures.
      (1)   Single-family dwellings;
      (2)   Single-family attached townhomes;
      (3)   Duplexes;
      (4)   Multiple-family dwellings; however, in no case shall there be more
than 15 dwelling units per gross residential acre; and
      (5)   Sewer lift stations.
   (C)   Permitted accessory uses and structures are as for R-1AAA, §
157.195.
   (D)   Permitted conditional uses are as for R-1AAA, §
157.195, and in addition public and private clubs and lodges not involved in
the conduct of commercial activities.
   (E)   Prohibited uses and structures are all uses not specifically or
provisionally permitted in this section.
   (F)   (1)   Lot and structure requirements for one-family dwellings are:
Minimum lot area          7,500 square feet
Minimum lot width         75 feet
Minimum lot depth         100 feet
Maximum lot coverage      50%
Minimum living area       1,200 square feet
Maximum height            25 feet
Minimum yard requirements
   Front               27 feet
   Side interior lot   7.5 feet
   Side corner lot     25 feet
   Rear                25 feet; 20 feet when abutting an alley
 
      (2)   Exceptions: the following exceptions to the 75 foot lot width shall
apply:
         (a)   Any development of vacant land pursuant to an approved plat
located within the town that is zoned R-2 (or a zoning district permitting the
developments of lots pursuant to the R-2 zoning district) prior to May 16, 2016
shall not be governed by the amendment in Ordinance No. 2016-05;
         (b)   Any submittal for a development of lots in a subdivision in the
R-2 zoning (or a zoning district permitting the developments of lots pursuant
to the R-2 zoning district) which contains a development plan not meeting the
technical requirements of a preliminary plat contained in §
156.32, but which does contain, at a minimum, proposed lot layouts, dimension
of lots and lot lines, shall not be governed by the amendment in Ordinance No.
2016-05. Provided, that a preliminary plat meeting the requirements of §
156.32 must be submitted to the town within six months of the submittal of the
development plan described above. Prior to the expiration of the six month
period an applicant may request one administrative extension for up to another
six months to submit a preliminary plat meeting the requirements of §
156.32. Failure to submit a timely preliminary plat meeting the requirements of
§
156.32 automatically removes this exception and the 75 foot lot width
requirements shall be applicable;
         (c)   Any application for a preliminary plat for the development of
lots in a subdivision in the R-2 zoning district (or a zoning district
permitting the developments of lots pursuant to the R-2 zoning district)
submitted prior to May 16, 2016 shall not be governed by the amendment in
Ordinance No. 2016-05;
         (d)   Any preliminary plat approved by the Town Council allowing for
the development of lots in a subdivision in the R-2 zoning district (or a
zoning district permitting the developments of lots pursuant to the R-2 zoning
district) submitted prior to May 16, 2016 shall not be governed by the
amendment in Ordinance No. 2016-05;
         (e)   Any development or any home in a development that was developed
and/or constructed in a subdivision in the R-2 zoning district (or a zoning
district permitting the developments of lots pursuant to the R-2 zoning
district) submitted prior to May 16, 2016 shall not be governed by the
amendment in Ordinance No. 2016-05; or,
         (f)   Any development and property falling within the exceptions
herein shall continue to be governed by the R-2 zoning requirements in effect
on May 16, 2016 and shall not be governed by the amendment in Ordinance No.
2016-05 and furthermore such development and/or construction shall not be
considered non-conforming.
   (G)   Lot and structure requirements for town homes are:
Minimum site area                                            7,500 square feet
Minimum site width                                           75 feet
Minimum site depth,                                          90 feet
Maximum site coverage                                        50%
Minimum interior lot size                                    2,000 square feet
Minimum interior lot width                                   24 feet
Primary building and structure limitations                    
   No more than 6 units/building                           
   Minimum floor area                                     1,175 square feet
   Maximum height                                         25 feet
Minimum distance between buildings                           15 feet
Minimum yard requirements
                                                             25 feet from all
                                                             property lines
                                                             where the property
   Perimeter setback                                      abuts property
                                                             located in any
                                                             single-family
                                                             residential zoning
                                                             classification.
                                                             No structure shall
   Street or roadway setback                              be located within
                                                             27 feet of back of
                                                             curb
   Interior lot setbacks (within a site) the minimum rear 20 feet
setback
 
   (H)   Lot and structure requirements for two-family dwellings (duplex) are:
Minimum lot area          7,500 square feet
Minimum lot width         75 feet
Minimum lot depth         90 feet
Maximum lot coverage      50%
Minimum living area       1,175 square feet per dwelling unit
Maximum height            25 feet
Minimum yard requirements  
   Front               27 feet
   Side interior lot   7.5 feet
   Side corner lot     25 feet
   Rear                25 feet; 20 feet when abutting an alley
 
   (I)   Lot and structure requirements for multiple-family dwellings are:
Minimum lot area            10,000 square feet
Minimum lot width           100 feet
Minimum lot depth           100 feet
Minimum lot coverage        50%
Minimum living area          
   Efficiency apartments Not permitted
   One bedroom apartments800 square feet
   Two bedroom apartments1,000 square feet
   Three bedroom apartmen1,250 square feet
   Four bedroom apartment1,500 square feet, plus 100 square feet for each
                            additional bedroom
Maximum building height     25 feet
Minimum yard requirements
   Front                 27 feet from back of curb
   Side interior lot     7.5 feet for each 10 feet or increment thereof over
                            20 feet in height
                           5 feet for lots less than 75 feet in width
                           7.5 feet for lots 75 feet and greater in width
   Side corner lot       25 feet
   Rear                  25 feet; 20 feet when abutting an alley
 
   (J)   Minimum required off-street parking for the site without impacting the
flow of pedestrian traffic on the sidewalk is 2.35 spaces per dwelling unit, of
which a minimum of one is in an enclosed garage for the single-family or duplex
unit.
   (K)   All riverfront properties with building construction plans submitted
after September 1, 2011 are subject to the breezeway/visual corridor
requirements as described in §
157.506 of the supplementary district regulations.
(2000 Code, § 66-351) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975; Ord. 99-02, passed 3-23-
1999; Ord. 2004-07, passed 5-25-2004; Ord. 2011-12, passed 11-1-2011; Ord.
2012-12, passed 11-27-2012; Ord. 2016-05, passed 6-29-2016; Ord. 2018-03,
passed 6-26-2018; Ord. 2022-05, passed 11-22-2022) Penalty, see §
157.999
C-1 NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL
§ 157.270 DISTRICT AND INTENT.
   (A)   The provisions of the C-1 District are intended to apply to an area
adjacent to major arterial streets and convenient to major residential areas.
The types of uses permitted are intended to serve the consumer needs of nearby
residential neighborhoods as well as the commercial needs of the motorist. Lot
sizes and other restrictions are intended to reduce conflicts with adjacent
residential uses and to minimize the interruption of traffic along
thoroughfares.
   (B)   The following uses and structures are permitted for any use or group
of uses that are developed, either separately or as a unit, with certain site
improvements shared in common, on a site of three acres or less:
      (1)   Retail stores, sales and display rooms; except automotive and
similar uses, including places in which goods are produced and sold at retail
upon the premises;
      (2)   Personal service establishments such as beauty shops and
barbershops, laundry and dry cleaning pickup stations, tailor shops and similar
uses;
      (3)   Professional offices, studios, clinics, laboratories, general
offices, business schools and similar uses;
      (4)   Schools and neighborhood libraries;
      (5)   Churches;
      (6)   Restaurants, including those restaurants holding a valid license
issued by the State of Florida which license allows and permits a restaurant to
sell and serve alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises as an
incident to the sale and service of food;
      (7)   Vocational and trade schools not involving operations of an
industrial nature; and
      (8)   Banks and financial institutions.
   (C)   Permitted accessory uses and structures are the customary accessory
uses of one or more of the principal uses clearly incidental and subordinate to
the principal use, in keeping with the low-density commercial character of the
district.
   (D)   Permitted conditional uses are:
      (1)   Service stations, subject to the following provisions:
Minimum lot size                              10,000 square feet
Minimum floor area                            300 square feet, exclusive of
                                              interior servicing area
Height                                        Maximum of 25 feet
Setbacks other than required elsewhere in
this district
   Gasoline pumps and other service island 20 feet from property line
equipment
   Building or other structure             15 feet each side
Underground storage is required for all receptacles for combustible materials
in excess of 200 gallons
A visual screen meeting the specifications of §§ 157.490 through 157.504 may
be required along the rear of the site and along the length of the sides
There shall be no repair work outside the principal structure other than minor
service
A minimum of 3,000 feet must separate these uses
 
      (2)   Planned commercial development on a parcel three acres or more,
subject to the provisions set forth in the schedule of special exceptions.
   (E)   Prohibited uses and structures are:
      (1)   Outdoor sales and/or display areas except as provided in this
section;
      (2)   Manufacturing activities, transportation terminals, storage
warehousing and other activities of a similar nature;
      (3)   All uses not specifically or provisionally permitted in this
division; any use not in keeping with the highway approach character of the
district; and
      (4)   All uses east of the eastern right-of-way line of U.S. Highway-1 as
described in § 157.505 of the supplementary district regulations.
   (F)   (1)   Lot and structure requirements are:
Minimum lot area          5,000 square feet
Minimum lot width         50 feet (200 feet if more than 3 acres)
Minimum lot depth         100 feet
Maximum lot coverage      50%
Minimum floor area        300 square feet
                          40 feet, except for those properties lying east of U.
                          S. 1 right- of-way or those properties abutting
Maximum height            existing developed single family residential
                          properties where the maximum height will not exceed
                          25 feet
Minimum yard requirements
   Front               20 feet
   Side interior lot   7.5 feet
   Side corner lot     20 feet
   Rear                15 feet; 10 feet when abutting an alley
 
      (2)   There may be different yard requirements applicable pursuant to §
157.509.
   (G)   All riverfront properties with building construction plans submitted
after September 1, 2011 are subject to the breezeway/visual corridor
requirements as described in §
157.506 of the supplementary district regulations.
(2000 Code, § 66-391) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975; Ord. 99-02, passed 3-23-
1999; Ord. 2006-15, passed 1-23-2007; Ord. 2009-05, passed 7-28-2009; Ord.
2011-01, passed 1-25-2011; Ord. 2011-06, passed 8-23-2011; Ord. 2011-12, passed
11-1-2011; Ord. 2015-04, passed 6-30-2015; Ord. 2017-01, passed 2-28-2017; Ord.
2018-04, passed 6-26-2018; Ord. 2023-03, passed 9-26-2023) Penalty, see §
157.999
C-2 GENERAL COMMERCIAL
§ 157.285 DISTRICT AND INTENT.
   (A)   The provisions of the C-2 District are intended to apply to an area
intended to be developed and preserved as a major commercial center serving the
commercial needs of the community and the region. The types of uses and other
restrictions are intended to promote adequate protection from conflicts with
adjacent residential and other noncommercial uses, and to minimize the
interruption of traffic along adjacent thoroughfares.
   (B)   The following uses and structures are permitted provided any uses or
groups of uses that are developed, either separately or as a unit with certain
site improvements shared in common, are developed on a site of three acres or
less:
      (1)   Same as in C-1, §
157.270;
      (2)   Wholesaling establishments;
      (3)   Any other retail sales outlet of products sold directly to the
consumer. Retail outlet as used in this division means stores engaged primarily
in the retail sale of new goods, wares, and merchandise as distinguished from
the sale of used goods, wares, and merchandise;
      (4)   Dry cleaning establishments using nonflammable solvents and
cleaning fluids as determined by the Fire Chief;
      (5)   Business service establishments;
      (6)   Repair service establishments such as household appliances, radio
and television and similar uses, automobile repair establishments, including
body and upholstering or painting, subject to the provisions under division (B)
(7) below of this section;
      (7)   New and used motor vehicles, major recreational equipment, boats
and vessels and mobile home sales or rentals with accessory services, subject
to the following restrictions:
         (a)   All outside areas where merchandise is displayed shall be paved;
         (b)   All servicing and repair facilities except gasoline pumps shall
be located in an enclosed structure;
         (c)   There shall be no storage of junked or wrecked motor vehicles
other than temporary storage for those awaiting repair. The temporary storage
shall be in an enclosed area, and the vehicles shall not be visible from
outside the property;
         (d)   Ingress and egress points shall not be placed so as to interfere
with the movement of pedestrian traffic on public sidewalks; and
         (e)   A minimum of 3,000 feet must separate these uses. This includes
any expansion of any existing use permitted under this section. Such distance
shall be measured from the nearest point of a use to the nearest point of any
other such use.
         (f)   The lot or combination of lots upon which such use is located
shall not exceed 2.5 gross acres.
         (g)   Such lot or combination of lots shall not exceed 350 feet of
road frontage.
      (8)   Educational institutions, cultural institutions (museums, municipal
libraries, community centers).
      (9)   Hospitals and nursing homes.
      (10)   Hotels, motels, guest cottages, subject to the following:
         (a)   The minimum living area per dwelling unit shall be the same as
established for the C-P District, §
157.300; and
         (b)   There shall be no more than 25 dwelling units per gross acre.
      (11)   On-site storage of materials used in conjunction with the primary
business, meeting the following performance standards and the general standards
provided for conditional uses:
         (a)   There shall be no contractor storage yards, no construction
equipment, such as cranes, back-hoes, tractors and the like stored on-site,
unless these items are stored in a non-mobile, permanent, enclosed structure;
         (b)   Storage areas shall be located to the rear of the primary
structure/business and not be visible by the general public from the roadways;
         (c)   Material storage may only be located on lands with a minimum of
three acres or more;
         (d)   A solid fence made of wood, masonry or other decorative
materials fence shall surround the perimeter of the storage area;
         (e)   There shall be landscaping around the outside perimeter of the
fence on any side, which abuts a property not owned by the principal business,
and the front equal to one six foot tree for every ten feet and a minimum of
three hedges, 36 inches in height at the time of planting between each tree;
         (f)   The area shall be secured and locked during non-business hours
to minimize criminal activity;
         (g)   If the property abuts a residential district, no outside
material storage shall be allowed;
         (h)   The site shall be stabilized and pervious pursuant to SJRWMD
regulations;
         (i)   A site plan shall be required per the site plan code;
         (j)   A distance of 2,000 feet shall separate the uses from other
similar uses; and
         (k)   Waivers for no more than two of these items may be granted by
the Town Council, upon recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Board, during
consideration of the conditional use process, when it is beneficial to protect
the public health, safety, welfare and general community character and
environment of the town. However, the distance requirements as prescribed in
division (B)(12)(j) above shall not be part of the waiver option.
      (12)   Single family residential uses east of U.S. 1, same as R-2, §
157.240.
      (13)   Subject to the provisions of division (E), existing facilities
with a current business tax receipt for mini-storage facilities subject to the
following:
         (a)   Maximum size unit - 500 square feet.
         (b)   Units to be used strictly for self-storage and not for any
assembly, manufacturing, retail sales and service, distribution, any type of
automotive/vehicular work, or any other business activity whatsoever from any
individual unit or units.
         (c)   Minimum 20 foot landscaped green area adjacent to residential
zoning.
         (d)   On-site management is required.
         (e)   No outside storage.
         (f)   Buildings shall be one story.
         (g)   Lighting must be directed away from residential areas.
         (h)   Maximum size of area of site used for storage shall not exceed
five acres. Retention and landscaped buffers shall not be included in the five
acre size calculation.
         (i)   A solid fence made of wood, masonry or other decorative material
may be used to secure the facility, and landscaping material shall be used
along the outside perimeter of the fence in order to provide an aesthetic
appearance. Applicable provisions of §
157.507 shall be complied with.
         (j)   Mini-storage facilities shall not be permitted in the town
within 3,000 feet of each other measured by the most direct road route from the
nearest property line upon which an existing facility is located and/or to be
located to the nearest property line of the other existing and/or proposed
facility.
         (k)   A wavier to the size of the parcel of up to an additional three
acres and to the distance between mini-storage facilities of up to an
additional 500 feet may be granted by the Town Council, upon recommendation of
the Planning and Zoning Board, when it is beneficial to protect the public
health, safety, welfare and general community appearance.
      (14)   Subject to the provisions of division (E), existing facilities
with a current business tax receipt for on-site storage of watercraft,
trailers, recreational vehicles, and recreational equipment, meeting the
following performance standards and general conditions:
         (a)   The lands used for storage shall be a minimum of three acres.
         (b)   The storage area shall be secured and locked during non-business
hours.
         (c)   All such items stored shall have a current vehicle license and
registration as required and issued by the State of Florida and maintained in
an aesthetic fashion and non-derelict.
         (d)   There shall be no habitation in any motor vehicle, trailer,
watercraft recreational vehicle or recreational equipment stored on site.
         (e)   There shall be no utility services available to individual
storage sites, and there shall be no sewer clean-out stations.
         (f)   The site shall be paved or stabilized and pervious pursuant to
SJRWMD regulations.
         (g)   A watercraft that must be transported by trailer shall be stored
on a trailer.
         (h)   A distance of 2,000 feet shall separate these uses from other
legally designated on-site storage facilities.
         (i)   Waivers for no more than two of these items may be granted by
the Town Council upon recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Board, during
consideration of the site plan, when it is beneficial to protect the public
health, safety, welfare and general community character and environment of the
town. However, the distance requirements as prescribed in division (B)(14)(h)
shall not be part of the waiver option.
         (j)   There shall be no storage of construction vehicles or equipment,
regardless if they meet any of the definitions of the property items allowed to
be stored herein.
         (k)   Outside exterior lighting shall be directional and not spill
over onto adjacent property.
         (l)   There shall be no major or minor service or repair work done on
this site.
         (m)   There shall be no access from a local or residential street.
         (n)   A six foot solid fence or decorative wall shall surround the
perimeter of the storage area. The wall or fence shall be finished on both
sides and erected at least one foot inside the property line.
         (o)   There shall be a minimum ten foot landscaped area adjacent to
the wall or fence with one tree planted for every 50 feet of length of the wall
or fence. Additional landscape material and ground cover shall be planted
within the ten foot strip. On the frontage, the landscape material must be in
front of the wall or fence. Existing vegetation may be used if approved by the
town. An irrigation system is required.
         (p)   Interior access aisle ways shall be a minimum of 24 feet wide
with turnaround area if needed.
         (q)   The revving of engines such as cleaning water out of boats and
airboats or similar activities which are noise producing is strictly
prohibited.
         (r)   Existing facilities with a current business tax receipt for on-
site storage facilities of watercraft, trailers, recreational vehicles, and
recreational equipment located in a C-2 Zoning District may expand up to six
additional acres as long as the above criteria are met, and no part of the
expansion will result in additional frontage along U.S. 1 and a site plan is
approved by the Town Council. The existing site shall meet the above conditions
prior to any permitted expansion.
         (s)   For purposes of this section, CURRENT BUSINESS TAX RECEIPT shall
mean a business tax receipt issued as of October 1, 2017.
   (C)   Permitted accessory uses and structures include customary accessory
uses of one or more of the principal uses, clearly incidental and subordinate
to the principal use, in keeping with the intense commercial character of the
District.
   (D)   Permitted conditional uses are:
      (1)   Automotive repair establishments when conducted entirely in an
enclosed structure but not including body work, upholstering or painting. A
minimum of 3,000 feet must separate these uses;
      (2)   Business service and printing establishments;
      (3)   Service stations, subject to the following provisions:
Minimum lot size                               10,000 square feet
Minimum floor area                             300 square feet, exclusive of
                                               interior servicing area
Height                                         Two stories or 25 feet
Setbacks other than required elsewhere in this
district
   Gasoline pumps and other service islands 20 feet from property line
equipment
   Building or other structure              15 feet from each side
Underground storage is required for all receptacles for combustible materials
in excess of 200 gallons
A visual screen meeting the specifications of §§
157.490 through
157.504 may be required along the rear and along the length of the sides of
the site
A minimum of 3,000 feet must separate these uses
 
      (4)   Planned commercial development on a parcel three acres or more,
subject to the provisions set forth in §
155.115 after review by the Planning and Zoning Board;
      (5)   Commercial recreation structures such as theaters, driving ranges,
bowling alleys and similar uses, except drive-in theaters and open-air or
outdoor amusement parks; and
      (6)   Marinas.
   (E)   Prohibited uses and structures are:
      (1)   Manufacturing activities, transportation terminals, storage,
warehousing and other activities of a similar nature;
      (2)   All uses not specifically or provisionally permitted in this
division; any use not in keeping with the commercial character of the district;
      (3)   All other residential uses, provided, however the following shall
apply. Effective February 28, 2017, the residential uses prohibition herein
shall not apply to:
         (a)   A development of lots on any vacant land located in the
corporate limits of the town that is zoned C-2 and has a land use designation
of low density residential, single-family dwellings as designated on the town's
Comprehensive Land Use Plan prior to the effective date of this section
[February 28, 2017];
         (b)   Any application submitted for a preliminary plat for the
development of lots in a subdivision pursuant to the town's code prior to the
effective date of this section, as long as the preliminary plat was properly
filed, submitted and received by the town in accordance with the town's land
usage regulations;
         (c)   Any preliminary plat approved by the Town Council allowing for
the development of lots in a subdivision pursuant to the town's code prior to
the effective date of this section;
         (d)   Any development and to any home in a development that was
developed and/or constructed in accordance with the town's code prior to the
effective date of this section;
         (e)   Site plans meeting the requirements of §
157.139(B) submitted prior to the effective date of this section.
      (4)   All uses east of the eastern right-of-way line of U.S. Highway-1 as
described in §
157.505 of the supplementary district regulations.
      (5)   Mini-storage facilities and facilities for on-site storage of
watercraft, trailers, recreational vehicles, and recreational equipment are
specifically prohibited unless such business has continuously held a business
tax receipt as of October 1, 2017, or where the town has approved a site plan
for such facilities prior to January 1, 2020.
      (6)   Except as provided in this section, outdoor sales and/or display
areas in conjunction with the permitted or conditional uses on parcels abutting
a residential district.
   (F)   (1)   Lot and structure requirements are:
Minimum lot area          5,000 square feet
Minimum lot width         50 feet (200 feet if more than 3 acres)
Minimum lot depth         100 feet
Maximum lot coverage      50%
Minimum floor area        300 square feet
                          40 feet, except for those properties lying east of U.
                          S. 1 right-of-way or those properties abutting
Maximum height            existing developed single family residential
                          properties where the maximum height will not exceed
                          25 feet
Minimum yard requirements
   Front               20 feet
                          None; except where the use borders a district
   Side interior lot   requiring setbacks, such shall also apply in this
                          district, along the abutting property line
                          None; except where the use borders a district
   Side corner lot     requiring setbacks, such shall also apply in this
                          district along the abutting property line
   Rear                20 feet; 15 feet when abutting an alley
 
      (2)   There may be different yard requirements applicable pursuant to §
157.509.
   (G)   All riverfront properties with building construction plans submitted
after September 1, 2011 are subject to the breezeway/visual corridor
requirements as described in §
157.506 of the supplementary district regulations.
(2000 Code, § 66-411) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975; Ord. 99-02, passed 3-23-
1999; Ord. 99-03, passed 7-27-1999; Ord. 2004-19, passed 10-5-2004; Ord. 2006-
15, passed 1-23-2007; Ord. 2007-03, passed 1-23-2007 ; Ord. 2009-05, passed 7-
28-2009; Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-25-2011; Ord. 2011-06, passed 8-23-2011; Ord.
2011-12, passed 11-1-2011; Ord. 2012-12, passed 11-27-2012; Ord. 2013-03,
passed 3-26-2013; Ord. 2015-04, passed 6-30-2015; Ord. 2017-01, passed 2-28-
2017; Ord. 2018-02, passed 6-26-2018; Ord. 2018-04, passed 6-26-2018; Ord.
2020-02, passed 3-24-2020; Ord. 2021-03, passed - -2021; Ord. 2022-05, passed
11-22-2022; Ord. 2024-01, passed 9-25-2024) Penalty, see §
157.999
C-P COMMERCIAL PARKWAY
§ 157.300 DISTRICT AND INTENT.
   (A)   The provisions of the C-P District are intended to apply to areas
located adjacent to a main highway approach to the town. The types of uses
permitted and restrictions are intended to serve the needs of the motorist and
provide an amenable impression of the town. Large lot sizes and other
restrictions are intended to minimize frequent ingress and egress to the
highway from abutting uses, thereby allowing the thoroughfare to serve its
primary function of carrying an uninterrupted flow of traffic.
   (B)   The following uses and structures are permitted for any use or group
of uses that are developed, either separately or as a unit with certain site
improvements shared in common, and developed on a site of three acres or less:
      (1)   Retail stores, sales, retail outlets and display rooms, including
places in which goods are produced and sold at retail on premises;
      (2)   Personal service establishments such as barbershops and beauty
shops, laundry and dry cleaning pickup stations, tailor shops and similar uses;
      (3)   Professional offices, studios, clinics, general offices, business
schools and similar uses;
      (4)   Hotels, motels, guest cottages, containing no more than 25 dwelling
units per gross acre;
      (5)   Restaurants, including those restaurants holding a valid license
issued by the State of Florida which license allows and permits a restaurant to
sell and serve alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises as an
incident to the sale and service of food;
      (6)   Commercial recreation such as theaters, driving ranges, bowling
alleys and similar uses except drive-in theaters and amusement parks;
      (7)   Research, design and development activities and accessory
laboratories, subject to the following:
         (a)   Where the use does not involve:
            1.   Operation of heavy machinery or equipment;
            2.   Creation of noise, fumes, dirt or dust; or
            3.   Damage to or interference with other properties.
         (b)   Where all work is done within the building; and
         (c)   Where no product is manufactured except purely incidental
results of the research, design and development activities for the purpose of
these activities only and not for sale.
      (8)   Plant nurseries and greenhouses, providing that no outside display
of merchandise shall be contained within 20 feet of the existing roadway. A
minimum of 3,000 feet must separate these uses;
      (9)   Retail stores using outside display areas, providing the following
provisions are met:
         (a)   The area of outside display shall not exceed in size one-third
the enclosed area of the principal structure;
         (b)   The outside display area shall be treated with a hard material
suitable for pedestrian traffic;
         (c)   The outside display area may be open along the front of the lot
but shall be effectively screened rendering the sides opaque in order to avoid
any deleterious effect on adjacent properties;
         (d)   The outside display area shall be considered the same as the
floor area for the purpose of calculating off-street parking requirements, yard
and lot coverage regulations; and
         (e)   If the property abuts a residential district, no outside display
areas shall be allowed.
      (10)   New and used motor vehicles, major recreational equipment and
mobile home sales or rentals with accessory uses, subject to the following
restrictions:
         (a)   A minimum of 3,000 feet must separate these uses. This includes
any expansion of any existing use permitted under this section. Such distance
shall be measured from the nearest point of a use to the nearest point of any
other such use;
         (b)   All outside areas where merchandise is displayed shall be hard
surfaced;
         (c)   All servicing and repair facilities except gasoline pumps shall
be located in an enclosed structure;
         (d)   There shall be no storage of junked or wrecked automobiles other
than temporary storage for those awaiting repair. The temporary storage shall
be in an enclosed area and the vehicles shall not be visible from outside the
property;
         (e)   Ingress and egress points shall not be placed so as to interfere
with the movement of pedestrian traffic on public sidewalks;
         (f)   The lot or combination of lots upon which such use is located
shall not exceed 2.5 gross acres; and
         (g)   Such lot or combination of lots shall not exceed 350 feet of
road frontage.
   (C)   Accessory uses and structures are allowed as follows:
      (1)   Same as for R-2, §
157.240; and
      (2)   Customary accessory uses of one or more of the principal uses
clearly subordinate to the principal use, in keeping with the highway approach
character of the District.
   (D)   Permitted conditional uses are:
      (1)   Veterinary hospitals and clinics providing that the following
conditions are met:
         (a)   All areas used for boarding or temporary housing of animals
shall be completely enclosed unless appropriate safeguards are constructed to
control objectionable odors and/or noise, as determined by the Board of
Adjustment; and
         (b)   Any area used for boarding or temporary housing of animals shall
be buffered from all adjacent properties by a visual and aural screen meeting
the specifications of §§
157.490 through
157.504 and any other conditions required by the Board of Adjustment.
      (2)   Service stations, provided the following specifications are met:
 
Minimum floor area                        300 square feet exclusive of interior
                                          servicing area
Maximum height                            25 feet
Setbacks other than required elsewhere in
this district for gasoline pumps and      40 feet from all property lines
other service island equipment
Underground storage is required for all receptacles for combustible materials
in excess of 200 gallons
A visual screen meeting the specifications of §§
157.490 through
157.504 may be required along the rear of the site and along the length of the
sides
There shall be no repair work outside the principal structure other than minor
service
A minimum of 3,000 feet must separate these uses
 
      (3)   Planned commercial development on a parcel three acres or more,
subject to the provisions set forth in §
155.115;
      (4)   Marinas; and
      (5)   Single family residential uses east of U.S. 1, same as R-2, §
157.240.
   (E)   Prohibited uses and structures are:
      (1)   Residential uses, provided, however, the following shall apply:
         (a)   Effective February 28, 2017, the residential uses prohibition
herein shall not apply to:
            1.   A development of lots on any vacant land located in the
corporate limits of the town that is zoned C-P and has a land use designation
of low density residential, single-family dwellings as designated on the town's
Comprehensive Land Use Plan prior to the effective date of this section
[February 28, 2017];
            2.   Any application submitted for a preliminary plat for the
development of lots in a subdivision pursuant to the town's Code prior to the
effective date of this section, as long as the preliminary plat was properly
filed, submitted and received by the town in accordance with the town's land
usage regulations;
            3.   Any preliminary plat approved by the Town Council allowing for
the development of lots in a subdivision pursuant to the town's Code prior to
the effective date of this section;
            4.   Any development and to any home in a development that was
developed and/or constructed in accordance with the town's Code prior to the
effective date of this section;
            5.   Site plans meeting the requirements of §
157.139(B) submitted prior to the effective date of this section.
      (2)   Outdoor sales and/or display areas except as provided in this
section;
      (3)   Manufacturing activities, transportation terminals, storage
warehousing and other activities of a similar nature;
      (4)   All uses not specifically or provisionally permitted in this
division; any use not in keeping with the highway approach character of the
district; and
      (5)   All uses east of the eastern right-of-way line of U.S. Highway-1 as
described in §
157.505 of the supplementary district regulations.
   (F)   (1)   Lot and structure requirements are:
Minimum lot area                        15,625 square feet
Minimum lot width                       150 feet; 200 feet if more than 3 acres
Minimum lot depth                       150 feet
Maximum lot coverage                    40%
Minimum floor area                      300 square feet
                                        40 feet, except for those properties
                                        lying east of U. S. 1 right-of-way or
Maximum height                          those properties abutting existing
                                        developed single family residential
                                        properties where the maximum height
                                        will not exceed 25 feet
Minimum yard requirements                
   Front                             50 feet
   Side interior lot                 25 feet
   Side corner lot                   40 feet
   Rear                              30 feet
Maximum lot depth                       500 feet
Maximum living area for hotel and motel 325 square feet per unit
and guest cottages
 
      (2)   There may be different yard requirements applicable pursuant to §
157.509.
   (G)   All riverfront properties with building construction plans submitted
after September 1, 2011 are subject to the breezeway/visual corridor
requirements as described in §
157.506 of the supplementary district regulations.
(2000 Code, § 66-431) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975; Ord. 99-02, passed 3-23-
1999; Ord. 2006-15, passed 1-23-2007; Ord. 2007-03, passed 1-23-2007; Ord.
2009-05, passed 7-28-2009; Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-25-2011; Ord. 2011-06, passed
8-23-2011; Ord. 2011-12, passed 11-1-2011; Ord. 2012-12, passed 11-27-2012;
Ord. 2013-03, passed 3-26-2013; Ord. 2015-04, passed 6-30-2015; Ord. 2017-01,
passed 2-28-2017; Ord. 2018-04, passed 6-26-2018; Ord. 2021-03, passed - -2021;
Ord. 2023-03, passed 9-26-2023) Penalty, see §
157.999
M-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL
§ 157.315 DISTRICT AND INTENT.
   (A)   The provisions of the M-1 District are intended to apply to an area
located in close proximity to transportation facilities and which can serve
manufacturing, warehousing, distribution, wholesaling and other industrial
functions of the town and the region. Restrictions in this section are intended
to minimize adverse influences of the industrial activities on nearby
nonindustrial areas.
   (B)   The following uses and structures are permitted provided any use or
group of uses that are developed, either separately, or if developed as a unit
with certain site improvements shared in common, are developed on a site of
five acres or less:
      (1)   Warehousing and wholesaling in enclosed structures, including
refrigerated storage;
      (2)   Service and repair establishments, dry cleaning and laundry plants,
business services, printing plants, welding shops, taxidermists and similar
uses;
      (3)   Light manufacturing, processing and assembly, such as precision
manufacturing, electrical machinery, instrumentation, bottling plants, dairy
products plants, bakeries, fruitpacking and similar uses;
      (4)   Building materials supply and storage; contractors storage yard
except scrap materials. Outside storage areas shall be effectively walled on
all sides to avoid any deleterious effect on adjacent property;
      (5)   Automotive, major recreational equipment and mobile home sales,
storage and repair establishments, such as body shops, dry docking facilities,
tire recapping, paint shops, upholstery shops and the like;
      (6)   Freight handling facilities; transportation terminals;
      (7)   Vocational and trade schools, including those of an industrial
nature;
      (8)   Veterinary hospitals and clinics;
      (9)   Airports and accessory uses;
      (10)    Marinas;
      (11)   Adult entertainment establishments; and
      (12)   On-site storage of boats, motor homes, and recreational vehicles.
   (C)   Permitted accessory uses and structures are:
      (1)   Retail sales of products manufactured, possessed or stored upon the
premises;
      (2)   Not more than one dwelling unit for occupancy by owners or
employees of the principal use; and
      (3)   Customary accessory uses of one or more of the principal uses,
clearly incidental and subordinate to the principal use in keeping with the
industrial character of the district.
   (D)   Permitted conditional uses are:
      (1)   Planned industrial development on a parcel of five acres or more,
subject to the provisions set forth in the schedule of special exceptions; any
industrial use in the planned development that meets the standards established
in the performance standards; and
      (2)   Commercial radio and television, broadcasting transmitters, towers
and antennas.
   (E)   Prohibited uses and structures are:
      (1)   Residential uses, except as provided under accessory uses;
      (2)   Motels, hotels, boardinghouses and lodginghouses;
      (3)   Automobile wrecking yards, junkyards, scrap and salvage yards for
secondhand building materials;
      (4)   Churches, private clubs and lodges, public schools;
      (5)   Retail and other commercial establishments except as specifically
permitted;
      (6)   All uses not specifically or provisionally permitted in this
division except as provided for under special exceptions; any use not in
keeping with the industrial character of the district; and
      (7)   Arcades and electronic gaming establishments.
   (F)   (1)   Lot and structure requirements are:
Minimum lot area          20,000 square feet
Minimum lot width         100 feet; 300 feet for more than 5 acres
Minimum lot depth         200 feet
Maximum lot coverage      50%
Minimum floor area        300 square feet
Maximum height            40 feet
Minimum yard requirements
   Front               40 feet
   Side interior lot   25 feet
   Side corner lot     25 feet
   Rear                20 feet; 15 feet when abutting an alley
 
      (2)   There may be different yard requirements applicable pursuant to §
157.509.
   (G)   All riverfront properties with building construction plans submitted
after September 1, 2011 are subject to the breezeway/visual corridor
requirements as described in §
157.506 of the supplementary district regulations.
(2000 Code, § 66-451) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975; Ord. 96-01, passed 1-29-
1996; Ord. 99-02, passed 3-23-1999; Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-25-2011; Ord. 2011-
06, passed 8-23-2011; Ord. 2011-12, passed 11-1-2011; Ord. 2015-03, passed 2-
24-2015; Ord. 2015-04, passed 6-30-2015; Ord. 2017-07, passed 11-8-2017)
Penalty, see §
157.999
TR-1 MOBILE HOME PARKS
§ 157.330 DISTRICT AND INTENT.
   (A)   The TR-1 District regulates existing mobile home parks developed in a
manner as to make efficient, economical and aesthetically pleasing use of the
land, so restricted that they will be continually maintained by the owner.
   (B)   Site and building regulations. Existing mobile homes may be replaced
within the existing footprint and must meet divisions (B)(1), (4), (5) and (6)
below. Any new configuration of lots must meet the following regulations:
      (1)   Homes shall have skirting between the base of the home and the
ground.
      (2)   Minimum lot size shall be 4,000 square feet with a minimum frontage
of 40 feet for single wide homes and 5,000 square feet with a minimum frontage
of 50 feet for double wide homes.
      (3)   Minimum setbacks/yards shall be as follows:
         (a)   Front: ten feet;
         (b)   Side: 7.5 feet;
         (c)   Rear: eight feet; and
         (d)   Side corner: 15 feet.
      (4)   Accessory structures shall be located in the rear yard and shall
have a minimum setback of five feet from the rear and side lot lines.
      (5)   Tie downs shall be required, and the area of the mobile home pad
shall be improved to provide adequate foundation for the placement of the tie
downs, thereby securing it from uplift, sliding, rotation and overturning.
      (6)   No home shall exceed 15 feet in height, and no accessory structure
shall exceed ten feet in height.
(2000 Code, § 66-471) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975; Ord. 85-01, passed 3-26-
1985; Ord. 2012-12, passed 11-27-2012; Ord. 2013-01, passed 2-26-2013; Ord.
2016-03, passed 3-22-2016; Ord. 2021-03, passed - -2021) Penalty, see §
157.999
TTP TRAVEL TRAILER PARK
§ 157.360 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   SANITARY STATION. A facility used for removing and disposing of wastes from
travel trailer holding tanks.
   SERVICE BUILDING. Any building in a travel trailer park used for
recreational, maintenance, sanitary or office purposes which may be necessary
for the proper development and management of the travel trailer park.
   TRAVEL TRAILER. And includes any of the following:
      (1)   Travel trailer, which is a vehicular, portable structure built on a
chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation or
vacation uses, permanently identified travel trailer by the manufacturer of the
trailer, and, when factory equipped for the road, having a width not exceeding
eight feet and a body length not exceeding 35 feet;
      (2)   Pickup coach, which is a structure designed to be mounted on a
truck chassis for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation or
vacation uses;
      (3)   Motor home, which is a portable, temporary dwelling to be used for
travel, recreation or vacation uses, and constructed as an integral part of a
self-propelled vehicle; and/or
      (4)   Camping trailer, which is a canvas, folding structure mounted on
wheels and designed for travel, recreation or vacation use.
   TRAVEL TRAILER PARK. An existing development in which sites are rented for
the placement of travel trailers for temporary use as living quarters.
   TRAVEL TRAILER SITE. A parcel of land within a travel trailer park designed
and improved for the accommodation of not more than one travel trailer or one
tent.
(2000 Code, § 66-511) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975; Ord. 2016-03, passed 3-22-
2016) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.361 PERMITTED USES.
   In the TTP district:
   (A)   Spaces in travel trailer parks may be used by travel trailers or
equivalent facilities constructed in or on automotive vehicles, tents or other
short-term housing devices; and
   (B)   Nonrecreational service and administrative buildings are permitted.
(2000 Code, § 66-512) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975)
§ 157.362 ACCESSORY USES.
   The following uses are permitted as accessories to a travel trailer park as
a convenience solely for the guests of the park:
   (A)   Bottled gas sales;
   (B)   Grocery store;
   (C)   Laundry facilities;
   (D)   Playgrounds and picnic areas;
   (E)   Recreational hall and game courts;
   (F)   Swimming pools;
   (G)   Marina and boat rental (including bait, fishing and sports accessories
sales) serving only guests of the travel trailer park; and
   (H)   Manager’s residence.
(2000 Code, § 66-513) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.363 SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS.
   A marina and boat rental (including bait, fishing and sports accessories
sales) is permitted in a TTP district. When a facility is planned to serve both
travel trailer park guests and the general public, a special use permit is
required. A separate access road on the periphery of the travel trailer park is
required for use by the general public.
(2000 Code, § 66-514) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.364 (RESERVED)
§ 157.365 DESIGN STANDARDS FOR TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS.
   (A)   Minimum size. Each parcel of land to be used for a travel trailer park
shall be a minimum of five acres.
   (B)   Density. There shall be a maximum of 15 travel trailer sites per gross
acre of land within the travel trailer park. This shall also apply to the tent
camping area.
   (C)   Streets and parking.
      (1)   Access to park.
         (a)   Direct vehicular access to the travel trailer park shall be only
from an abutting approved street. Access to the park shall be so located as to:
            1.   Provide minimum congestion on the external street;
            2.   Provide a clear and unobstructed view of on-coming traffic
from both directions for a distance of not less than 350 feet; and
            3.   Provide for good vehicular circulation in the park.
         (b)   The administrative facility of the travel trailer park shall be
so located as to assure the complete removal of trailer units from the public
right-of-way during the check-in process.
      (2)   Width of streets. Streets in a travel trailer park shall be private
and shall be at least of the following widths:
         (a)   A one-way street shall be at least 12 feet in width; and
         (b)   A two-way street shall be at least 24 feet in width.
      (3)   Street surfacing. Access roads entering a travel trailer park shall
match the surface of the public road providing access to the park. If the
public road is paved, the access road of a travel trailer park shall be paved
for a distance of 100 feet into the park from all entrances and exits, and
shall be at least 24 feet in width. Travel trailer park roads that are not
paved shall be hard surfaced, well drained and all-weather stabilized (e.g.,
shell, marl and the like);
      (4)   Road curves. All road curves shall have a minimum turning radius of
50 feet. All culs-de-sac shall have a maximum length of 500 feet and terminate
in a turning circle having a minimum radius of 50 feet; and
      (5)   Parking. Each travel trailer site shall have off-street parking
pads for both travel trailer and towing vehicle. The pads shall be composed of
marl, shell, paving or other stabilized material. The remainder of each travel
trailer site shall be well drained, grassed and landscaped.
   (D)   Buffer strips. There shall be a suitably landscaped perimeter buffer
strip not less than 25 feet in depth between travel trailer sites and all
public streets abutting a travel trailer park, and a landscaped buffer strip
not less than 15 feet in depth between travel trailer sites and all other
boundaries of the park. Within all buffer strips (except waterfront) there
shall be a plant and/or structural screen, which shall be semi-opaque and at
least six feet high and shall extend the length of the buffer strip except for
street openings. Newly planted screens shall meet the height and opaqueness
requirements within 12 months of planting. The landscaped buffer strip shall be
separate from recreational areas, streets, travel trailer sites and utility
sites, but may be utilized for drainage purposes and two identification signs.
   (E)   Recreational areas. A minimum of 10% of the total land area of a
travel trailer park shall be devoted to one or more common use areas for
recreational activity. In addition, for every travel trailer and tent site,
there shall be allocated an additional 100 square feet of land for recreational
activity. However, this requirement is not necessary when the proposed
development has a density of ten sites per gross acre or less. The recreational
areas shall be exclusive of travel trailer sites, buffer strips, street rights-
of-way and storage areas; however, the periphery of the recreational areas may
contain utility sites, and other nonrecreational service buildings, the area of
which will be subtracted from the computed recreational area. Recreational
areas shall be easily accessible to all park users and management. Although the
required space for recreational usage may be met through more than one
recreational site, the minimum size of any area shall be 20,000 square feet.
Provision for all common open space and the construction of recreational
facilities which are shown on the site plan shall proceed at an equivalent, or
greater, rate as the construction of individual travel trailer sites.
   (F)   Tent camping. Areas may be set aside for tent camping in accordance
with all provisions of this division, except:
      (1)   There shall be a stabilized pad on the site for parking of the
transportation vehicle; and
      (2)   Tent camping may be permitted on a travel trailer site.
   (G)   Maximum height. Maximum height of structures is 25 feet.
(2000 Code, § 66-516) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975; Ord. 2012-12, passed 11-
27-2012) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.366 DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR TRAVEL TRAILER SITES.
   (A)   Minimum size. Back-in parking sites shall have a minimum area of 1,500
square feet with a minimum width of 30 feet and a minimum length of 50 feet.
Drive-through parking sites shall have a minimum area of 1,200 square feet with
a minimum width of 20 feet and a minimum length of 60 feet.
   (B)   Access. Each travel trailer site shall abut on at least one street
within the boundaries of the travel trailer park, and access to the site shall
be only from an internal street.
   (C)   Setback requirements. No part of a travel trailer placed on a travel
trailer site shall be closer than five feet to any site line and ten feet to
any street.
   (D)   Appurtenances. Temporary appurtenances, such as cabanas and awnings,
may be erected on a travel trailer site as long as the appurtenances do not
violate the setback requirements as set forth in this division and as long as
the appurtenances are capable of being dismantled and stored within four hours.
(2000 Code, § 66-517) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.367 PROVISION OF SERVICES IN TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS.
   (A)   Service buildings. All service buildings shall comply with building
code and regulations and the statutes and regulations of the state concerning
buildings, electrical installations, plumbing and sanitation systems.
   (B)   Water supply.
      (1)   An adequate supply of water shall be provided in accordance with
the State Sanitary Code and the County Health Department.
      (2)   A minimum of one portable water supply outlet shall be provided for
every two travel trailer sites.
      (3)   Each recreational area and bathhouse restroom facility shall have
at least one approved drinking fountain in close proximity.
   (C)   Sewage disposal.
      (1)   All sewage disposal facilities shall be provided in accordance with
the State Sanitary Code and the County Health Department.
      (2)   (a)   At least one sanitary dumping station shall be provided in
every travel trailer park. The station shall be readily accessible and well-
lighted. The following schedule shall be used in determining additional dumping
stations based on the number of sites that are not connected individually to
sewer lines; and
         (b)   For every 50 sites or fractional part beyond the first 50 sites,
one sanitary dumping station shall be provided.
      (3)   At least one central bathhouse-restroom facility shall be located
within 300 feet of all camping units that are either not supplied with sewer
connections or not capable of utilizing the connections (e.g., tents, camper
trailers).
      (4)   Any dispersed bathhouse-restroom facility provided to meet the
distance requirement of 300 feet shall have at least two of each of the
following fixtures for men and women: toilets, urinals, lavatories and showers.
      (5)   Recreational areas shall be located within 300 feet of a bathhouse-
restroom facility. The following schedule indicates the minimum number of bath
and toilet facilities required based upon the total number of spaces within the
travel trailer park:
Number of Spaces Toilets Urinals/Lavatories  Showers Laundry Sink
Number of Spaces Toilets Urinals/Lavatories   Showers Laundry Sink
                 M W     M M                W M W
1—15           1 1     1 1                1 1 1     2
16—30          1 2     1 2                2 1 1     2
31—45          2 2     1 3                3 1 1     2
46—60          2 3     2 3                3 2 2     2
61—80          3 4     2 4                4 2 2     2
81—100         3 4     2 4                4 3 3     2
 
      (6)   For travel trailer parks having more than 100 travel trailer
spaces, there shall be provided:
         (a)   One additional toilet and lavatory for each sex per additional
30 travel trailer spaces;
         (b)   One additional shower for each sex per each additional 40 travel
trailer spaces; and
         (c)   One additional men’s urinal per each additional 100 travel
trailer spaces.
   (D)   Lighting.
      (1)   All entrances, exits, streets and service buildings shall be well-
lighted during the hours of darkness.
      (2)   Street lighting may be overhead or low level but must be shaded and
reflected into the street and should be of low intensity.
      (3)   All recreational facilities to be utilized during the hours of
darkness shall be adequately lighted to ensure the safety of all users of the
facilities.
   (E)   Electricity. Each travel trailer site shall be equipped with at least
a 110/115 volt, 20 amp three-wire grounded weatherproof receptacle mounted on a
three-foot-high post. Separate PVC type A conduit for each circuit shall be run
underground to each site from a central circuit breaker panel. The conduit
shall be buried at least 18 inches deep. The individual breakers in the panel
shall be 20 amp. The conductors and ground shall be type TW and sized so the
load imposed on each conductor is 20 amps. or less. Maximum run shall be 100
feet for #10 wire, 200 feet for #8 wire and 300 feet for #6 wire. Rigid metal
conduit shall be used where any service wire comes out of the ground to the
receptacle. EMT is not permitted.
   (F)   Service and utility lines. All service and utility lines in a travel
trailer park shall be installed underground and at a minimum depth of 18
inches.
   (G)   Refuse handling.
      (1)   Each travel trailer site shall be provided with at least one
flytight, watertight, rodentproof container of a capacity not less than four
gallons and not more than 30 gallons. However, this is not required when sites
are within 200 feet of a large covered trash receptacle (e.g., Dempster
Dumpster).
      (2)   All refuse shall be collected at least twice weekly; and where
public or private collection service is not available, the owner or operator of
the travel trailer park shall dispose of the refuse by transporting it to a
disposal site approved by the County Health Department.
   (H)   Insect and rodent control. Grounds, buildings and structures shall be
maintained free of insect and rodent harborage and infestation. Extermination
methods and other measures to control insects and rodents shall conform with
the requirements and regulations of the County Health Department and the State
Sanitary Code. Adequate drainage systems will be provided and maintained in a
manner as to prevent the breeding of mosquitoes and other obnoxious insects in
the park.
   (I)   Fire protection. The travel trailer park shall be subject to the rules
and regulations of the Fire Department. Fires shall be made only in stoves,
fireplaces and other equipment as permitted by the Fire Department.
   (J)   Fuel supply and storage. All installations and tanks furnishing and/or
storing any type of gaseous fuels to be used by the occupants of the travel
trailer park shall comply with the Fire Prevention Code of the American
Insurance Association as adopted.
   (K)   Storage. Outdoor storage of travel trailers is permitted provided that
the storage takes place within an area especially set aside for the use.
   (L)   Signs.
      (1)   Those signs necessary for directional or safety purposes are
permitted.
      (2)   Two identification signs are permitted within the buffer area and
shall be set back not less than 15 feet from the public road right-of-way and
shall not exceed 60 square feet in size.
      (3)   The lighting of all signs shall be shaded and directed away from
roads and adjoining property.
   (M)   Animal control. It shall be the responsibility of the park manager to
ensure that no owner or person in charge of an animal shall permit that animal
to run at large or commit any nuisance within the limits of any travel trailer
park.
(2000 Code, § 66-518) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.368 OPERATION OF TRAVEL TRAILER PARK.
   (A)   Responsibilities of park management. The owner of a travel trailer
park or the park management shall at all times maintain the park and its
facilities in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition. The park management
shall inform all park occupants of the provisions of this subchapter and other
related ordinances and statutes, and of their responsibilities under this
section.
   (B)   Register of occupants. A register of all travel trailer occupants in
the park shall be maintained with the following information:
      (1)   The name and address of each travel trailer owner or operator
making use of the travel trailer park; and
      (2)   The dates of arrival and departure of each travel trailer.
   (C)   Evacuation. It shall be the responsibility of the park management to
notify all park occupants of the need to evacuate the travel trailer park in
case of fire, wind, water or other man-made disasters or acts of God.
(2000 Code, § 66-519) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.369 REGULATION OF TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS.
   (A)   Use and occupancy permits.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a travel trailer
park within the town without first obtaining a use and occupancy permit, in the
name of the person, to operate the specific park. The permit shall be issued
annually by the Town Clerk. All applications for permits shall be made to the
Town Clerk, who shall issue a license upon compliance by the applicant with
provisions of this division and regulations stated in this division and other
applicable legal requirements.
      (2)   Application for original approval shall be made in writing,
accompanied by a filing fee in an amount on file in the Town Clerk’s office and
shall contain:
         (a)   The name and address of the applicant;
         (b)   The location and legal description of the travel trailer park
area; and
         (c)   A site plan of the travel park area showing all trailer spaces,
structures, roads, walkways, sanitary stations and other information as
outlined in §
157.364(A).
      (3)   Application for renewals of permits shall be made in writing by the
holders of the permits, shall be accompanied by a filing fee in an amount on
file in the Town Clerk’s office, and shall contain any change in the formation
submitted since the original permit was issued or the latest renewal granted.
   (B)   Inspection. The health official, Building Official and Fire Department
are authorized to make periodic inspections of the travel trailer park and
travel trailer sites for the purpose of determining satisfactory compliance
with the regulations of this division pertaining to the health, safety and
welfare of the residents of the town.
   (C)   Revocation of permit. Whenever any of the officials referred to in
division (B) above of this section, upon inspection of a travel trailer park,
find that conditions or practices exist which are in violation of any
applicable provision of this subchapter, they shall furnish the permittee with
a list of violations the inspection shall reveal, and give the permittee
written notice of a specific reasonable time in which to remedy the violations.
Failure of the permittee to remedy the violations within the specific time
shall result in the revocation of the permit. The permit shall be reissued only
if the violations have been remedied to comply with the requirements of this
division. The users of the travel trailer park shall have two days from the
date of revocation in which to vacate the travel trailer park. The permittee
shall be granted a hearing on the revocation before the zoning Board of
Adjustment provided a request is made by the applicant within 30 days after
revocation.
(2000 Code, § 66-520) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975) Penalty, see §
157.999
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
§ 157.380 DISTRICT AND INTENT.
   (A)   The provisions of the Adult Entertainment District are intended to
apply only to those uses defined and allowed in
Chapter 113 of this code. These uses may only be allowed in the specific area
legally zoned for the uses on the official zoning map of the town as long as
the provisions for development are met. This district is intended and designed
to be in conformance with the commercial lands requirements in the adopted
comprehensive plan and shown as commercial on the future land use map.
   (B)   In addition to all other general location requirements specified in
other codes, the uses in this district shall have:
      (1)   Direct frontage along U.S. Highway 1 (also known as Harbor City
Boulevard);
      (2)   Be properly served with water, sewer or septic tank, drainage,
parking and other suitable infrastructure;
      (3)   Meet signage and landscaping codes and all other applicable land
development codes of the town; and
      (4)   The site shall be made accessible and safely located to allow for
ease in access by users and public safety personnel.
   (C)   In conformance with the licensure provisions for adult entertainment
establishments, only one adult entertainment use is allowed at any one
location.
(2000 Code, § 66-541) (Ord. 97-01, passed 3-11-1997) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.381 PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES.
   The following principal uses and structures are permitted in the adult
entertainment district:
   (A)   Adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult dancing establishment, adult
motel, adult booth, adult motion picture theater, leisure spa establishments;
   (B)   Eating establishments where no alcoholic beverages are served; and
   (C)   Retail sales of nonadult materials as long as the site meets the
requirements for lands in the C-P Zoning District and all adult materials are
separated from nonadult retail sales areas.
(2000 Code, § 66-542) (Ord. 97-01, passed 3-11-1997) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.382 LOCATION REQUIREMENTS FOR ADULT ENTERTAINMENT USES.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this division or any provision
of the adult entertainment code for the town, no person shall cause or permit
the establishment or operation of any adult entertainment establishment within:
 
From any other adult entertainment establishment                    1,000 feet
From any preexisting religious institution, school, day care center 1,000 feet
or other institutional use
From any area zoned for a residential use within the town           1,000 feet
 
   (B)   The distance between any two adult entertainment establishments shall
be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from
the closest exterior structural wall of each establishment. The distance
between any adult entertainment establishment and any religious institution or
school shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures, from the closest exterior structural wall of the adult
entertainment establishment to the closest property line of the religious
institution or school. The distance between any adult entertainment
establishment and an area zoned for residential use shall be measured in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from the closest
exterior structural wall of the adult entertainment establishment to the
nearest boundary for the area zoned for residential use.
   (C)   An adult entertainment establishment shall be allowed only in the
adult entertainment district, which will be more particularly described and
known as Petit’s property. (See legal description which is on file in the Town
Clerk’s office.)
(2000 Code, § 66-543) (Ord. 97-01, passed 3-11-1997) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.383 ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.
   No accessory uses and structures shall be allowed in the adult entertainment
district.
(2000 Code, § 66-544) (Ord. 97-01, passed 3-11-1997) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.384 SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS.
   No special exceptions are allowed in the adult entertainment district.
(2000 Code, § 66-545) (Ord. 97-01, passed 3-11-1997) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.385 PROHIBITED USES.
   All uses not specifically or provisionally allowed in the adult
entertainment district are prohibited.
(2000 Code, § 66-546) (Ord. 97-01, passed 3-11-1997) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.386 LOT AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS.
   Lot and structure requirements in the adult entertainment district are the
same as in the C-P District.
(2000 Code, § 66-547) (Ord. 97-01, passed 3-11-1997) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.387 SITE PLAN REQUIRED.
   In addition to any provisions in
Chapter 113 of this code, all proposed adult entertainment uses shall submit a
site plan in accordance with §§
157.135 through
157.150 of this chapter prior to or in conjunction with an application for
occupational licensure. The plan must demonstrate that all land development
codes for the town have been satisfied prior to or not later than the time of
occupational license approval by the Town Council.
(2000 Code, § 66-548) (Ord. 97-01, passed 3-11-1997) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.388 BUFFERING/SCREENING REQUIREMENTS.
   In addition to any provisions in
Chapter 113, Title 13 and §
157.100 of this code and the general buffering provisions required by this
chapter, any adult entertainment use shall have at least a six-foot, solid,
opaque, concrete, brick or masonry fence or walled structure on all but the
frontage of the property, in order to buffer the neighboring uses from any
effects from adult uses. The wall/structure shall be at a minimum finished on
the outside and include appropriate landscaping. The property at the front of
the adult use may be required by the Town Planning and Zoning Board or the Town
Council to contain a four-foot opaque wall if a wall will not detract from the
visibility and safety of users, employees or public safety personnel.
(2000 Code, § 66-549) (Ord. 97-01, passed 3-11-1997) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.389 VARIANCES AND APPEALS.
   The Town Council, upon recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Board,
shall have the authority to vary from the strictest application of the land
development codes only within the adult entertainment district and only if an
applicant can produce expert testimony that demonstrates that lot, structure,
parking, landscaping, signage, buffering, yard or other physical code
provisions cannot be met for the land zoned for adult entertainment uses.
(2000 Code, § 66-550) (Ord. 97-01, passed 3-11-1997) Penalty, see §
157.999
GOVERNMENT MANAGED LANDS
§ 157.400 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   The Government Managed Lands (GML) District is established as a
special district to protect the substantial public interest of real property
owned and used by any governmental entity including local, state or federal
government units.
   (B)   This district is not intended to be applied to land that is used by
governmental entities on an easement or leased basis if title to the land is in
private ownership.
   (C)   It is intended that the district be utilized for mapping purposes and
to be in accord with and promote the purposes set forth in the comprehensive
plan.
(Ord. 2006-16, passed - -; Ord. 2007-02, passed 1-23-2007)
§ 157.401 PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following are permitted principal uses:
   (A)   Government administrative, public safety and judicial buildings;
   (B)   Public schools and libraries;
   (C)   Government maintenance facilities;
   (D)   Public utility buildings and facilities;
   (E)   Public parks, playgrounds and outdoor recreation; and
   (F)   Other public facilities of a like nature.
(Ord. 2006-16, passed - -; Ord. 2007-02, passed 1-23-2007) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.402 ACCESSORY USES.
   The following are accessory uses:
   (A)   Uses and structures which are on the same lot and of a nature
customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal governmental use or
structure; and
   (B)   Uses and structures which are in keeping with the character of the
district.
(Ord. 2006-16, passed - -; Ord. 2007-02, passed 1-23-2007) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.403 PROHIBITED USES.
   Any use of structure not specifically or by reasonable implication permitted
herein is prohibited,
(Ord. 2006-16, passed - -; Ord. 2007-02, passed 1-23-2007) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.404 HEIGHT, YARD AND AREA REQUIREMENTS.
  Maximum building height            25 feet
Maximum yard requirements             None
Minimum lot size                      7,500 square feet
Maximum lot width                     None
Maximum lot coverage by all buildings 50%
Minimum yard requirements
   Front                           40 feet
   Side interior lot               25 feet
   Side corner lot                 25 feet
   Rear                            20 feet; 15 feet when abutting an alley
 
(Ord. 2006-16, passed - -; Ord. 2007-02, passed 1-23-2007; Ord. 2012-12, passed
11-27-2012)  Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.405 SPECIAL CONTROLS.
   Because of the unique nature of this District, special controls pertaining
to landscaping, transportation services, off-street parking and the like, may
be necessitated to promote a stable, healthy and safe environment.
(Ord. 2006-16, passed - -; Ord. 2007-02, passed 1-23-2007) Penalty, see §
157.999
PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS; GENERALLY
§ 157.420 PLANNED COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENTS; PERMITTED.
   (A)   Any commercial use or group of commercial uses for which three or more
acres is intended to be developed simultaneously according to a carefully drawn
plan may be permitted by the Town Council as a conditional uses to the
appropriate zoning district in which the development is planned.
   (B)   (1)   This provision is intended to:
         (a)   Encourage the timely and logical development of commercial
facilities which would be constructed as a unit;
         (b)   Discourage development of commercial parcels of size where
uncoordinated development would likely result in less efficient use of the land
and of service to the community and its residents; and
         (c)   Assure suitable design and other criteria that would protect
both the commercial environment and surrounding properties.
      (2)   Variances to lot and building regulations to permit more flexible
design and utilization of space may be permitted.
   (C)   In order to qualify for the conditional uses, the following conditions
must be met.
      (1)   Ownership. The site proposed shall be in one ownership, or, if in
several ownerships, the request for conditional use shall be filed by all
owners of the properties included in the plan.
      (2)   Zoning provisions. All other portions of the respective zoning
district regulations and all other applicable portions of this chapter except
those portions specifically permitted for variance shall be adhered to.
      (3)   Street frontage. The site proposed shall have a minimum width of
200 feet along a major street frontage.
      (4)   Access limitations. Locations for access onto and off the site
shall be confined to rights-of-way on which no residentially zoned property
abuts. The minimum distance between the locations shall be at least 150 feet,
and the minimum distance between any one location and an intersection of two or
more street rights-of-way shall be 100 feet.
      (5)   Site plan.
         (a)   Concurrent with the request, a site plan shall be submitted on
which structures shall be located in relation to:
            1.   Each other and to major entrances into and off the site;
            2.   Internal circulation ways;
            3.   Parking and service areas; and
            4.   Landscaped areas.
         (b)   The site plan and supporting data shall show proposed standards
for development, including restrictions of the use of property; exceptions or
variations to the requirements of the zoning ordinance requested, if any; plans
for the provision of utilities, including water, sewer and drainage facilities;
plan for protection of abutting properties; and other plans, tabulations and
other data the Board of Adjustment may require.
      (6)   Assurance of improvements. A statement defining the manner in which
the town is to be assured that all improvements and protective devices are to
be installed and maintained shall accompany the request for special exception.
   (D)   (1)   The Town Council may require the posting of a performance bond
not to exceed 110% of the cost of providing the:
         (a)   Public improvements necessary to ensure proper ingress and
egress for the site; and
         (b)   Public services customarily supplied by the town to fill
respective needs for storm, water and sanitary sewer disposal, water supply and
so forth.
      (2)   Subsequent to the compliance of these conditions, the customary
procedure for granting a conditional use by the Town Council and for obtaining
a building permit shall take effect.
(2000 Code, § 66-601) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975; Ord. 99-02, passed 3-23-
1999) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.421 PLANNED INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENTS; PERMITTED.
   (A)   Any industrial use or group of industrial uses for which five or more
acres is intended to be developed simultaneously according to a carefully drawn
plan may be permitted by the Town Council as a conditional use in the M-
1 Zoning District.
      (1)   This provision is intended to:
         (a)   Encourage better organization and controlled development for
land reserved primarily for industrial uses;
         (b)   Create a compatible environment for a variety of industrial
activities;
         (c)   Protect the integrity of surrounding residential and commercial
uses;
         (d)   Allow and encourage proper placement and design for those
commercial and residential uses that augment the principal uses; and
         (e)   Discourage commercial and residential encroachment upon areas
that should be reserved for industrial activities.
      (2)   Variances to lot and building regulations to permit more flexible
design and utilization of space may be permitted, and any industrial use that
meets the standards established in performance standards may be permitted.
   (B)   In order to qualify for the conditional uses, the following conditions
must be met.
      (1)   Ownership. The site proposed shall be in one ownership; or, if in
several ownerships, the request for special exception shall be filed by all
owners of the properties included in the plan.
      (2)   Zoning provisions. All other portions of the respective zoning
district regulations and all other applicable portions of this chapter except
those portions specifically permitted for variance shall be adhered to.
      (3)   Street frontage. The site proposed shall have a minimum width of
300 feet along a major street frontage.
      (4)   Access limitations. Locations for access onto and off the site
shall be confined to rights-of-way that no residentially zoned property abuts.
The minimum distance between the locations shall be at least 200 feet, and the
minimum distance between any one location and an intersection of two or more
street rights-of-way shall be 100 feet.
      (5)   Site plan.
         (a)   Concurrent with the request, a site plan shall be located in
relation to:
            1.   Each other and to major entrances into and off the site;
            2.   Internal circulation ways;
            3.   Parking and service areas; and
            4.   Landscaped areas.
         (b)   The site plan and supporting data shall also show proposed
standards for development, including restrictions of the use of property;
exceptions or variations to the requirements of this chapter requested, if any;
plans for the provision of utilities, including water, sewer and drainage
facilities; plans for protection of abutting properties; and other plans,
tabulations and other data that the Town Council may require.
      (6)   Assurance of improvements. A statement defining the manner in which
the town is to be assured that all improvements and protective devices are to
be installed and maintained shall accompany the request for conditional use.
   (C)   (1)   The Town Council may require the posting of a performance bond
not to exceed 110% of the cost of providing the:
         (a)   Public improvements necessary to ensure proper ingress and
egress for the site; and
         (b)   Public services customarily supplied by the town to fill
respective needs for storm, water and sanitary sewer disposal, water supply and
the like.
      (2)   Subsequent to the compliance of these conditions, the customary
procedure for granting of a conditional use by the Town Council and for
obtaining a building permit shall take effect.
(2000 Code, § 66-621) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975; Ord. 99-02, passed 3-23-
1999) Penalty, see §
157.999
SUPPLEMENTARY DISTRICT REGULATIONS
§ 157.490 BUILDING SETBACK LINES.
   (A)   For the purpose of promoting health, safety and general welfare of the
community, and to lessen congestion in the streets; secure safety from fire,
panic, storm, hurricane or other causes; to provide adequate light and air, to
prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population;
to provide adequate facilities for transportation, parking, water and sewerage;
and to conserve the value of buildings and encourage the most appropriate use
of land, all properties within the town limits that abut the following roads
shall maintain these minimum building setback lines as measured from the
centerline of the existing right-of-way:
 
U.S. Highway 1 100 feet
Wickham Road   100 feet
 
   (B)   In determining the setback requirements for any building proposed to
be erected, the setback requirements specified in division (A) above of this
section shall be construed as a minimum setback; and if a greater setback is
required under any of the zoning districts, the greater setback requirement
shall be enforced.
(2000 Code, § 66-866) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.491 ERECTION OF MORE THAN ONE PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE ON A LOT.
   In any district, more than one structure housing a permitted or permissible
principal use may be erected on a single lot, provided that yard and other
requirements of this chapter shall be met for each structure as though it were
on an individual lot.
(2000 Code, § 66-867) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.492 PARCELS OF LAND DIVIDED BY PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   For the purpose of determining building permit requirements, setback
requirements and minimum lot sizes, those lots, plots, tracts or parcels of
real property titled under common ownership, located within the town, that are
separated or divided by a public or private right-of-way, street, road, alley
or easement shall be defined as follows:
   (A)   Where the land area on each side of the public or private roadway or
road meets the minimum requirement for lot size in the designated zoning
classification, then the landowner shall be deemed the owner of two separate
lots, plots, tracts or parcels for the purposes of this chapter. A current
survey, dated within 180 days of building permit application submittal,
reflecting existing conditions and mean high water line will be required in
order to make this determination;
   (B)   Where the land area on either side of the public or private right-of-
way or road fails to meet the minimum requirements for lot size in the
designated zoning classification, then the landowner shall be deemed the owner
of one lot, plot, tract or parcel for the purposes of this chapter, and the
principal structure or dwelling unit shall be located on the side or part
having the greater land area; and
   (C)   In platting new subdivisions or new roads, the land area must meet the
minimum lot area requirements on at least one side of the public or private
right-of-way or road.
(Ord. 2006-09, passed 5-23-2006) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.493 YARD ENCROACHMENTS.
   Every part of every required setback shall be open and unobstructed from the
ground to the sky except as follows or as otherwise permitted in this chapter:
   (A)   Sills or belt courses may project not over 18 inches into a required
yard;
   (B)   Movable awnings may project not over four feet into a required yard,
provided that where the yard is less than ten feet in width the projection
shall not exceed half the width of the yard;
   (C)   Chimneys, fireplaces or pilaster may project not over three feet into
a required yard;
   (D)   Fire escapes, stairways and balconies that are unroofed and unenclosed
may project not over five feet into a required rear yard, or not over three
feet into a required side yard in any residential district;
   (E)   Overhangs, hoods, canopies or marquees may project not over three feet
into a required yard;
   (F)   Fences, walls and hedges shall be permitted in required yards subject
to the provisions established in this chapter;
   (G)   Accessory parking may be located in a required front, rear or side
yard for single-family and two-family dwellings;
   (H)   In the C-P District, required off-street parking spaces may be located
in the front yard except that no parking space shall be permitted within 20
feet of the front lot line;
   (I)   In the C-1, C-2 and M-1 Districts, required off-street parking space
may be located in the front yard except that no parking space shall be
permitted within ten feet of the front lot line;
   (J)   Other than listed above in divisions (G), (H) and (I) above, no
required setback area shall be used for any parking space, drive or backout
area, except that access drives may cross the setback areas; and
   (K)   Open, unenclosed porches, platforms or paved terraces not covered by a
roof or a canopy, may extend or project into the required side yard area not
more than six feet, and into the rear yard not more than 12 feet.
(2000 Code, § 66-868) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.494 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.
   (A)   No accessory structure shall be erected in any required front or side
yard. For residential uses, the maximum square footage allowed shall be 200
square feet and the height shall not exceed ten feet and only one accessory
structure shall be allowed on the lot. For commercial and industrial uses the
square footage shall not exceed 900 square feet and the height shall not exceed
20 feet. No separate accessory structures shall be erected within ten feet of
any building on the same lot or within 15 feet of any lot line; however, when a
commercial or industrial use abuts a residential zoning classification, the
setback from the residential zoning shall be 25 feet.
   (B)   Accessory buildings erected on lots fronting on two streets shall
conform to main structure setbacks for the rear yard.
   (C)   For the purpose of this section, swimming pools are considered as an
accessory building, and shall meet the following setback requirements:
      (1)   At least ten feet to the water’s edge from all lot lines and five
feet from any other structures with provisions for a screen enclosure to be
allowed seven and one-half feet from the property line; and
      (2)   There shall always be an enclosure of a permanent nature around the
pool not less than four feet high with a doorway that can be locked.
   (D)   Special requirements for carports. The following provisions shall
exclusively apply to carports:
      (1)   Definition of carport: Any structure, either temporary or
permanent, with a roof, supported by columns or posts, and at least two fully
unenclosed walls open which is used primarily for the parking of vehicles,
boats, trailers, and other means or modes of transportation; equipment and/or
materials. Carport floor surfaces shall be of approved noncombustible material.
For purposes herein the term WALL shall mean the front, rear and sides of the
structure. A carport is declared an accessory structure and unless stated to
the contrary the provisions of division (A) above apply.
      (2)   No part of a carport shall be located to the rear of the principal
or main structure. Carports must be attached to the principal or main structure
and must meet the same setback requirements as the principal or main structure.
Carports shall be constructed simultaneously with, or following, the
construction of the principal or main building, and shall not be used until
after the principal or main structure has been fully erected. No carport shall
be used or converted to living quarters.
      (3)   Any portion of the carport which abuts a residential zone, a mobile
home park or cooperative, or any property currently occupied by a residence,
shall provide a vegetative hedge of at least six feet in height when planted
with a plant separation of no more than ten inches when first planted and
maintained in a sightly condition between the carport and the abutting
property.
(2000 Code, § 66-869) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975; Ord. 2016-01, passed 3-22-
2016) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.495 AIR CONDITIONING UNITS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   In all residential districts, the exhaust or mechanical part of any air
conditioning or heating unit, other than window units, shall be subject to side
yard requirements except if the unit faces a street or an alley and is located
15 feet or more from an adjoining property.
(2000 Code, § 66-870) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.496 VISION CLEARANCE AT CORNERS, CURB CUTS AND RAILROAD CROSSINGS.
   Notwithstanding any part of this subchapter or any permit granted, or any
variance granted by the Board of Adjustment, no type of structure, vehicle,
tree, planting, vegetation, sign or fence or any type of obstacle or any
portion thereof shall be placed or retained in a manner which would create a
traffic hazard or would obstruct the vision clearance at corners, curb cuts or
railroad crossings in any zone.
(2000 Code, § 66-871) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.497 (RESERVED).
§ 157.498 STRUCTURES TO HAVE ACCESS.
   Every building erected or moved shall be on a lot adjacent to a public
street or with access to an approved private street, and all safe and
convenient access for servicing, fire protection and required off-street
parking. All lots upon which structures are built shall have a minimum width of
50 feet facing a public right-of-way or an approved private right-of-way.
(2000 Code, § 66-873) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.499 PARKING, STORAGE OR USE OF MAJOR RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT.
   No major recreational equipment shall be parked or stored on any lot in a
residential district except in a carport or enclosed building or to the rear of
the front building line; however, the equipment may be parked anywhere on
residential premises for a period not to exceed 24 hours during loading or
unloading. No equipment shall be used for living, sleeping or housekeeping
purposes when parked or stored on a residential lot, or in any location not
approved for the use. The equipment and the area of parking shall be maintained
in a clean, neat and presentable manner and the equipment shall be in a usable
condition at all times; and the equipment shall have attached, at all times, a
current vehicle registration license plate.
(2000 Code, § 66-874) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.500 MINIMUM WIDTH OF COURTS.
   The minimum width of a court shall be 30 feet for one-story buildings, 40
feet for two-story buildings, 50 feet for three-story buildings, and 60 feet
for four-story buildings. For every five feet of height over 40 feet, the width
of a court shall be increased by two feet, provided that open unenclosed
porches may project into a required court not more than 25% of the width of the
court. Where a roadway is provided in the court, the width allowed for the
roadway shall be in addition to that required by this section.
(2000 Code, § 66-875) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.501 WATER AREAS.
   All areas within the town that are under water and not shown as included
within any district shall be subject to all the requirements of the district
that immediately adjoins or abuts the water area. If the water area adjoins two
or more districts, the boundaries of each district shall be construed to extend
into the water area in a straight line as projected until they intersect a
projected line from other district boundaries.
(2000 Code, § 66-876) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975)
§ 157.502 VISUAL SCREENS.
   Wherever the boundary of a commercial or industrial zoning district abuts a
residential area, except where the commercial or industrial zoning district
abuts a public street, a visual screen shall be provided within the yard
setbacks of the commercial or industrial zoning district, meeting the following
specifications.
   (A)   The visual screen shall be provided along the entire length of the
commercial or industrial zoning district boundary that abuts any residential
zoning district. The screen shall be at least eight feet high.
   (B)   (1)   The visual screen shall consist of decorative or ornamental
fencing and/or decorative or ornamental trees and shrubs. This visual screen
may include a wall or a hedge. It shall be designed and placed in a manner
rendering the visual screen opaque within a period of two years after the
screen is provided, and shall be maintained in a sightly condition at all
times. At the time of installation, a fence or wall shall be finished on both
sides.
      (2)   There shall be a minimum ten foot landscaped strip adjacent to the
visual screen with one tree planted for every 50 feet of length of the visual
screen boundary. Additional landscape material, grass and ground cover shall,
also, be planted within the ten foot strip.
   (C)   The visual screen requirement may be waived by the Board of Adjustment
provided that an alternate landscaping design is provided for a particular use
in the commercial or industrial zoning district.
(2000 Code, § 66-877) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975; Ord. 2015-04, passed 6-30-
2015) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.503 BUILDINGS REQUIRED.
   All commercial uses shall provide at least the minimum size building
required for the district in which the use is to be located. The building shall
contain plumbing facilities adequate to serve the needs of the customers and
employees of the commercial use.
(2000 Code, § 66-878) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.504 DRIVEWAYS AND CURB BREAKS IN COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS.
   The number of curb breaks or driveways for one establishment shall not
exceed two for each 150 feet of street frontage and shall be at least 50 feet
apart, with the width of each break or driveway being not more than 30 feet nor
less than 15 feet, and located not closer than 30 feet from the nearest street
intersection. Curb breaks and driveways shall be made or constructed to town
specifications and a town permit shall be required and approved by the Building
Official prior to breaking of any curb or installation of a driveway on or
across any right-of-way. Commercial and/or industrial parcels shall not be
permitted to have a driveway exiting onto or access from a local residential
street which is the only entrance to a residential subdivision unless there is
a recorded developer's agreement permitting such access or the access is
permitted by the Community Association accessed by such local residential
street.
(2000 Code, § 66-879) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975; Ord. 2018-05, passed 9-25-
2018) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.505 PROHIBITED USES EAST OF THE EASTERN RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF U.S.
HIGHWAY-1.
   Notwithstanding any other provision in this code the following uses are
prohibited east of the eastern right-of-way line of U.S. Highway-1:
   (A)   Massage parlors and therapists;
   (B)   Arcade amusement centers;
   (C)   Automotive paint and/or repair shops;
   (D)   Gas stations;
   (E)   Convenience stores;
   (F)   Drug stores;
   (G)   Liquor sales for consumption on or off premises;
   (H)   Laundry and dry cleaning;
   (I)   Drinking establishments;
   (J)   Automobile sales;
   (K)   Manufacturing;
   (L)   Storage or warehousing facilities;
   (M)   Pawn shops;
   (N)   Bail bondsman;
   (O)   Carnivals;
   (P)   Palm readers;
   (Q)   Psychics;
   (R)   Hypno-therapists;
   (S)   Skate rinks and skate parks;
   (T)   Acupuncturists;
   (U)   Hotels, motels and motor courts;
   (V)   Cemeteries;
   (W)   Gun and/or ammunition sales;
   (X)   Construction companies;
   (Y)   Heavy equipment repairs, storage and/or sales;
   (Z)   Automobile sales and/or rentals;
   (AA)   Flea markets;
   (BB)   Motorcycle sales and/or repair and service;
   (CC)   Electronic gaming establishments; and
   (DD)   Adult care facilities as defined in §
157.003 of this code.
(Ord. 2011-06, passed 8-23-2011)
§ 157.506 RIVERFRONT BREEZEWAY/VISUAL CORRIDOR.
   The riverfront breezeway/visual corridor as defined in §
157.003 shall apply to all Indian River Lagoon front properties east of U.S.
Highway 1, with building construction plans submitted after September 1, 2011.
The breezeway visual corridor shall be calculated as the ratio between the
minimum side setbacks and/or the distance between structures and the width of
the lot. The breezeway width and lot width shall be measured on the same line
parallel to the waterfront. The lot width for the purpose of determining the
required breezeway shall be established at the location of the principle
structure(s) at their widest point. The sum of the breezeway/visual corridors
shall accumulate to at least 20% of the width of the lot for properties less
than 100 feet in width and 30% of the width of the lot for property's 100 feet
or more in width. No buildings, structures, berms or solid fences, or any
combination thereof, more than four feet in height shall be permitted in the
breezeway/visual corridor.
(Ord. 2011-12, passed 11-1-2011)
§ 157.507 FENCES, WALLS AND ENTRACEWAYS AND RELATED STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      ABUT OR ABUTTING PROPERTY. A lot or parcel sharing a common boundary with
the lot or parcel in question, or a lot or parcel immediately across a public
or private right-of-way or street from the lot or parcel in question.
      COMMERCIAL DISTRICT. Any area of the town having the zoning
classification C-l. C-2, or C-P in accordance with the land development
regulations of the town.
      ENTRANCE GATE. A gate designed for ingress and egress for vehicular
traffic to and from a lot or parcel that directly connects to the public
roadway. Entrance gates may be opened manually or by automated means and may be
guided by hinges, tracks, or other means.
      ENTRANCEWAY. Columns, poles, walls, arches or other structures that
define a point of entry onto a property. The entranceway may or may not have a
gate.
      FENCE. A vertical row of opaque nonliving material, placed close together
or abutting each other in such a manner as to form a boundary or barrier
between two adjacent parcels of land. Such amenities as kennels, cages, corals,
trellises and related conveniences are not fences for the purposes of this
division.
      GATE. A rigid structure to open and close in order to allow ingress and
egress through a fence or wall. Gates may be opened manually or by automated
means and may be guided by hinges, tracks, or other means.
      HEIGHT. The distance from existing grade to the top of such fence or wall
including post and/or uprights measured on the side facing abutting property.
      INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT. Any area of the town having the zoning
classification IND in accordance with the land development regulations of the
town.
      INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT. Any area of the town having the zoning
classification M-1 in accordance with the land development regulations of the
town.
      OPAQUE. Shall mean that objects located on one side of a fence or wall
are not visible from the opposite side when the viewer's line of sight to such
object is through such fence or wall.
      PERIMETER. Outside boundary of a subdivision or multiple adjoining lots.
      RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. Any area of the town having the zoning
classification R-A, R-1AAA, R-1A, or R-2, in accordance with the land
development regulations of the town.
      WALL. A vertical row primarily composed of masonry materials that are
constructed so that less that 50% of the vertical surface is open to permit the
transmission of light, air and vision through the surface in a horizontal
plane.
      YARD. An open, unoccupied space on the same lot or parcel with a building
or buildings, other than a court, which is unobstructed from the ground upwards
by buildings or structures.
   (B)   Height restrictions for fences, walls, gates and related structures in
commercial industrial or institutional districts.
      (1)   Fences, walls, gates, and related structures located, erected,
constructed or altered on any property used as or located in a Commercial,
Industrial or Institutional District shall be no more than eight feet in
height.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the provisions of this division (B) the provisions
of §
157.496 shall take priority.
   (C)   Height restrictions for fences, walls, gates, entranceways and related
structures on residential property shall comply with the following height
requirements:
      (1)   Except as provided in this section, no portion of any fence, wall
or gate located between the front building line and the front lot line shall be
more than five feet in height and if located to the rear of the front building
line shall be no more than six feet in height, provided; however, that any
residential lot which abuts commercial, industrial or institutional zoned or
used property may erect a fence, wall or related structure up to eight feet in
height along the rear and/or side portions of the property which abuts such
commercial, industrial, or institutional zone or property.
      (2)   For any lot or parcel not containing a structure, the requirements
of this section shall be applied in the same manner as if a structure had been
constructed in accordance with such required yard area or setback as specified
within the zoning district requirements.
      (3)   Except as provided in this section, no portion of any entranceway
shall be more than six feet in height.
      (4)   If a gate is installed to provide ingress and egress to and from
property, the gate must be set back at least 15 feet from the property line.
      (5)   Notwithstanding the provisions of this division (C), the provisions
of §
157.496 shall take priority.
   (D)   Maintenance of fences, walls or related structures. All fences, walls
and related structures in the town shall be maintained in good repair and in a
structurally sound condition. All such structures shall be maintained to their
original specifications.
   (E)   Materials and design requirements.
      (1)   Walls and fences shall not prevent necessary access to facilities
(easements, refuse containers, alleys and lawn areas) that need to be
maintained on a regular basis.
      (2)   No wall or fence shall cause the collection or ponding of
stormwater along property lines. Weep holes of sufficient size and design to
assure compliance with the section shall be installed where the foregoing
condition would occur.
      (3)   Posts and stringers required for the support of opaque fences shall
not be visible from the side facing any abutting property, for which such fence
permit was issued. Posts shall be a treated wood type or wood or material type
with a resistance to decay.
      (4)   All walls shall have a painted surface with struck mortar joints,
stucco or other finished surface on the side facing any abutting property for
which the permit for such wall was issued.
      (5)   The following fence types or uses are prohibited:
         (a)   Electrified wire strands.
         (b)   Barbed wire. Razor wire or concertina wire, except such fencing
material may be permitted at the top of fences or walls erected in commercial
or industrial zoning districts.
         (c)   Chain link.
         (d)   Other types of fences which are designed to potentially inflict
bodily injury or which are constructed of corrodible material or which do not
meet the intent or actual standards of this section shall be prohibited.
         (e)   Fencing of easements. No person shall fence any public utility,
public right-of-way, or drainage easement (to include, but not limited to,
sewer, water, drainage, gas, cable television, telephone, and electric
utilities), unless such person has provided adequate access for any purpose
necessary to access the easement, right-of-way, and the like. Access shall be
provided so that no fence will have to be cut or any wall removed to install,
maintain, repair or replace any utility. Any landscaping and fencing within the
easement shall be relocated by or at the expense of the property owner if
required.
   (F)   Permit required for fence, wall, entranceway and related structures.
No fence, wall, entranceway or related structure shall be constructed, erected,
replaced or altered between abutting parcels unless a permit therefore has been
obtained from the town by the owner of the property on which such fence or wall
is to be located, or by some other person duly authorized by such owner. The
application for such permit shall be on a form provided by the Building
Official and shall be accompanied by drawings showing the proposed location of
and the specifications for the type of construction. The Building Official
shall deny a permit if he or she believes the proposed structure creates a
threat to health or safety. Unless requested otherwise by the applicant, denial
of a permit shall create an automatic appeal to the Town Council after
consideration and recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Board. Permits are
not required for periodic repair and maintenance of an existing fence or wall
unless such is more than 50% destroyed by any means. All such issued permits
shall contain the following:
      "WARNING: The issuance of this permit by the Town of Palm Shores does not
relieve the permittee from complying with any Homeowner's Association
requirements. Before proceeding with any permitted activities authorized by
this permit the permittee should obtain approval from the applicable
association."
   (G)   Permit fee. Permit fees shall be calculated in accordance with adopted
resolutions. No permit shall be issued unless and until all fees associated
with the permit are paid.
   (H)   Restriction of fences, walls or related structures on public
easements, utility easements and public rights-of-way.
      (1)   No permanent wall, fence, gate, entranceway, or related structures
shall be constructed on any public right-of-way or easement.
      (2)   A non-permanent fence or gate may be constructed on any public
right-of-way or public easement providing the property owner making application
for such fence or gate has submitted written permission from any affected
property owners and agrees in writing, at the time of application for permit,
that the property owner and/or any successors in interest will bear the expense
of removal of such fence when access to the public easement is required.
   (I)   All fences, walls or entranceways shall be constructed in a manner
that provides adequate visibility at any public or private right-of-way,
easement, driveway or street providing access to such lot or parcel, and at any
abutting intersection.
   (J)   Town Council may authorize non-compliant design specifications only
after considering the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Board. Prior to
approving subject structure the Town Council shall render a finding that the
structure is safe and visually compatible within the area.
   (K)   Special fence, wall and related structure provisions.
      (1)   Property Fronting Highway US 1. For any property whose frontage is
along Highway US 1, any fence which is proposed to be constructed along such
frontage and which is visible from the right-of-way of Highway U.S. 1 shall be
opaque.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, no fence, wall or
related structure shall be erected in violation of §
157.506.
      (3)   The provisions of this code shall not apply to any fence, wall or
related structure erected by the Florida Department of Transportation.
   (L)   Grandfather clause. The provisions of this section shall not apply to
any fence, wall or related structure that was erected pursuant to a permit
issued by the town or a permit that was pending before the town prior to the
effective date of this section. However, in the event that any fence, wall or
related structure is more than 50% destroyed by any means then the entire
fence, wall or related structure shall only be reconstructed in accordance with
this section. In determining the calculation of the 50% requirement the total
lineal feet of the fence, wall or related structure as depicted on the approved
permit on file with the town shall be divided by a denominator of two.
(Ord. 2013-02, passed 3-26-2013; Ord. 2022-05, passed 11-22-2022)
§ 157.508 (RESERVED).
§ 157.509 ADDITIONAL YARD REQUIREMENTS ABUTTING RESIDENTIAL AREAS.
   Whenever a commercial or industrial zone abuts property zoned residential,
TR-1, TRC-1, TTP or which is currently used as a residential area, if the
district front yard is greater than the rear yard, then the yard requirements
shall be reversed in order to achieve a greater yard requirement abutting the
residential area.
(Ord. 2015-04, passed 6-30-2015)
§ 157.510 MEDICAL MARIJUANA TREATMENT CENTER DISPENSING FACILITIES.
   The Town Council, pursuant to F.S. § 381.986(11) (2017), hereby prohibits
and bans the location of medical marijuana treatment center dispensing
facilities, as that term is defined and/or used or variations of it are defined
and/or used in F.S. § 381.986 (2017) or any rule promulgated pursuant to F.S. §
381.986 (2017) from within the jurisdictional boundaries of the town as such
boundaries may now exist or as such boundaries may exist in the future.
(Ord. 2017-07, passed 11-8-2017)
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
§ 157.515 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE. A minimum rectangular parking area measuring nine
feet by 20 feet, exclusive of access drives or aisles.
(2000 Code, § 66-941) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975; Ord. 96-08, passed 10-22-
1996; Ord. 2021-03, passed - -2021)
§ 157.516 REQUIREMENTS FOR OFF-STREET PARKING.
   There shall be provided at the time of the erection of any main building or
structure, or at the time any main building or structure is enlarged or
increased in capacity by adding dwelling units, guest rooms, floor area of
seats, minimum off-street automobile parking space with adequate provisions for
ingress or egress in accordance with the following requirements.
Function Minimum Off-Street Parking Space
                                                                                    Minimum
                                                                                    Off-
Function                                                                            Street
                                                                                    Parking
                                                                                    Space
Auditorium, theaters or other places of assembly
   For each four seats or seating places                                         1
   For every 120 square feet of floor area of the main assembly hall             1
   Whichever requirement is greater
Business or commercial buildings, for each 300 square feet of gross floor area or   1
fraction thereof
Churches, temples or places of worship
   For each five seats or seating places                                         1
   For each 150 square feet of floor area of the main assembly hall              1
   Whichever is greater
Clubs or lodges
   For each five seats or seating places                                         1
   For each 150 square feet of floor area of the main assembly hall              1
Colleges and universities
   Dormitories, fraternity houses, sororities, for each two sleeping spaces      1
   Classrooms, planetarium, for each three seats or seating places               1
   Gymnasium, natatorium, auditorium, theater, amphitheater and other places of  1
public assembly, for each three seats or seating spaces
   Stadium, for each two seats                                                   1
   Minus campus parking required elsewhere; except parking required for
dormitories, fraternities or sororities may not be subtracted
                                                                                    No new
   Field sports other than stadium                                               parking
                                                                                    required
   Infirmary
      For each bed                                                            0.5
      For each 300 square feet if there are no beds                           1
      Libraries, museums, for each 300 square feet of floor area              1
   Computer center, laboratories, greenhouses, radio/T.V. stations, for each 300 1
square feet of floor area
   Student union, cafeteria, restaurant, automats, other eating facilities,      1
bookstore, retail facilities, post office, for each 300 square feet of floor space
   Student military building, for each 300 square feet of floor area             1
   Power plant, other mechanical equipment structures, for each 1,000 square feet1
of floor area
   Administrative offices, teacher’s offices and the like, for each 300 square 1eet
of floor area
Hospitals and sanitariums, for each four patient beds                               1
   Plus, for every two employees on the largest working shift, exclusive of space1
required for doctors
                                                                                    Equal in
                                                                                    area to
                                                                                    50% of
                                                                                    the
Libraries, museums                                                                  floor
                                                                                    area
                                                                                    open to
                                                                                    the
                                                                                    public
Manufacturing and industrial uses, for each two employees on the largest working    1
shift
Medical and dental clinics, per doctor or dentist                                   5
Mortuaries, for each five seats or seating places, exclusive of areas needed for    1
funeral vehicles
Nursing or convalescent homes and sanitariums, for each three patient beds          1
Office and professional buildings, for each 300 square feet of gross floor area     1
Residential uses
   Single-family and duplex residential uses                                     2
   Townhouse and multiple-family residential uses                                2.35 per
                                                                                    unit
Restaurants or other eating places, for each three seats or seating places          1
Roominghouses, boardinghouses, for each two beds                                    1
Junior high and elementary schools
   Per classroom                                                                 1
   For each administrative office                                                1
   High school, for each four students                                           1
Transient lodging facilities
   For each sleeping unit                                                        1
   For the owner or manager                                                      1
   For each three employees                                                      1
All other uses shall be determined by the official agency of the town charged with approving
plans for the uses to be constructed
 
(2000 Code, § 66-942) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975; Ord. 2008-01, passed 1-22-
2008; Ord. 2022-05, passed 11-22-2022) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.517 LOCATION OF OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES.
   (A)   Parking spaces for all dwellings shall be located on the same property
with the main building to be served where feasible, unless otherwise stipulated
elsewhere in this subchapter; except that half the total number of required
spaces for multiple-family dwellings, townhouses and mobile homes may be
located in a common parking facility not more than 200 feet distant from the
nearest boundary of the site.
   (B)   Required off-street parking areas for three or more automobiles shall
have individual spaces marked and shall be so designed, maintained and
regulated in a manner that no parking or maneuvering incidental to parking
shall be on any area, public street, walk or alley, and so that any automobile
may be parked and unparked without moving another.
(2000 Code, § 66-943) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.518 REQUIREMENTS FOR OFF-STREET LOADING SPACES.
   (A)   Every single-occupancy permitted use having a floor area of 10,000
square feet or more requiring the receipt or distribution by vehicles of
materials and merchandise shall have at least one permanently maintained off-
street loading space for each 10,000 square feet of gross floor area.
   (B)   Single-occupancy retail operations, wholesale and industrial
operations with a gross floor area of less than 10,000 square feet shall
provide sufficient receiving space on the property so as not to hinder the fast
movement of vehicles and pedestrians over a sidewalk, street or alley.
(2000 Code, § 66-944) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.519 LOCATION AND DIMENSION OF OFF-STREET LOADING SPACE.
   (A)   Each loading space shall have direct access to an alley or street and
shall have the following minimum dimensions:
 
Length 45 feet
Width  14 feet
Height 14 feet
 
   (B)   Sufficient maneuvering area shall be provided where it is anticipated
that trucks and/or trailers exceeding 45 feet in length will be utilized in
loading or unloading. Loading spaces shall be within the confines of the
property.
(2000 Code, § 66-945) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975) Penalty, see §
157.999
HOME-BASED BUSINESSES
§ 157.530 REGULATIONS.
   (A)   In any district where a home-based business is allowed, it shall be
clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling
purposes and shall not change the character of the dwelling. For purposes of
this section, a business is considered a home-based business if it operates, in
whole or in part, from a residential property and has obtained and currently
possess the appropriate business tax receipt from the town.
   (B)   When permitted, home-based business shall be conducted in accordance
with the following provisions:
      (1)   The employees of the business who work at the residential dwelling
must also reside in the residential dwelling, except that up to a total of two
employees or independent contractors who do not reside at the residential
dwelling may work at the business. The business may have additional remote
employees that do not work at the residential dwelling.
      (2)   In order to preserve the character, aesthetics, architectural and
the use of the residential property so as to be consistent with the uses of the
residential areas that surround the property, there shall be no display of
goods visible from any street.
      (3)   In order to preserve the character, aesthetics, architectural and
the use of the residential property so as to be consistent with the uses of the
residential areas that surround the property, a nonilluminated nameplate, not
exceeding two square feet in area, may be displayed providing it is affixed
flat against the exterior surface at a position not more than two feet distance
from the main entrance to the residence.
      (4)   (a)   No home-based business shall occupy a residence, exclusive of
the area of any open porch or attached garage or similar space not suited or
intended for occupancy as living quarters which results in a situation where
the home business becomes the primary use of the property and the residential
use is secondary. A list of non-exclusive factors which may be considered to
determine if the residential use is secondary are as follows:
            1.   Whether homestead tax exemption is maintained on the property;
            2.   The number of occupants of the dwelling compared to the number
of bedrooms in the dwelling;
            3.   Whether the dwelling unit is owner/occupied;
            4.   Traffic generation to and from the property exceeds that which
is greater than would normally be expected at a similar residence where no
business is conducted;
            5.   Whether parking volume at the property exceeds that which is
greater than would normally be expected at a similar residence where no
business is conducted;
            6.   Whether the use of vehicles or trailers operated or parked at
the business or on a street right-of-way is greater than would normally be
expected at a similar residence where no business is conducted.
         (b)   No rooms that have been constructed as an addition to the
residence, nor any attached garage or porch that has been converted into living
quarters since the dwelling's original construction, shall be considered as
floor area until two years after its date of completion or occupancy is issued
by the town.
      (5)   No home-based business retail transaction may be conducted in any
structure or accessory building other than the residential dwelling.
      (6)   All business activities comply with any relevant local, state, and
federal regulations with respect to the use, storage, or disposal of any
corrosive, combustible, or other hazardous or flammable materials or liquids.
      (7)   No equipment or process shall be used in the home occupation that
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference
detectable to the normal senses off the lot. In the case of electrical
interference, no equipment or process shall be used that creates visual or
audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises, or
causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises.
      (8)   Occupations that generate greater volumes of traffic than would
normally be expected in a residential neighborhood are prohibited.
      (9)   Parking related to the business activities of the home-based
business may not be greater in volume than would normally be expected at a
similar residence where no business is conducted. The parking of vehicles and
trailers shall conform to the parking requirements of the zoning district where
the home-based business is located. Vehicles and trailers, if so permitted in
the applicable zoning district, used in connection with the business must be
parked in legal parking spaces that are not located within the right-of-way, on
or over a sidewalk, or on any unimproved surfaces at the residence.
      (10)   The parking or storage of heavy equipment at the business which is
visible from the street or neighboring property is prohibited. For purposes of
this division the term HEAVY EQUIPMENT means commercial, industrial, or
agricultural vehicles, equipment, or machinery.
(2000 Code, § 66-1011) (Ord. 75-01, passed 7-14-1975; Ord. 2021-05, passed - -
2021; Ord. 2022-01, passed - -2022) Penalty, see §
157.999
TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND ANTENNAS
§ 157.545 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   The intent of this subchapter is to provide standards and regulations
for the location of telecommunications antennas and towers in the town. These
regulations and requirements are adopted with the intent and purpose of:
      (1)   Protecting the health, safety and welfare of the public;
      (2)   Of encouraging users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the
extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal;
      (3)   Of protecting residential areas, scenic roads, historical sites and
other land uses from potential adverse impact of antennas and towers;
       (4)   To minimize adverse visual impact of antennas and towers through
careful design, siting and landscaping;
      (5)   To encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a
way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas;
      (6)   To promote and strongly encourage shared use (collocation) of
existing towers and antenna support structures as a primary option rather than
construction of additional single-use towers;
      (7)   To avoid potential damage to property caused by antennas and towers
by ensuring the structures are soundly and carefully designed, constructed,
modified and maintained;
      (8)   To ensure that antennas and towers are compatible with surrounding
land uses; and
      (9)   To enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunication
services to provide the services to the community quickly, effectively and
efficiently.
   (B)   The Town Council hereby finds and declares that the concept of the
public welfare is broad and inclusive. The values it represents are spiritual
as well as physical, aesthetic as well as monetary. It is within the power of
this Town Council to determine that the community should be beautiful as well
as healthy, spacious as well as clean, well balanced as well as carefully
patrolled. All applicants for a special permit for telecommunication towers
shall have the burden of demonstrating that the proposed placement of
telecommunication towers and antennas is to the extent possible, consistent
with the preservation of the aesthetics of the community.
(2000 Code, § 66-1029) (Ord. 99-01, passed 3-23-1999)
§ 157.546 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANTENNA. Any exterior apparatus designed to transmit or receive
communications as authorized by the FCC. The term ANTENNA shall not include
satellite earth stations used to receive direct-to-home satellite services as
defined in 47 U.S.C. § 303(v). An array of antennas, installed at one time and
designed as a single, integrated system, shall be considered as a single
antenna.
   ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE. Any building or other structure other than a
tower, which can be used for the location of an antenna. An ANTENNA SUPPORT
STRUCTURE shall be referred as to as a UTILIZED ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE if it
is or has been used for the location of an antenna.
   CAMOUFLAGED ANTENNA AND/OR TOWER. A wireless communications antenna and/or
tower designed to unobtrusively blend into the existing surroundings and be
disguised to not have the appearance of a wireless communications antenna and/
or tower. CAMOUFLAGED ANTENNAS AND/OR TOWERS on buildings must be disguised to
appear as an accessory structure that is normally associated with the principal
use occupying the property. CAMOUFLAGED ANTENNAS AND/OR TOWERS must be
disguised to blend in with other facilities on the property or existing
vegetation, such as a tower constructed in the form and shape of a tree to be
part of a forested area, or an antenna and/or tower constructed to be a
component of a bell, clock or water tower on sites with compatible buildings or
a component of a church steeple on sites with churches. Surface finish, paint
and/or markings alone are insufficient to qualify for a determination as a
CAMOUFLAGED ANTENNA AND/OR TOWER.
   COLLOCATION. The process of locating two or more antennas on an existing or
proposed tower or antenna support structure.
   ENGINEER. Any engineer licensed by the state. Radio-frequency engineers do
not have to be licensed by the state, however, for purposes of this subchapter,
if their qualifications include specific experience or employment in the
telecommunications industry in a professional technical capacity.
   MODIFY. Includes all structural changes to a tower other than routine
maintenance, including, without limitation, structural modifications,
rebuilding or relocating on the same parcel. MODIFY does not include adding
additional or different antennas or deleting or removing antennas.
      (1)   The structural changes shall be subject to the requirements
concerning MODIFIED TOWERS or MODIFICATION TO TOWERS if:
         (a)   They are made to accommodate collocation; and
         (b)   After the changes, the tower will not exceed 40 feet over the
tower’s originally approved height.
      (2)   If the structural changes do not meet the requirements of the
preceding division, they shall be subject to the requirements of this section
concerning new towers or the construction of towers.
   MONOPOLE TOWER. A tower consisting of a single pole or spine self supported
by a permanent foundation and constructed without guy wires and ground anchors.
   TOWER. A lattice, guyed or monopole structure constructed from grade which
supports antennas. The term TOWER shall not include the singular use as a
amateur radio operator’s equipment, as licensed by the FCC, or antenna support
structures and/or towers which are less than 50 feet in height and are used
only to support antennas which receive, but do not transmit television signals.
   TOWER CLUSTERING. The location of two or more towers on a parcel of
property.
(2000 Code, § 66-1030) (Ord. 99-01, passed 3-23-1999)
§ 157.547 LOCATION PRIORITY.
   (A)   It is recognized that different wireless telecommunication services
and providers have distinct geographical areas in which they must be located to
provide their service, but it is also recognized that there is usually some
flexibility in the type of antenna and type of support structure on which the
antenna is to be located. Therefore, all antennas and towers subject to this
section shall to the extent possible be located in accordance with the
following prioritization of types of facilities and sites.
   (B)   Priority of facilities or sites:
      (1)   Antennas on existing towers;
      (2)   Antennas on existing antenna support structures;
      (3)   Antennas on modified or reconstructed towers designed to
accommodate the collocation of additional carriers;
      (4)   Towers and antennas on limited replacement/modified light
standards, power poles or other the antenna support structures in a
nonresidential zoning district; and
      (5)   New construction and new towers.
(2000 Code, § 66-1031) (Ord. 99-01, passed 3-23-1999)
§ 157.548 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   A communication tower, meeting the requirements of this chapter and
specifically §§
157.550 through
157.552 and
157.554 shall be a permitted use of land requiring administrative review and
administrative permit only, through approval by the Town Council. A
communication tower allowed as a permitted use under this section shall be
limited to a maximum of 70 feet in height and shall be a monopole tower.
   (B)   A communication tower which fails to meet the requirements of this
section as a permitted use may be permitted by a conditional use permit, if
issued by the governing body designated to hear and decide special exception or
conditional uses, after review and recommendation by the Planning and Zoning
Board:
      (1)   On property with an industrially or commercially designated land
use and zoning;
      (2)   On property within an urban commerce district or specialized
commerce district;
      (3)   On new structures and replacement structures on electrical
substation properties as long as the new structure is setback at least 75% of
the height away from an existing residential structure and the new structure is
no more than 150 feet in height; and
      (4)   On institutional or government property, where the proposed tower
will serve an overriding public purpose and is needed to support emergency
services.
(2000 Code, § 66-1032) (Ord. 99-01, passed 3-23-1999) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.549 CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT.
   (A)   No person shall erect or modify an antenna or an antenna support
structure, construct a new tower or modify an existing tower without first
obtaining a special use permit pursuant to this section, or an administrative
permit as set forth herein. The Town Council, or body designated to hear and
decide special/conditional use permit requests, is under no obligation to
approve a special use permit application unless and until the applicant meets
their burden of demonstrating that the proposed use will not adversely affect
the public interest, the proposed use is consistent with the comprehensive plan
and the proposed use is compatible with the land use in the surrounding area.
The Town Council’s or designee’s determination shall be based on substantial
and competent evidence, documentation and testimony received at the public
hearing, including, but not limited to, the recommendation of the town planning
staff, the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Board, information and
recommendation of town engineering consultants, information from the applicant
and any party in support or opposition, or their respective representatives.
   (B)   In addition, the Town Council or designee shall consider the following
factors in determining whether to issue a special use permit for a new tower,
although the Town Council or designee may waive or reduce the burden on the
applicant of one or more of these criteria if the Council or designee concludes
that the goals of this section are better served thereby:
      (1)   Height of the proposed tower; surrounding topography; surrounding
tree coverage and foliage; nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties;
proposed ingress and egress; and availability of suitable existing towers and
other structures as set forth in this section;
      (2)   Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential
subdivision boundaries, including the amount of the tower that can be viewed
from surrounding residential zones in conjunction with its proximity (distance)
to the residential zone, mitigation landscaping, existing character of
surrounding area, or other visual options proposed by the applicant;
      (3)   Proximity of the tower to public and private airports, including
but not limited to the effect on the airport traffic pattern and visual and
instrument approaches, orientation to the runway heading and type and volume of
aircraft traffic operating at the airport;
      (4)   Design of the tower, with particular reference to design
characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual
obtrusiveness, including the extent to which the tower is designed and located
to be compatible with the nature and character of other land uses and/or with
the environment within which the tower proposes to locate, the tower may be
placed, designed or camouflaged to assist with mitigating the overall aesthetic
impact of a tower;
      (5)   Surrounding topography, tree coverage and foliage;
      (6)   Proposed ingress and egress; and
      (7)   No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates
to the reasonable satisfaction of the Town Council that no existing tower or
antenna structure can accommodate the applicant’s proposed antenna. Evidence
submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower or antenna support structure
can accommodate the applicant’s proposed antenna must be submitted with the
application and may consist of any of the following:
         (a)   No existing towers or antenna support structures are located
within the geographic area required to meet applicant’s engineering
requirements;
         (b)   Existing towers or antenna support structures are not of
sufficient height to meet applicant’s engineering requirements;
         (c)   Existing towers or antenna support structures do not have
sufficient structural strength to supports applicant’s proposed antenna and
related equipment;
         (d)   The applicant’s proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic
interference with the antenna on the existing towers or antenna support
structure, or the antenna on the existing towers or antenna support structures
would cause interference with the applicant’s proposed antenna;
         (e)   The fees, costs or contractual provisions required by the owner
in order to share an existing tower or antenna support structure or to adapt an
existing tower or antenna support structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs
exceeding new tower development are presumed to be unreasonable; and
         (f)   The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors
that render existing towers and antenna support structures unsuitable.
(2000 Code, § 66-1033) (Ord. 99-01, passed 3-23-1999) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.550 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   The following development standards shall govern the application,
consideration and issuance of administrative and special use permits.
   (B)   The applicant shall comply with the following conditions, unless the
applicant can obtain a variance through the Board of Adjustment, after the
variance request is reviewed and receives a recommendation by the Planning and
Zoning Board.
      (1)   Setbacks and location requirements. The following matrix, showing
separation requirements shall apply to all towers, at a minimum, whether a
permitted use or special exception. For those towers which do not abut
residentially zoned or used lands, the towers shall be setback from the
property lines a distance equal to one feet for every two feet of tower height,
but in no case less than the underlying setback, whichever is greater. In
zoning districts which require special or conditional use permit, additional
setbacks may be required to satisfy safety and aesthetic concerns. Structural
support devices such as peripheral anchors, guy wires or other supporting
devices shall be located pursuant to the district setbacks, but in no event
closer than ten feet from any property line of the parent parcel, where there
are no setbacks required. A minimum setback of ten feet from all overhead
utility lines shall be required.
      (2)   Setbacks from parent property lines. Tower setbacks shall be
measured from the base of the tower to the property lines of the parent parcel.
The tower owner shall provide a lease or deed or recorded fall zone easement
covering the certified fall radius, and all towers shall be located on a parcel
in a manner that in the event of collapse, the tower structure and its
supporting devices shall be contained within the confines of the property lines
of the parent parcel. The fall radius of the tower shall be determined and
certified by a state licensed engineer.
      (3)   Location requirements relative to off-site uses and zoning. Towers
shall meet the locational requirements set forth in the table below from
adjacent and surrounding properties of the parent tract. If the owner of the
property where the tower is to be located owns residential units thereon or on
surrounding properties (or if the properties are owned by his or her parents or
children and they have consented in writing), those units shall not be taken
into consideration when calculating the setback and locational requirements in
this section.
 
Tower Locational Requirements
Separation from                         Distance
Any adjacent or surrounding residential 100% of tower height or 50 feet which
dwelling                                ever is greater
Any adjacent or surrounding             100% of tower height or 50 feet
residentially zoned land                whichever is greater
Any government used land                100% of tower height
Public road rights-of-way               100% of tower height
Designated scenic roadways              100% of tower height
 
      (4)   Collocation. All new towers, whether monopole, lattice or guyed,
shall be designed and constructed to allow collocation of a minimum of two
antennas for monopoles and four antennas for other towers. The tower owner/
operator shall submit executed collocation agreements or binding letters of
intent for each collocation as support for granting the permit to locate the
tower, if any. Collocation agreements or binding letters of intent shall be in
a form acceptable to the Town Attorney that shall provide that each of the
additional users will be utilizing the tower upon its completion.
      (5)   Tower clustering. Application for tower clustering shall be filed
with the town and shall include a site plan showing the location and fall zone
radius of each tower. The town planner shall prepare and forward a
recommendation and supporting documents to the Town Council. The Council may
approve or deny the site for tower clustering by adoption of a resolution,
provided however, if one or more of the towers requires a special use permit,
the resolution of approval shall be subject to issuance of the necessary
special use permit. Unless otherwise approved by the Town Council, towers shall
be separated from each other a minimum distance equal to the certified fall
radius.
      (6)   Landscaping and buffers. Landscaping of tower electrical control
equipment facilities/structures and compound shall be required. A planting area
a minimum or four feet wide, around the outside perimeter of the fence around
the tower compound shall be established. The area shall be planted with a hedge
of native or ornamental evergreen shrubs at least 30 inches in height at
planting and capable of growing to at least 40 inches in height within the
first growing season. Plants shall be mulched using two inches of material. A
drip or low volume/pressure irrigation system or other alternative means of
insuring hearty growth of vegetation shall be utilized. These plant materials
shall be designed and placed to effectively screen the view of the tower
compound from adjacent property. Ornamental trees may be included in the design
to achieve this goal. Landscape buffering on the parent parcel shall be
installed along the portion of the parent parcel boundaries between the tower
and off-site residentially zoned property as necessary to buffer residential
property when vegetative buffers are non-existent or provide insufficient
screening. Plant materials shall be designed and placed to screen the view of
the tower compound. Ornamental trees may be included in the design to achieve
this goal. Existing mature tree growth and natural landforms on the property
shall be protected and preserved to the maximum extent possible. New trees
shall be a minimum of two inches D.B.H. and shall be container grown. Shrubs
shall be a minimum of 18 through 24 inches in height and shall be in a three
gallon container. Plants shall be mulched using two inches of material. All
plant material shall be guaranteed for two years following final inspection and
approval. Replacements shall be made annually and coordinated with the town
planner or other Town Council designee. The Town Council may require a greater
buffer where appropriate or waive or modify any or all of these requirements if
the goals of this section would be better served thereby.
      (7)   Lighting. Towers shall not be artificially lighted except as
required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) or other applicable
authority. If lighting is required, the town shall review the available
lighting alternatives and approve the design that will cause the least
disturbance to the surrounding views, including but not limited to installation
of bottom shielding on all lights.
      (8)   Color. Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish, or
concrete, or be painted a color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness, subject
to any applicable standards of the FAA, except for camouflaged towers. The
wiring conduit and coaxial cable shall be designed or painted to reduce visual
obtrusiveness.
      (9)   Buildings. At the tower site, the design of the building and
related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors,
textures, screening and landscaping that will blend with the tower facilities
to the natural setting and built environment. Outdoor storage is not permitted
at a tower site.
      (10)   Antenna. If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a
tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be
of a color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the
supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as
visually unobtrusive as possible.
      (11)   Signage. No signage shall be allowed on any tower, except as
required for public safety purposes or by the Federal Communication Commission
(FCC).
      (12)   Security fencing. Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not
less than six feet in height and shall also be equipped with an appropriate
anti-climbing device; provided however, that the Town Council may waive the
requirements, as it deems appropriate. The use of barbed wire is prohibited.
      (13)   Inventory of existing sites. In order to encourage collocation of
facilities, the town shall maintain a current map of all existing towers and
all antenna support structures on which an antenna has been located. To prepare
and maintain a map, at the time of its first application after the effective
date of this subchapter, each applicant for an antenna and/or new tower shall
provide to the town planner an update of the inventory of the communications
company’s existing towers and antennas and approved towers that are either
within town or within one-quarter mile of the border thereof, including
municipal boundaries, including specific information about the location
(including longitude, latitude and global positioning system location), height
and design of each tower. The town may share the information with other
applicants applying for administrative approvals or special use permits under
this subchapter or other organizations seeking to locate towers or antennas
within the jurisdiction of the Town Council, provided however, that the town is
not, by sharing the information, in any way representing or warranting that the
sites are available or suitable.
      (14)   Federal requirements. All towers must meet or exceed current
standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC and any other agency of the
federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If, upon
inspection, the Town Council concludes that a tower fails to comply with the
codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon
notice being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have 30 days
to bring the tower into compliance with the standards. If the owner fails to
bring the tower into compliance within the 30 days, the Council may remove the
tower at the expense of the owner and/or landowner.
      (15)   Building codes; safety standards. To ensure the structural
integrity of towers, the owner of a tower constructed after the effective date
of this subchapter shall ensure that it is constructed and maintained in
compliance with EIA/TIA 222-E Standard, as published by the Electronic
Industries Association, as amended from time to time. If, upon inspection, the
Town Council concludes that a tower fails to comply with the codes and
standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice
being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have 30 days to bring
the tower into compliance with the standards. If the owner fails to bring the
tower into compliance within the 30 days, the Town Council may remove the tower
at the expense of the owner and/or landowner.
      (16)   Public notice. For purposes of this section, any conditional/
special use permit for a tower shall require a 15 day public notice to all
abutting property owners and all owners of property that are located within 500
feet of the perimeter of the parent parcel upon which proposed communication
tower is located. Municipalities within one mile of the proposed site and
owners of private and public airports within a two mile radius of the proposed
site shall also receive notification Failure of a municipality to respond
within 30 days after notification shall be interpreted as no objection.
(2000 Code, § 66-1034) (Ord. 99-01, passed 3-23-1999) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.551 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   An applicant requesting a new tower permit, a permit to modify an existing
tower or a permit for a new antenna on an antenna support structure or a tower
shall include the following:
   (A)   Information required. Each applicant requesting a special use permit
shall submit a complete application as set forth herein, including a scaled
site plan and a scaled elevation view and other supporting drawings,
calculations and other documentation, signed and sealed by appropriate licensed
professionals, showing the location (including longitude, latitude and global
positioning system location) and dimensions of all improvements, including
information concerning topography, radio frequency coverage, geographical area
required to meet applicant’s engineering requirements (applicant’s search
ring), tower height requirements, setbacks, drives, parking, fencing,
landscaping, adjacent uses and other information deemed by the Town Council to
be necessary to assess compliance with this section. Any information of an
engineering nature that the applicant submits, whether civil, mechanical or
electrical shall be certified by a licensed professional engineer. For new
towers only, a site plan, based upon the town’s requirements, drawn to scale
shall be required with the application. The Town Clerk shall provide a
checklist of items required for the site plan. The site plan shall also include
the criteria pursuant to this section;
   (B)   The height of the proposed or modified tower or antenna support
structure (including the antenna);
   (C)   For new towers only, the location of the proposed new tower, antenna
support structure or modified tower, placed upon an aerial photograph
possessing a scale of not more than one inch equals 660 feet, indicating all
adjacent land uses within a radius of 1,000 feet from all property lines of the
proposed tower location site. For a permit to modify an existing tower, written
documentation that the modified tower can accommodate collocation and will not
exceed 40 feet over the tower’s existing height. For a new antenna on an
antenna support structure or tower, a description of the antenna and antenna
support structure with technical reasons concerning its design;
   (D)   For new towers only, the names, addresses and telephone numbers of all
owners of the proposed tower and the location of other towers or usable antenna
support structures within one-half mile radius of the proposed new tower site
and within the geographical area required to meet applicant’s engineering
requirements (applicant’s search ring), including property zones and property
that is owned by a government entity within one mile radius of the proposed
site;
   (E)   For new towers only, written approval or a statement of no objection
from the FCC, FAA and other state and federal government agencies that regulate
towers. In addition, all applications for new towers within a two mile radius
of a public or private airport shall demonstrate that the tower location will
not interfere or obstruct the flight path of the airport;
   (F)   For new towers only, written documentation demonstrating that the
applicant made diligent efforts for permission to collocate on existing or
approved towers or usable antenna support structures or locate on government
owned property located within the applicant’s search ring and within a one mile
radius of the proposed site;
   (G)   A description of the tower, or antenna and antenna support structure
with technical reasons concerning its design;
   (H)   For new and replacement towers only, written documentation from a
qualified radio frequency engineer that the construction and placement of the
tower will not interfere with public safety communication and the usual and
customary transmission or reception of radio, television, or other
communication service;
   (I)   Written, technical evidence from an engineer(s) that the proposed
antenna tower or structure meets the structural requirements standards as
defined in this section. The applicant is required to submit the necessary
building plans to the Building Department;
   (J)   For new towers only, if volatile, flammable, explosive or hazardous
material (such as LP gas, propane, gasoline, natural gas, corrosive or other
dangerous chemicals) except standard battery back up systems typically used in
telecommunication industry, are present on the site or in proximity thereto,
written technical evidence from a qualified engineer(s) acceptable to the Fire
Marshal and the Building Official that the material is properly stored
consistent with applicable codes and does not pose an unreasonable risk of
explosion, fire or other danger to life or property;
   (K)   For new towers only, 20 copies of the final written report of all
experts which the applicant will rely upon to support its application. The
applicant may supplement the reports during the public hearing process to
address additional issued raised at the public hearings; and
   (L)   Payment of all permit fees, as well as other fees and charges assessed
by the town (e.g. fees for building permits, site plan review and the like).
The applicant shall pay any reasonable additional costs incurred by the town in
processing the application including, without limitation, compensation for
engineers (including radio frequency engineers) or other technical consultants
retained by the town.
(2000 Code, § 66-1035) (Ord. 99-01, passed 3-23-1999) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.552 ADMINISTRATIVE PERMIT.
   (A)   No person shall erect or modify an antenna on an antenna support
structure, construct a new tower as a permitted use or modify an existing tower
without first obtaining an administrative permit pursuant to this section. The
Town Council shall issue administrative permits consistent with the
requirements to this section and this subchapter. An application for an
administrative permit shall be in writing and in the form and content necessary
to justify the permit. Within 15 days of receiving an application or a
supplement to a pending application, the town planner shall determine and
notify the applicant whether the information in the application is sufficient
or shall request any additional information needed. The applicant shall either
provide the additional information requested or shall notify the town planner
in writing that the information will not be supplied and the reasons therefor.
If the applicant does not respond to the request for additional information
within 60 days, the application shall be deemed to be withdrawn. Within 30 days
after acknowledging receipt of a sufficient application, or of receiving
notification that the information will not be supplied, the town planner shall
have the Town Clerk place the application on the next available Council agenda.
   (B)   The following uses may be approved in writing by the Town Council or
designee after submission of a complete application, an administrative review
and issuance of an administrative permit:
      (1)   Towers allowed as a permitted use;
      (2)   Installing an antenna on an existing structure other than a tower
(such as a building, light pole, water tower or other freestanding
nonresidential structure) that is 50 feet in height or greater, so long as the
additional antenna adds no more than 40 feet to the height of the originally
approved structure;
      (3)   Installing an antenna on any existing tower of any height,
including the placement of additional equipment buildings or other supporting
equipment used in connection with the antenna, so long as the addition of the
antenna does not add to the height of the originally approved tower;
      (4)   Replacement towers, antenna support structures or tower
modifications meeting the requirements of this section. A communication tower
may be modified or reconstructed to accommodate the collocation of an
additional communication antenna by administrative permit and shall be subject
to the following provisions:
         (a)   The modified or replacement structure shall be either of the
same tower type as the existing communication tower or a monopole tower that is
replacing an existing lattice or guyed tower, as long as the existing height is
exceeded;
         (b)   An existing communication tower may be modified or rebuilt to a
taller height, not to exceed 20 feet over the tower’s original height, to
accommodate the collocation of additional communication antennas; and
         (c)   The modified or replacement structure shall be exempt from any
of the separation requirements set forth in §
157.550.
      (5)   An existing transmission line tower or pole-type antenna support
structure (such as utility structure/pole) may be modified or replaced by
administrative permit to allow for the collocation of additional antenna(s),
providing the following criteria are met. If the following criteria can not be
met, an existing pole-type antenna support structure may be modified or
replaced by special use permit:
         (a)   The communication antenna attached to the existing electrical
transmission tower or pole-type structure or replacement monopole shall not
extend above the highest point of the pole-type structure or replacement
monopole more than 20 feet, as measured from the height of the original pole-
type structure and the modified or replaced structure shall not exceed a height
of 150 feet;
         (b)   If the resulting structure/tower adds additional height over the
original pole-type structure, the closest residential structure shall be
located a distance of at least 150% the height of the structure/tower from the
base of the pole-type structure or replacement tower;
         (c)   If no additional height over the height of the original pole-
type structure is added by either the attachment of the communication antenna
to the existing pole-type structure, or the replacement tower including the
communication antenna, the structure/tower is permitted with no additional
distance separation or setback from residential structures over that which was
provided by the original pole-type structure;
         (d)   The communication antenna and support structure comply with all
applicable FCC and FAA regulations;
         (e)   The communication antenna, pole-type structure and/or
replacement monopole tower comply with all applicable building codes; and
         (f)   Pole-type structures within public rights-of-way, or used for
power distribution shall be eligible for use under this division.
Notwithstanding the foregoing sentence, pole-type structures within front yard,
side yard or rear yard residential subdivision easements are not eligible for
use under this division.
(2000 Code, § 66-1036) (Ord. 99-01, passed 3-23-1999) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.553 ABANDONMENT OF COMMUNICATION TOWERS.
   (A)   Compelling public interest. The Town Council finds and declares that,
because of the national public policy of ensuring that the wireless industry
and its evolving new technologies are accommodated notwithstanding the
undesirable effects that communication towers may have on the aesthetics of
communities and neighborhoods, there is a compelling public interest in
ensuring that communication towers are promptly disassembled, dismantled and
removed once they are no longer being used. Further, the Town Council finds
that there is substantial risk that towers may cease being used in large
numbers if there is a concentration or consolidation of competitors within the
industry or if even newer technologies arise, obviating the need for towers.
   (B)   Abandonment.
      (1)   In the event the use of any communication tower has been
discontinued for a period of 180 consecutive days, the tower shall be deemed
abandoned. Determination of the date of abandonment shall be made by the town
planner, who shall have the right to request documentation and/or affidavits
from the communication tower owner/operator regarding the issue of tower usage.
Failure or refusal for any reason by the owner/operator to respond within 20
days to a request shall constitute prima facie evidence that the communication
tower has been abandoned. Upon a determination of abandonment and notice
thereof to the owner/operator, the owner/operator of the tower shall have an
additional 180 days within which to:
         (a)   Reactivate the use of the tower or transfer the tower to another
owner/operator who makes actual use of the tower within the 180 day period; or
         (b)   Dismantle and remove the tower.
      (2)   At the earliest of the 181 days from the date of abandonment
without reactivation or upon completion of dismantling and removal, any
approval for the tower will automatically expire.
   (C)   Duty to remove abandoned towers.
      (1)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (B) above, upon
abandonment of a communication tower as determined under division (B) above by
the town planner and the failure or refusal by the owner/operator of the tower
to either reactivate the tower or dismantle and remove it within 180 days as
required by division (B) above, the following persons or entities (the
“responsible parties”) shall have the duty jointly and severally to remove the
abandoned tower:
         (a)   The owner of the abandoned tower (and, if different, the
operator of the abandoned tower);
         (b)   The owner of the land upon which the abandoned tower is located;
         (c)   The lessee, if any, of the land upon which the abandoned tower
is located;
         (d)   The sublessee or sublessee(s), if any, of the land upon which
the abandoned tower is located;
         (e)   Any communication service provider who or which by ceasing to
utilize the tower, or otherwise failing to operate any of its transmitters or
antennas on the tower for which it leased space or purchased the right to space
on the tower for its transmitters or antennas and the ceasing or failure to
utilize the tower in fact caused the tower to become abandoned;
         (f)   Any persons to whom or entity to which there has been
transferred or assigned any license issued by the Federal Communication
Commission and under which the tower owner/operator operated the tower;
         (g)   Any person or entity which has purchased all or a substantial
portion of the assets of the tower owner/operator;
         (h)   Any entity which has merged with, or which has arisen or
resulted from a merger with, the tower owner/operator;
         (i)   Any person or entity which has acquired the owner or the
operator of the abandoned tower;
         (j)   Any parent or subsidiary of any of the foregoing which happens
to be a corporation;
         (k)   Any managing partner of any of the foregoing which happens to be
a limited partnership; and
         (l)   Any partner of any of the foregoing which happens to be a
general partnership.
      (2)   The abandoned tower shall be removed on or before the 90 day after
receipt by the responsible party or parties of a notice from the town planner
ordering its removal. The duty imposed by this division shall supersede and
otherwise override any conflicting provision of any contract, agreement, lease,
sublease, license, franchise or other instrument entered into or issued on or
after January 1, 1999.
(2000 Code, § 66-1037) (Ord. 99-01, passed 3-23-1999) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.554 TOWERS ALLOWED AS PERMITTED USES OR SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS OR CONDITIONAL
USES IN THE FOLLOWING ZONING DISTRICT CLASSIFICATIONS.
   Due to the size limitations of the town, the configurations and land
constraints of the town, the types of residential uses, no towers are permitted
in any residentially zoned districts or any lands which residential uses
approved by special exception or conditional use.
   (A)   Towers and monopoles not exceeding 70 feet in height are permitted in
any of the following districts:
 
M-1 Industrial
Commercial Parkway
C-2 General Commercial
 
   (B)   Towers and monopoles, exceeding 70 feet in height, are permitted as
conditional uses/special exceptions meeting the criteria found herein, after
review by the Planning and Zoning Board and approval by the Board of Adjustment
or Town Council:
 
M-1 Industrial
C-P Commercial Parkway
C-2 General Commercial
 
   (C)   Any tower or monopole, regardless of the height, must be approved as a
conditional use/special exception for any of the following districts. Setbacks
in the these districts are greater than provided elsewhere, due to the close
proximity to residential areas as provided for in the matrix:
 
C-1 Neighborhood Commercial
 
   (D)   Towers and antennas are not permitted in any residential zone within
the town.
   (E)   Camouflage towers are permissible uses in all industrial, commercial
or institutional districts and by conditional use in R-A RM-2, RM-3, TR-1, TRC
and TTP.
   (F)   Modification of any tower sites in any zoning district shall require a
conditional use.
(2000 Code, § 66-1038) (Ord. 99-01, passed 3-23-1999) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.555 EXPECTATIONS AND APPLICABILITY.
   Except as provided below, these provisions shall apply throughout the
corporate limits of the town and no communication tower or antenna shall be
permitted except in compliance with these provisions:
   (A)   Any communication tower or antenna that is owned and operated by a
federally licensed amateur radio operator or is used exclusively for “receive
only” antennas;
   (B)   Any communication antenna which is not attached to a communication
tower or building which is accessory to any commercial, industrial,
institutional, multi-family or public utility structure provided that:
      (1)   The communication antenna does not exceed 20 feet above the highest
point of the structure or the height limitation for the district, whichever is
greater but not more that 60 feet in zoning district without height
limitations. This shall include ground mounted satellite dish antennas which
shall be regulated as accessory structures;
      (2)   The communication antenna complies with all applicable FCC and FAA
regulations; and
      (3)   The communication antenna complies with applicable building codes.
   (C)   Temporary telecommunications which comply with all applicable FCC
regulations.
(2000 Code, § 66-1039) (Ord. 99-01, passed 3-23-1999) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.556 TOWN OWNED OR GOVERNMENT LANDS.
   The town may authorize the use of town property pursuant to the town’s
charter and codes. Telecommunication facilities and telecommunication support
structures shall be encouraged to locate on public property, including the
right-of-way, when appropriate or necessary for the safety, health and welfare
of the community.
(2000 Code, § 66-1040) (Ord. 99-01, passed 3-23-1999)
§ 157.557 FEES.
   (A)   In addition to the schedule of fees for any development order or
permit, the following schedule applies to all applications for towers, whether
by administrative permit or special/conditional use:
 
Monopoles under 70 feet $250
Monopoles over 70 feet  $350
All other towers        $500
 
   (B)   Applicants are responsible for all fees directly associated with the
processing of their requests, including advertisements, consultant review fees,
staff time, notifications and the like.
(2000 Code, § 66-1041) (Ord. 99-01, passed 3-23-1999) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.558 STRUCTURAL REQUIREMENTS.
   All towers must be designed and certified by an engineer, licensed in the
state, to be structurally sound and, at a minimum, in conformance with the
town’s Building Code, and any other standards outlined in this subchapter. All
towers in operation shall be fixed to land with the exception of temporary
telecommunications towers.
(2000 Code, § 66-1042) (Ord. 99-01, passed 3-23-1999) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.559 TOWER SEPARATION REQUIREMENTS.
   All towers shall be separated from any other existing or proposed tower by a
minimum of 3,000 feet, unless the towers are determined to be necessary to meet
the needs of the local government, as determined by the Town Council. The
applicant must show, by aerial photo or other tower inventory map, the location
of all towers within 3,000 feet of their proposed tower.
(2000 Code, § 66-1043) (Ord. 99-01, passed 3-23-1999) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.560 METHOD OF DETERMINING TOWER HEIGHT.
   Measurement of tower height for the purpose of determining compliance with
all requirements of this section shall be taken from grade and shall include
the tower structure itself and the base pad. Height shall be the vertical
distance from the grade to the top of the tower structure, and shall include
all appurtenances and antennas.
(2000 Code, § 66-1044) (Ord. 99-01, passed 3-23-1999) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.561 ACCESS.
   All parcels upon which towers are located must provide access to at least
one parking space on the same site on which the tower is constructed.
(2000 Code, § 66-1045) (Ord. 99-01, passed 3-23-1999) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.562 CERTIFICATIONS AND INSPECTIONS.
   All tower owners shall submit a certification regarding the structural
integrity of the tower every five years from the date of permit issuance for
monopole towers and every two years for all other towers. The owner may be
required by the town to submit more frequent certifications should there be
reason to believe that the structural and electrical integrity of the tower has
been jeopardized. The town or its agents shall have authority to enter onto the
property upon which a tower is located, between the inspections and
certifications required herein, to inspect the tower for purpose of determining
whether it complies with the standard building code and all other construction
standards provided by the city’s code, federal and state law. The town reserves
the right to conduct the inspections at any time upon reasonable notice to the
owner. All expenses related to the inspections by the town shall be borne by
the owner.
(2000 Code, § 66-1046) (Ord. 99-01, passed 3-23-1999) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for
which no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions
of §
10.99.
   (B)   Site development plans; §§
157.135 through
157.151.
      (1)   Any person, whether as owner, leaseholder, principal, agent,
employee or otherwise, who violates any of the provisions of §§
157.135 through
157.151, or permits any violation to continue, or otherwise fails to comply
with the requirements of §§
157.135 through
157.151 or of any plan or statement submitted and approved under the provisions
of §§
157.135 through
157.151, shall be guilty of an ordinance violation and subject to prosecution
as provided for in the town code. Each day the violation continues shall be
considered a separate offense. At the option of the town, any violation may be
processed through the town’s Code Enforcement Board.
      (2)   Nothing herein contained shall prevent the town from taking other
lawful action, including, but not limited to, resorting to equitable action, as
is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. 2002-03, passed 6-25-2002)
CHAPTER 158: VACATION RENTAL CODE
Section
General Provisions
   
158.001   Vacation rentals, authority, scope and purpose
   
158.002   Findings of facts
   
158.003   Definitions
   
158.004   Enforcement
   
158.005   Appeals
   
158.006   Construction of code
Vacation Rental Registration
   
158.020   Registration required
   
158.021   Vacation rental registration
   
158.022   Modification/change of ownership of vacation rental registration
   
158.023   Duration
   
158.024   Renewal
   
158.025   Inspection of vacation rentals
   
158.026   Sale of vacation rental property
   
158.027   Vested rights/waiver/estoppel
   
158.028   False information
   
158.029   Effective date for existing vacation rentals
   
158.030   Duties of vacation rental owner or responsible party
Standards and Requirements for Vacation Rentals
   
158.040   Generally
   
158.041   Minimum safety and operational requirements
   
158.042   Maximum occupancy based on site capacity/limitations/grandfathering
   
158.043   Parking, solid waste disposal, legal compliance, evacuations,
miscellaneous provisions
   
158.044   Required local information provided in a vacation rental
   
158.045   Minimum life/safety requirements
Exemptions
   
158.060   Exemption for pre-existing rental agreements
   
158.061   Exemption for owner occupied vacation rentals
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 158.001 VACATION RENTALS, AUTHORITY, SCOPE AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   This chapter is enacted under the home rule power of the Town of Palm
Shores in the interest of the health, peace, safety and general welfare. This
chapter may be referred to as the "Town of Palm Shores Vacation Rental Code."
   (B)   Florida Statutes § 509.013 provides a distinction between "transient
public lodging establishments" which are rented, or advertised or held out for
rental to guests more than three times in a calendar year for periods of less
than 30 days or one calendar month, whichever is less; and "nontransient public
lodging establishments" which are rented, or advertised or held out for rental
to guests for periods of at least 30 days or one calendar month, whichever is
less.
   (C)   Florida Statutes § 509.242(1)(c) further provides for a subset of
transient public lodging establishments, called "vacation rental" which is any
unit or group of units in a condominium or cooperative or any individually or
collectively owned single-family, two-family, three-family or four- family
house or dwelling unit that is also a transient public lodging establishment,
but that is not a timeshare project.
   (D)   It is the intent of this chapter to regulate vacation rentals as
defined by Florida Statutes, which are located in residential zoning districts
of the Town of Palm Shores, which collectively are referred to herein as
"vacation rentals."
   (E)   In 2011, the Florida Legislature passed House Bill 883, (Section 2011-
119, Laws of Florida), amending F.S. § 509.032(b) to provide that "[a] local
law, ordinance, or regulation may not restrict the use of vacation rentals,
prohibit vacation rentals, or regulate vacation rentals based solely on their
classification, use or occupancy. This paragraph does not apply to any local
law, ordinance, or regulation adopted on or before June 1, 2011."
   (F)   In 2014, the Florida Legislature passed Senate Bill 356 (Section 2014-
71, Laws of Florida), amending that same statute to read "[a] local law,
ordinance, or regulation may not prohibit vacation rentals, or regulate the
duration of frequency of rental of vacation rentals. This paragraph does not
apply to any local law, ordinance, or regulation adopted on or before June 1,
2011."
   (G)   (1)   The official statement of legislative intent of Senate Bill 356
as reflected in the House of Representatives' Final Bill Analysis, dated June
19, 2014, states that the "Effect of the Bill" is as follows:
         "The bill permits local governments to create regulation that
distinguishes vacation rentals from other residential property. In the past,
local government regulations have included noise, parking, registration, and
signage requirements for vacation rentals.
         The bill does not allow local governments to create regulations that
would prohibit vacation rentals or restrict the duration or frequency of
vacation rentals. These types of regulation remain preempted to the state.
         The grandfather provision in existing law exempting any local law,
ordinance, or regulation adopted on or before June 1, 2011, is maintained. Any
local law, ordinance, or regulation passed before that date that prohibits or
restricts vacation rentals based on the duration or frequency may continue to
be enforced."
      (2)   This ode does not prohibit vacation rentals, or the duration or
frequency of vacation rentals, nor is it the intention of the Town of Palm
Shores to do so, but rather this chapter is intended to address life safety and
compatibility concerns in the interests of the health, peace, safety, and
general welfare.
(Ord. 2019-07, passed 11-19-2019)
§ 158.002 FINDINGS OF FACTS.
   Based on information presented to the town by residents of the town and
owners and operators of vacation rentals, the practical first-hand experience
and observations of Town Council Members, common sense deductions of Town
Council members based on long term experiences in the town, information learned
by Town Council members from various residents, information from the U.S.
Census, as well as evidence and testimony presented at public hearings before
the Town Council, and on the Short-Term Rental Housing Restrictions White
Paper, prepared by Robinson & Cole, Attorneys at Law, in 2011, prepared for the
National Association of Realtors®, the Town Council finds:
   (A)   Residents residing within their residential dwellings are inherently
familiar with the local surroundings, local weather disturbances, local
hurricane evacuation plans, and means of egress from their residential
dwellings, thereby minimizing potential risks to themselves and their families.
   (B)   In contrast, transient occupants of vacation rentals, due to their
transient nature, are typically not familiar with local surroundings, local
weather disturbances, local hurricane evacuation plans, and means of egress
from the vacation rentals in which they are staying, thereby increasing
potential risks to themselves and their families, and putting an additional
burden on, and potentially putting at risk, emergency personnel in the event of
an emergency situation.
   (C)   Vacation rentals, left unregulated, can create negative impacts within
residential neighborhoods due to excessive noise, parking and traffic problems,
excessive use and impact on public services and public works, extreme size and/
or greater occupancy.
   (D)   Vacation rentals situated within residential neighborhoods can disturb
the quiet nature and atmosphere of the residential neighborhoods, and the quiet
enjoyment of its residents.
   (E)   Vacation rentals located within established residential neighborhoods
can create negative compatibility impacts relating to extreme noise levels,
late night activities, on-street parking issues and traffic congestion.
   (F)   A residential dwelling is typically the single largest investment a
family will make, with the residents of the residential dwelling desiring the
tranquility and peaceful enjoyment of their neighborhood without excessive
noise and increased parking issues and traffic congestion caused by transient
occupants of vacation rentals.
   (G)   According to the U.S. Census, (2010) the Town of Palm Shores has an
average household size of 2.27 persons.
   (H)   According to the U.S. Census, (2010) the Town of Palm Shores has an
average family size of 2.91 persons.
   (I)   According to the U.S. Census, (2010) the Town of Palm Shores has an
average household size of owner-occupied units of 2.35 persons.
   (J)   According to the U.S. Census, (2010) the Town of Palm Shores has an
average household size of renter-occupied units of 1.92 persons.
   (K)   Vacation rentals situated in residential zoning district can and do
create a great disparity in occupancy.
   (L)   The town finds that such rentals increase the demands upon code
enforcement, police, fire and emergency services beyond those created by non-
vacation rental residential dwelling units.
   (M)   Vacation rental use and longer term residential use and ownership are
generally incompatible, due to rapid turnover associated with short term
vacation residential use and its disruptive effect on the peaceful use and
enjoyment of residential areas.
   (N)   The primary reasonable investment-backed expectation of owners of
residential dwelling units in the town is the use that is a residence and not a
vacation rental.
   (O)   Vacation rentals is a use that is more in nature, that is best
accommodated by hotels, motels and timeshares; and,
   (P)   The regulation of vacation rentals will contribute to the stability of
existing residential neighborhood.
   (Q)   The regulation of vacation rentals will protect visitors to the town
by assuring that fire and safety inspections are periodically conducted, that
they receive necessary information about the dwelling which they have rented,
and notifying them of the owner of the dwelling's obligation to provide for
their safety and welfare.
   (R)   The regulation of vacation rentals is necessary in order to protect
the public health, safety and welfare of the city, its residents and its
visitors.
(Ord. 2019-07, passed 11-19-2019)
§ 158.003 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BEDROOM. Any room in a vacation rental which has a bed or other place for
sleeping and a separate closet that is an integral part of the permanent
construction within the bedroom or an ensuite bathroom, and complies with the
Florida Fire Code and Florida Life Safety Code as a bedroom, but shall not
include a bathroom, a kitchen, a dining room, or any main living area. If a
room has been added, altered, or converted without any required building permit
having been granted, such room shall not be deemed a bedroom. If a previously
approved bedroom exists as of the effective date of this chapter and does not
have a separate closet that is an integral part of the permanent construction
of the structure, but rather utilizes an armoire or other furniture piece for
clothing storage, the requirement for a closet to qualify as a bedroom is
waived.
   LIVING AREA. The area under roof designated primarily for habitation and
specifically excluding garages. As used in this chapter, the total living area
shall be computed as follows: the exterior dimensions of all enclosed spaces
within the framework of the building unit (length and width), multiplied and
totaled, as follows:
      (1)   Any room or area accessible from any other room or area within the
framework shall constitute living area.
      (2)   A room or area must be totally enclosed by walls and covered by
roofing.
      (3)   A room or area must be protected from the elements.
      (4)   A utility room within the framework of the main building and
accessible within the main living area constitutes living area.
   OCCUPANT. Any person who occupies a vacation rental overnight.
   OWNER OCCUPIED. The vacation rental is then occupied by person(s), at the
vacation rental owner's consent, who do not pay rent for the occupancy of the
vacation rental, when such persons are members of the family of the vacation
rental owner.
   PEER-TO-PEER PLATFORM/ENTITY. Any person, service, business, company,
marketplace, or other entity that, for a fee or other consideration, provides
property owners and responsible parties a platform or means to offer vacation
rentals to transient occupant whether through the internet or other means.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY. The owner, or the person designated by the owner of the
vacation rental to be called upon to answer for the maintenance of the vacation
rental and the conduct and acts of vacation occupants of residential
properties.
   TOWN CODE. The Town of Palm Shores Code of Ordinances, Zoning Code, Land
Usage Code, Comprehensive Plan and Future Land Use Map and applicable
resolutions.
   TRANSIENT PUBLIC LODGING ESTABLISHMENTS. Any unit, group of units, dwelling,
building, or group of buildings within a single complex of buildings which is
rented to guests more than three times in a calendar year for periods of less
than 30 days or one calendar month, whichever is less, or which is advertised
or held out to the public as a place regularly rented to guests.
   VACATION RENTAL. Collectively a vacation rental as defined under Florida
Statutes, and any transient public lodging establishment which is located in
the residential zoning districts of the Town of Palm Shores.
   VACATION RENTAL OWNER. The fee simple owner of the vacation rental, whether
an individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, trust, or
other entity. In the event the vacation rental owner is not an individual, the
vacation rental owner shall designate a responsible natural person to perform
the functions and duties of a vacation rental owner herein. The duties and
functions of a vacation rental owner may, at the option of the vacation rental
owner, be performed by an agent of the vacation rental owner, so long as the
vacation rental owner notifies the town in writing, on a form provided by the
town, of the identity and contact information of such agent, and the specific
duties that the agent will be performing for the vacation rental owner. The
vacation rental owner may change the designation of agent at any time through
the filing of a new form and the payment of an administrative fee in an amount
as set by resolution by the Town Council. The vacation rental owner shall be
held responsible for all actions of such designated agent with respect to the
applicable vacation rental.
(Ord. 2019-07, passed 11-19-2019)
§ 158.004 ENFORCEMENT.
   Violations of this chapter shall be enforced as code violations in
accordance with the provisions of F.S. Ch. 162, and the Code of Ordinances, and
through fines in accordance with ordinances and resolutions adopted by the Town
Council.
(Ord. 2019-07, passed 11-19-2019)
§ 158.005 APPEALS.
   Any decision of the Mayor or his or her authorized designee relating to this
chapter shall be rendered in writing in appealable form, and reviewed by the
Town Special Magistrate if a notice by the vacation rental owner or agent is
filed with the Town Clerk within ten days after the action to be reviewed. The
Town Clerk or designee shall place the matter on the agenda of the next
available meeting of the Special Magistrate, but no later than 35 days after
the notice by the vacation rental owner or agent is filed, at which the matter
will be reviewed. The decision of the Special Magistrate shall be final and
shall be rendered in writing in appealable form. Such final decision may be
reviewed as permitted under Florida law.
(Ord. 2019-07, passed 11-19-2019)
§ 158.006 CONSTRUCTION OF CODE.
   This chapter shall be liberally construed to accomplish its purpose of
regulating vacation rentals, protecting the residential character of the
residential zoning districts of the Town of Palm Shores, the health, safety,
and general welfare of its residents and visitors, and the quiet enjoyment by
Palm Shores' residents.
(Ord. 2019-07, passed 11-19-2019
VACATION RENTAL REGISTRATION
§ 158.020 REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   As of January 1, 2020, a vacation rental registration shall be required to
operate a vacation rental within the Town of Palm Shores in the residential
zoning districts, utilizing forms promulgated by the town, electronically or in
hard copy. The town may extend the date that such registration is required by
notice on the town's website should the town not publish forms and fees for
registration by January 1, 2020. Prior to the issuance of a vacation rental
registration, the responsible party has the affirmative duty to ensure that the
dwelling unit and property in or on which the vacation rental is or will be
located, is in full compliance with the appropriate portions of Town Code, the
Florida Building Code, the Florida Administrative Code, and the Florida Fire
Prevention Codes. A separate vacation rental registration shall be required for
each vacation rental. The operation of a vacation rental without registration
after the date registration is required shall be a violation of this chapter,
except in the instance of providing accommodations to fulfill a pre-existing
contract.
(Ord. 2019-07, passed 11-19-2019)
§ 158.021 VACATION RENTAL REGISTRATION.
   (A)   A vacation rental owner, agent, or responsible party, as applicable,
registering a vacation rental with the town shall submit to the town a
completed registration form, utilizing a form promulgated by the town, together
with all applicable registration and inspection fees in the amount set by
resolution of the Town Council.
   (B)   A registration application shall include the following:
      (1)   Full address of the vacation rental property being registered,
along with proof of ownership;
      (2)   Name, address, phone number and e-mail of the property owner;
      (3)   Name, address, e-mail, and emergency contact phone number of
responsible party for the vacation rental, which shall be a 24-hour, seven days
a week contact number;
      (4)   The vacation rental's current and active license number as a
transient public lodging establishment with the Florida Department of Business
and Professional Regulation (DBPR), if the registrant has such license;
      (5)   A copy of the vacation rental's current and active certificate of
registration with the Florida Department of Revenue and Brevard County for
sales and Tourist Development Tax collection, respectively, if the registrant
has such certificates or accounts; unless a peer-to-peer platform entity
through which the vacation rental is booked will be remitting all such taxes
associated with the vacation rental on the responsible party's behalf;
      (6)   Business tax receipt from the Town of Palm Shores, if applicable;
      (7)   Statement attesting to the number of bedrooms and paved off-street
parking spaces available on the property with affirmation that "no on-street
parking" will be allowed;
      (8)   Exterior site sketch. An exterior sketch of the vacation rental
facility shall be provided. The sketch shall show and identify all structures,
pools, spas, hot tubs, fencing, and uses, including areas provided for off-
street parking. For purposes of the sketch, off-street parking spaces shall be
delineated so as to enable a fixed count of the number of spaces provided. At
the option of the vacation rental owner, such sketch may be hand drawn, and
need not be professionally prepared;
      (9)   Interior building sketch by floor. A building sketch by floor shall
be provided, showing a floor layout identifying all bedrooms, other rooms,
exits, hallways, stairways, as applicable. At the option of the vacation rental
owner, such sketch may be hand drawn, and need not be professionally prepared;
      (10)   Acknowledgement signed by the owner, or designated responsible
party, understanding and agreeing to initial and ongoing compliance with the
city's vacation rental regulations and standards contained herein and all other
applicable local, state, and federal laws, regulations, and standards; and
      (11)   The landline telephone number on the main level and in the common
area at the rental with the ability to call 911 as required by §§
158.040 et seq. of this chapter.
   (C)   If a registration form is incomplete, the registrant will be notified
of the deficiency, and be allowed 15 days to provide any missing information.
(Ord. 2019-07, passed 11-19-2019)
§ 158.022 MODIFICATION/CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OF VACATION RENTAL REGISTRATION.
   (A)   An amendment of a vacation rental registration application and
affidavit of compliance shall be required, with payment of the appropriate fee
set by resolution, in the event that any of the following changes to the
vacation rental are proposed:
      (1)   An increase in the number of bedrooms in the vacation rental.
      (2)   An increase or decrease in the number of parking spaces or a change
in the location of parking spaces for the vacation rental.
      (3)   A change in the designated responsible party.
   (B)   A change of ownership shall require a new application and all required
documents including appropriate fees set by resolution.
(Ord. 2019-07, passed 11-19-2019)
§ 158.023 DURATION.
   A vacation rental registration shall be valid for one year after the date of
registration.
(Ord. 2019-07, passed 11-19-2019)
§ 158.024 RENEWAL.
   A vacation rental owner must renew its registration annually prior to the
expiration date of the previous vacation rental registration and is subject to
an annual inspection and applicable fees.
(Ord. 2019-07, passed 11-19-2019)
§ 158.025 INSPECTION OF VACATION RENTALS.
   (A)   Inspection of a vacation rental to verify compliance with the Florida
Building Code, and the Florida Fire and Life Safety Codes which governed at the
time of completion of the subject construction, shall be required subsequent to
the initial registration of the vacation rental, and annually after each
renewal. If instances of noncompliance are found, all such instances of
noncompliance shall be handled as other violations of the Florida Building Code
and Florida Fire and Life Safety Codes are otherwise handled in the city, These
requirements will not be imposed so as to affect contracts that pre-exist the
effective date of this chapter. This inspection fee shall be set by resolution
of the Town Council.
   (B)   Annual inspections to verify compliance with the Florida Building
Code, and the Florida Fire and Life Safety Codes, and the posting of notice
requirements required herein shall be made by the town or designated contractor
through appointment with the vacation rental owner, agent, or responsible
party, as applicable. The annual inspection fee shall be set by resolution of
the Town Council. If a town inspector or designated contractor has made an
appointment with vacation rental owner or agent, as applicable, for an
inspection, and the Town Inspector or designated contractor is unable to
complete the inspection as a result of an action or inaction of the vacation
rental owner or agent, or an occupant of the vacation rental, the vacation
rental owner shall be charged a "re-inspection" fee in an amount set by
resolution of the Town Council to cover the inspection expense incurred. The
re-inspection fee shall be paid prior to scheduling the re-inspection. In
addition, failure of a vacation rental owner agent, or responsible party, as
applicable, to make the vacation rental available for an inspection within 20
days after notification by the town in writing that the town is ready to
conduct the annual inspection, shall be a violation of this chapter punishable
by a fine as set by resolution by the Town Council. Such violation shall
continue until the inspection is accomplished. Each day that such violation
continues shall be a separate violation.
(Ord. 2019-07, passed 11-19-2019)
§ 158.026 SALE OF VACATION RENTAL PROPERTY.
   When the ownership of the vacation rental is sold or otherwise transferred,
the new owner shall file a new registration with the town within 30 days from
the date of the sale or transfer. Failing such application for registration,
any certificate of compliance as to that vacation rental property shall be null
and void on the thirty-first day after such sale or transfer.
(Ord. 2019-07, passed 11-19-2019)
§ 158.027 VESTED RIGHTS/WAIVER/ESTOPPEL.
   A vacation rental registration shall not be construed to establish any
vested rights or entitle the registered vacation rental to any rights under the
theory of estoppel. A vacation rental registration shall not be construed as a
waiver of any other requirements contained within the Town of Palm Shores Town
Code, and is not an approval of any other code requirement outside this code.
The registration of a vacation rental is not an approval of a use or activity
that would otherwise be illegal under Florida law, the Florida Building Code,
the Florida Fire Code or Life Safety Code, or in violation of the Town of Palm
Shores Town Code.
(Ord. 2019-07, passed 11-19-2019)
§ 158.028 FALSE INFORMATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to give any false or misleading
information in connection with any application for registration, modification,
or renewal of a vacation rental as required by this chapter. Vacation rental
applications shall be sworn to under penalty of perjury. Any false statements
made in an application shall be a basis for the revocation of any license
issued pursuant to such application.
(Ord. 2019-07, passed 11-19-2019)
§ 158.029 EFFECTIVE DATE FOR EXISTING VACATION RENTALS.
   The provisions of this chapter will not become effective for existing
vacation rental properties until January 1, 2020. If the registration forms to
implement the required registration provisions of this chapter are not
available by January 1, 2020, the town may extend the requirement to register
vacation rental properties by notice on the town's website.
(Ord. 2019-07, passed 11-19-2019)
§ 158.030 DUTIES OF VACATION RENTAL OWNER OR RESPONSIBLE PARTY.
   (A)   Every vacation rental owner, or responsible party, as applicable,
shall be available by phone at the listed phone number 24 hours a day, seven
days a week to respond to police, fire or other emergency personnel requests.
Otherwise, response to contact by the town's regulatory personnel shall be
required only Monday through Thursday 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. and Friday 9:00
a.m. to 3:00 p.m., except holidays. Failure of the vacation rental owner, or
responsible party, as applicable, to fulfill this duty, shall be a violation of
this chapter which shall be punished by fine.
   (B)   Responsible party. All vacation rental units, if not managed by the
vacation rental owner, shall have a designated responsible party.
      (1)   The responsible party shall be available 24 hours per day, seven
days a week, for the purpose of promptly responding to complaints regarding
conduct or behavior of vacation rental occupants or alleged violations of these
regulations. This party must have authority to immediately address and take
affirmative action, within one hour of notice from the town, on violations
concerning life-safety, noise, and parking violations. A record shall be kept
by the town of the complaint and the responsible party's response, as
applicable.
      (2)   An owner may change his or her designation of a responsible party
temporarily, up to 30 cumulative days during any consecutive 12-month period,
or permanently; however, there shall only be one designated responsible party
for each vacation rental property at any given time.
      (3)   It shall be the sole responsibility of the property owner to
appoint a reliable responsible party and to inform the manager of his or her
correct mailing address. Failure to do so shall not be a defense to a violation
of this chapter. Service of notice on the responsible party shall be deemed
service of notice on the property owner, tenant and violator.
   (C)   (1)   A vacation rental owner or responsible party is responsible for
ensuring sexual offenders/predators as defined in F.S. §§ 775.21, 943.0435,
944.607 or 985.4815 register at the Brevard County Sheriff's Office 48 hours
prior to arrival at a vacation rental, regardless of the length of stay.
      (2)   A vacation rental owner and/or responsible party shall comply with
Florida law, pertaining to the distance separation of homes with a sexual
offender/predator residing within the vacation rental and any business, school,
child care facility, park, playground, or other places where children regularly
congregate.
      (3)   Failure to comply with this chapter shall result in the revocation
of the Business Tax Receipt, if applicable, and vacation rental registration
for the vacation rental and other enforcement provisions outlined in the Town
Code.
   (D)   The vacation rental owner or responsible party shall inquire at check-
in if any guest at the vacation rental is a sexual offender/predator as defined
in F.S. §§ 775.21, 943.0435, 944.607 or 985.4815. If any guest of a vacation
rental public lodging is a sexual offender/predator as defined in F.S. §§
775.21, 943.0435, 944,607 or 985.4815, the operator shall immediately notify
the town and the Brevard County Sheriff's Office.
   (E)   The owner or responsible party shall provide the town and post in a
conspicuous place in the premises, the name, address and day/evening telephone
numbers of the responsible party and be available 24 hours per day, seven days
a week for the purpose of promptly responding to complaints regarding conduct
or behavior of vacation rental occupants or alleged violations of these
regulations. Any change in the responsible party shall require written
notification to the town on forms provided by the town and in a manner
promulgated by the town upon payment of the applicable fees.
   (F)   Complaints to the responsible party concerning violations by occupants
of vacation rental units to this code shall be responded to within a reasonable
time but in no instance greater than three hours. A record shall be kept of the
complaint and the manager's response for a period of at least three months
after the incident, which shall be available for inspection by the town during
business hours.
   (G)   An owner may change his or her designation of a responsible party;
however, there shall only be one responsible party for each vacation rental
property at any given time. To change the designated agent or responsible
party, the owner shall notify the town in writing of the name, contact
information and other information required in this section for the new vacation
rental manager, along with a signed affidavit from the new agent or responsible
party acknowledging and agreeing to serve in this capacity and perform the
duties of this code. Any notice of violation or legal process which has been
delivered or served upon the previous vacation rental manager, prior to the
town's receipt of notice of change of the vacation rental manager, shall be
deemed effective service.
   (H)   It shall be the sole responsibility of the property owner to appoint a
reliable responsible party and to inform the responsible party of his or her
correct mailing address. Failure to do so shall not be a defense to a violation
of this chapter. No property owner shall designate as a responsible party any
person who does not expressly comply with the provisions of this chapter. The
property owner or the responsible party shall be deemed to be the "violator" of
this chapter as the term is used in F.S. § 162.06. Service of notice on the
responsible party shall be deemed service of notice on the property owner,
tenant and violator. Copies of all notices shall also be provided to the
property owner.
(Ord. 2019-07, passed 11-19-2019)
STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR VACATION RENTALS
§ 158.040 GENERALLY.
   The standards and requirements set forth in this subchapter shall apply to
the rental, use, and occupancy of vacation rentals in the Town of Palm Shores.
(Ord. 2019-07, passed 11-19-2019)
§ 158.041 MINIMUM SAFETY AND OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   Vacation rentals in the Town of Palm Shores shall meet the applicable
standards under the Florida Statutes, the Florida Building Code, the Florida
Administrative Code, the Florida Swimming Pool Safety Act, and the Florida Fire
Code and Life Safety Code, and each vacation rental shall have at least one
landline telephone on the main level and in the common area at the rental with
the ability to call 911. The landline telephone number shall be registered at
all times with Brevard County Emergency Management for the purpose of receiving
emergency alerts for items including, but not limited to, mandatory evacuations
for hurricanes and requests to limit utility usage. Additionally, the landline
telephone number shall be registered at all times with the Town of Melbourne
Utilities Department, the water provider within the Town of Palm Shores, for
the purposes of receiving boil water alerts and rescinding alerts.
(Ord. 2019-07, passed 11-19-2019)
§ 158.042 MAXIMUM OCCUPANCY BASED ON SITE CAPACITY/LIMITATIONS/ GRANDFATHERING.
   (A)   The maximum occupancy of a vacation rental shall be stated in the
vacation rental registration form, and shall be limited to two occupants (as
defined herein) per bedroom (as defined herein) plus two occupants, with a
maximum capacity of 12 persons.
   (B)   The maximum occupancy restriction as set forth above shall not apply
when the property is owner occupied by the vacation rental owner.
   (C)   Notwithstanding the above, a vacation rental that was used as a
vacation rental as of the effective date of this chapter, may apply for the
status of grandfathered for a period of ten years, as to occupancy limitations,
and may cap its occupancy based upon the following criteria and procedures.
Vacation rentals that have an occupancy of 12 or less as determined according
to § 158.030(A) above will not require grandfathering to maintain that
occupancy.
      (1)   A grandfathered vacation rental shall have its maximum occupancy
based upon two persons per bedroom (each bedroom must meet the definition of
bedroom herein) at the time of application for grandfather status. A change in
the number of bedrooms at the vacation rental shall cause such vacation rental
to lose its grandfathered status.
      (2)   The vacation rental owner, or agent, as applicable,
("grandfathering applicant"), shall complete a grandfathering application as
prescribed by the town, which shall be submitted under oath and upon penalty of
perjury, and provide verifiable written proof of the number of bedrooms as
herein defined in the vacation rental.
      (3)   The grandfathering application and supporting proof shall be
submitted to the town for review by town staff, and such staff shall make a
written determination as to the maximum occupancy of such grandfathered
vacation rental.
      (4)   If the town staff fails to confirm the requested occupancy level,
the Town of Palm Shores shall notify the grandfather applicant of that fact,
and the occupancy level that can be approved, in writing. Within 20 days after
such notice, an evidentiary hearing may be requested by the grandfather
applicant before the Special Magistrate to provide the grandfather applicant an
opportunity to provide evidence and/or testimony in support of the occupancy
requested. A determination by the Special Magistrate after such evidentiary
hearing shall be final. If no hearing is requested during that time period, the
occupancy level shall be set at the level determined by the town staff upon
initial review.
      (5)   An application for grandfathering shall be submitted, if at all,
but no later than the time of registration of the vacation rental, but not
later than January 1, 2020, along with fees established by the Town Council by
resolution. If the town extends the date that registration is required, the
deadline for the application for grandfathering shall also be extended to the
same extended date. If a vacation rental has been registered, but a final
determination as to the occupancy level based upon grandfathering has not yet
been made, such vacation rental may allow occupancy up to the occupancy
requested in the grandfathering application until such time as a final
determination as to occupancy has been made.
      (6)   If it is reasonably determined by the town staff that any
information supplied to the Town of Palm Shores in support of an application
for grandfathering was intentionally false or fraudulent, the person supplying
the false or fraudulent information shall be subject to a fine. If there is
such a determination by town staff, the Town of Palm Shores shall notify the
grandfather applicant of that fact, and within 20 days after such notice, an
evidentiary hearing may be requested by the grandfather applicant before the
Special Magistrate to provide the grandfather applicant an opportunity to
provide evidence and/or testimony to show that the information supplied in
support of the application for grandfathering was not intentionally false or
fraudulent. The determination by the Special Magistrate after such evidentiary
hearing shall be final. If no hearing is requested during that time period, the
initial determination by the town staff shall be final.
      (7)   If a vacation rental registration does not exist as to a vacation
rental for a period in excess of 13 months, any grandfathering determination
shall be deemed abandoned, and shall no longer be applicable to that vacation
rental.
(Ord. 2019-07, passed 11-19-2019)
§ 158.043 PARKING, SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL, LEGAL COMPLIANCE, EVACUATIONS,
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
   (A)   (1)   All vehicles associated with the vacation rental, including
visitors not residing at the vacation rental, must be parked in compliance with
the Town of Palm Shores Code of Ordinances. All vehicles associated with the
vacation rental must be parked within a driveway located on the subject
property. There shall be no sidewalk, on-street, right-of-way, or grass
parking. Parking shall be paved and shall not be located off the vacation
rental property, including common areas.
      (2)   Parking of boats, watercraft, recreational vehicles, campers, and
trailers at vacation rentals shall be to the rear of the front building line of
the property.
   (B)   Solid waste disposal (household garbage, recycling, and yard trash) at
vacation rentals shall be in compliance with the solid waste franchise
agreement adopted by the city.
   (C)   Vacation rental occupants are required to comply with all local, state
and federal laws at all times, including those related to illegal activities,
local nuisance ordinances, and emergency management.
   (D)   Vacation rental occupants are required to participate in all mandatory
evacuations due to hurricanes, tropical storms or other threats to resident
safety, as required by state and local laws.
   (E)   A vacation rental shall not be eligible for a special activity permit.
   (F)   No temporary storage containers may be stored on the vacation rental
premises. The term TEMPORARY STORAGE CONTAINER shall mean any container,
structure, box, cylinder, or crate made of any material not permanently affixed
to real property, that is enclosed or capable of being enclosed on all sides,
top and bottom, that is stored, placed, located or put on any real property
within the town for the purpose of storing personal property, construction
material, trash, refuse, garbage, debris, or other material or matter.
Provided, however, with prior authorization from the Building Department, a
temporary storage container may be authorized during valid construction permit
activity for this location.
   (G)   No accessory structure, vehicle, recreational vehicle, trailer,
camper, or similar apparatus shall be utilized or rented as a vacation rental.
(Ord. 2019-07, passed 11-19-2019)
§ 158.044 REQUIRED LOCAL INFORMATION PROVIDED IN A VACATION RENTAL.
   In each vacation rental, there shall be provided, in a prominent location on
the inside of the vacation rental, the following written information:
   (A)   The official street address and landline telephone phone number of the
vacation rental.
   (B)   The name, address and phone number of the vacation rental owner or
responsible party as applicable.
   (C)   The maximum occupancy of the vacation rental.
   (D)   A copy of a document to be supplied by the town which includes
excerpts from Town of Palm Shores ordinance provisions of general application
relevant to vacation rentals to include solid waste pick-up regulations,
regulations related to sea turtles and sea turtle lighting, and Town of Palm
Shores Noise Ordinance, as specified by resolution of the city, as a lease
addendum. The town will make available to vacation rental owners and agents a
copy of such document in digital format upon request, and the town will post
such document on its website.
   (E)   The maximum number of vehicles that will be allowed to park at the
vacation rental, along with a sketch of the location of the paved off-street
parking and a notice that visitors to the vacation rental, not residing at the
rental are also prohibited from on-street parking.
   (F)   The days and times of trash and recycling pickup.
   (G)   Phone number and address of Holmes Regional Medical Center Melbourne
and Health First Viera Hospital and directions from the vacation rental to the
hospital.
   (H)   Emergency and nonemergency phone numbers for Brevard County Sheriff's
Office and Brevard County Fire and Rescue.
   (I)   Emergency evacuation instructions.
   (J)   Rip currents are prevalent in the Atlantic Ocean in Brevard County.
Information from the National Weather Service, available via from http://
weather.gov/mlb, shall be provided to occupants important information on the
dangers of rip currents that occur in the Atlantic Ocean shall be prominently
displayed.
   (K)   Notice of the need for respect for the peace and quiet of neighborhood
residents, especially during town wide quiet hours identified in the Town Code
of Ordinances §§
91.060 et seq. A statement that all occupants shall be prohibited from making
excessive or boisterous noise in or about any residential dwelling unit at all
times.
   (L)   In addition, there shall be posted, next to the interior door of each
bedroom, and the exterior doors exiting the vacation rental a legible copy of a
building evacuation map - minimum 8-1/2 inches by 11 inches.
(Ord. 2019-07, passed 11-19-2019)
§ 158.045 MINIMUM LIFE/SAFETY REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Swimming pool, spa, and hot tub safety. A swimming pool, spa, or hot
tub shall comply with the current standards of F.S. § 515, Residential Swimming
Pool Safety Act.
   (B)   Smoke and carbon monoxide (CO) detection and notification system.
There shall be a smoke and carbon monoxide detection system, installed and
maintained in compliance with the requirements of Florida Building Code
Residential, Sections R314 Smoke Alarms R315 Carbon Monoxide Alarms.
   (C)   Fire extinguisher. On each floor there shall be available a portable,
multipurpose dry chemical 2A:10B: C fire extinguisher, which shall be installed
and maintained in compliance with NFPA 10.
   (D)   Battery powered emergency lighting. Battery powered emergency
lighting, which illuminates automatically for at least one hour when
electricity is interrupted, is required at each building exit.
(Ord. 2019-07, passed 11-19-2019)
EXEMPTIONS
§ 158.060 EXEMPTION FOR PRE-EXISTING RENTAL AGREEMENTS.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, rental agreements
with prospective occupants for vacations rentals that were pre-existing as of
the enactment of this portion of this chapter (hereinafter "pre-existing
agreements") are exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   If a vacation rental is cited for a violation of this chapter, (that
would not be a violation if it were not for this code), when the vacation
rental is occupied under the terms of a pre-existing agreement, the vacation
rental owner may defend such violation based on the fact that the vacation
rental was exempt from this chapter due to it being occupied pursuant to a pre-
existing agreement. Such defense shall be determined based upon the following
information, and upon any additional information supplied by the vacation
rental owner or otherwise determined by the fact finder:
      (1)   Copy of deposit or payment information evidencing that the
agreement was a pre- existing agreement;
      (2)   Copy of e-mail or other communication evidencing a binding pre-
existing agreement;
      (3)   Information from the occupant confirming that there was a binding
agreement in a time-frame to make the agreement a pre-existing agreement under
this section; or
      (4)   Written vacation rental agreement dated prior to September 24,
2019.
   (C)   If it is reasonably determined by the town staff, and confirmed by the
town's Special Magistrate, that any information supplied to the Town of Palm
Shores in support of an application for exemption or in support of a defense
based upon pre-existing agreement was intentionally false or fraudulent, the
person supplying the false or fraudulent information shall be subject to a
fine.
(Ord. 2019-07, passed 11-19-2019)
§ 158.061 EXEMPTION FOR OWNER OCCUPIED VACATION RENTALS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to owner occupied vacation
rentals or property which is homestead under the Florida Constitution and
Florida law from forced sale under any process of law. Any person desiring to
qualify for the exemption herein shall file an affidavit in substantially the
following form:
         "Affidavit of Exemption"
      State of
      County
      Before me the undersigned authority personally appeared (hereinafter the
"Owner") who upon oath deposes and states:
      1.   I am over the age of 18 and competent to make this Affidavit.
      2.   I own the following real property in the Town of Palm Shores,
Brevard County, and State of Florida:
      (Legal description and Street Address)
      3.   Check one or both as applicable:
      ( ) I currently occupy the property described in paragraph 2 above and
have resided on this property continuously and uninterruptedly from        to
       the date of this Affidavit.
      Or
      ( ) I have applied for and received the homestead tax exemption as to the
above described property, that is the tax                      identification
parcel number of this property, and that the undersigned has resided on this
property continuously and uninterruptedly from (date) to the date of this
Affidavit.
      4.   The purpose of this Affidavit is to qualify for exemption from the
Town of Palm Shores Vacation Rental Ordinance.
      Sworn and subscribed before me by                    this day of
                20   
      Notary"
(Ord. 2019-07, passed 11-19-2019)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   FRANCHISES
TABLE I: FRANCHISES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
74-21    10-22-1974  Granting Southern Bell Telephone and Telegraph Company a
                     franchise for 30 years.
88-07    8-30-1988   Granting City of Melbourne Water System a franchise for 30
                     years.
90-01    1-16-1989   Granting Harris Sanitation, Inc. a franchise for five
                     years.
91-16    11-19-1991  Granting Cable Vision of Central Florida a franchise for15
                     years from March 29, 1992.
95-01    3-28-1995   Granting Florida Power and Light Company a franchise for
                     30 years.
2002-01  4-23-2002   Amending Ord. 2000-01, granting Harris Sanitation, Inc. an
                     extension; amending franchise terms and conditions.
                     Renewing the cable television franchise to Bright House
2007-05  3-20-2007   Networks, LLC, its successors and assigns for a period of
                     ten years.
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Florida Statutes
References to 2000 Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO FLORIDA STATUTES
F.S. Section Code Section
F.S. Section          Code Section
1.01                  10.02
7.05                  10.02
83.40 - 83.682        155.007
89.0356               110.51
Ch. 97                30.06
100.361               30.02
112.501               157.041
112.51                157.041
125.66                131.02
161.055               151.057
                      31.33 -
                      31.35,
                      91.040,
Ch. 162               95.99,
                      132.99 ,
                      150.15 ,
                      158.004
162.03(2)             31.33
162.06                158.030
162.07(2)             31.37
162.08                31.38
162.09(1)             31.37
162.12                31.36,
                      91.019
162.21                31.99
162.22                93.11,
                      113.999
163.3161 et seq.      34.45,
                      152.15
163.3164              157.136
                      157.115 ,
Ch. 166               157.116 ,
                      157.121
166.011 et seq.       93.02
166.021               34.01
166.0335              96.01
                      10.11,
166.041               30.04,
                      30.05,
                      113.001
                      34.01 -
166.231               34.05,
                      34.07
166.232               34.02
166.233               34.01,
                      34.02
                      34.01,
166.234               34.02,
                      34.06
Ch. 177               157.121
200.065               33.18
Ch. 202               93.34
202.11(1)             93.03
202.195               93.07
203.012               34.02
203.012(4)            34.02
203.012(5)            34.02
203.012(6)            34.02
203.012(7)            34.02
Ch. 205               110.30
205.042               110.30
205.043(2)            110.32,
                      110.33
                      110.31,
205.053(1)            110.33,
                      110.35
205.063 - 205.193     110.37
Ch. 212               34.04,
                      34.07
212.08                114.02
286.011               30.03
286.0115              157.121
286.0115(1)           157.121
316.003               91.075
320.001(1)(a)         157.003
320.01                151.014
320.01(b)             151.014
320.8249              151.133
337.401               93.02
337.401(7)            93.30
337.403               93.07
337.403(1)(a),(b),(c) 93.07
337.404               93.07
366.02                151.052
373.036               151.057
381.0065              151.057
381.031               91.015
381.986               157.510
381.986(11)           157.510
Ch. 400               157.003
400.0060(5)           157.003
400.011               157.003
400.701               157.003
400.960               157.003
Ch. 402               132.02
403.9338              94.02
408.032(8)            157.003
429.02(5)             157.003
429.65(2)             157.003
429.901(1)            157.003
Ch. 480               113.004,
                      157.003
482.1562(9)           94.02
Ch. 489               116.01 ,
                      150.15
489.127(1)            150.15
489.127(5)            150.15
489.132(1)            150.15
489.505               116.01
Ch. 496               114.02,
                      114.18
509.013               158.001
509.032(b)            158.001
509.242(1)(c)         158.001
Ch. 515               158.045
553.73(5)             150.02 ,
                      151.110
553.73(10)(k)         151.052
553.793               116.01
Ch. 556               93.05,
                      93.07
Chs. 561 - 565        111.01
Ch. 561               110.99,
                      113.037
561.422               115.06
Ch. 562               113.037
Ch. 563               113.037
Ch. 564               113.037
Ch. 565               113.037
570.02                94.02
604.50                151.052
Ch. 607               113.036
Ch. 620               113.036
705.103               91.076
Ch. 718               91.036
Ch. 719               91.036
Ch. 720               91.036
775.082               31.99
775.083               31.99
775.21 et seq.        113.004
775.21                113.037 ,
                      158.030
775.21(3)(a)          132.01
                      113.004,
Ch. 794               113.037,
                      157.003
794.065               132.01
                      113.001,
Ch. 796               113.004,
                      113.037,
                      157.003
                      113.004,
Ch. 800               113.037,
                      157.003
806.01                157.003
806.10                157.003
806.13(2)(c)          157.003
806.111               157.003
823.14                94.09
                      113.004,
Ch. 826               113.037,
                      157.003
Ch. 827               113.037
839.13                10.13
Ch. 847               113.004,
                      113.037
847.013               113.004,
                      157.003
847.0133              113.004
847.0134              113.030
847.0145              157.003
Ch. 849               112.30
849.09(2)             157.003
849.094               157.003
849.10                157.003
849.16                112.31
849.161               157.003
849.25(3)             157.003
865.09                113.025,
                      113.036
876.05                30.01,
                      31.02
877.03                157.003
Ch. 893               113.037
893.03                110.51
893.035               110.51
893.13                157.003
Ch. 895               113.037
943.0435              158.030
944.606(l)            132.02
944.606(2)            132.01
944.607               158.030
947.1405              132.01
985.4815              158.030
Chs. 1000 - 1013      157.003
1000.04(1)            132.02
1002.01               132.02
                      
 
REFERENCES TO 2000 CODE
2000 Code Section 2010 Code Section
2000 Code Section 2010 Code Section
1-1               10.01
1-2               10.02
1-3               10.03
1-4               10.04
1-5               10.05
1-6               10.06
1-7               10.07
1-8               10.08
1-9               10.09
1-10              10.10
1-11              10.11
1-12              10.12
1-13              10.13
1-14              10.14
1-15              10.99
2-31              30.01
2-32              30.02
2-33              30.03
2-34              30.04
2-35              30.05
2-36              30.06
2-66              31.01
2-67              31.02
2-68              31.03
2-91              31.15
2-92              31.16
2-146             33.15
2-147             33.16
2-148             33.17
2-149             33.18
2-150             33.19
2-151             33.20
2-152             33.21
2-153             33.22
2-154             33.23
2-155             33.24
2-156             33.25
6-1               111.01
6-31              111.15
6-61              111.30
6-62              111.99
6-63              111.31
6-64              111.32
6-65              111.33
10-1              112.01
10-309            112.15
10-310            112.16
10-311            112.17
10-312            112.18
14-1              90.01
14-2              90.02
22-1              110.01
22-51             110.15,
                  110.99
26-1              32.01
26-2              32.02
30-1              91.001
30-2              91.002
30-66             91.060
30-67             91.061
30-87             91.075
30-88             91.076
30-89             91.077
30-90             91.078
30-91             91.079
30-92             91.080
30-93             91.081
30-94             91.082
30-95             91.083
30-96             91.084
30-97             91.085
30-98             91.086
30-99             91.087
30-100            91.088
30-101            91.089
30-102            91.090
34-1              130.01
34-56             131.17
38-31             110.30
38-32             110.31
38-33             110.32
38-34             110.33
38-35             110.34,
                  110.99
38-36             110.35,
                  110.99
38-37             110.99
38-38             110.36
38-39             110.37
38-40             110.38
42-31             92.01
50-31             152.01
50-61             152.15
50-62             152.16
50-63             152.17
54-42             153.046
54-61             153.031
54-81             153.045
58-1              156.01
58-2              156.02
58-3              156.03
58-56             156.15
58-57             156.16
58-58             156.17
58-59             156.18
58-81             156.30
58-82             156.31
58-83             156.32
58-84             156.33
58-85             156.34
58-86             156.35
58-111            156.50
58-112            156.51
58-113            156.52
58-114            156.53
58-146            155.001
58-147            155.002
58-148            155.003
58-149            155.004
58-150            155.005
58-151            155.006
58-152            155.007
58-176            155.020
58-177            155.021
58-178            155.022
58-179            155.023
58-180            155.024
58-181            155.025
58-201            155.040
58-202            155.041
58-203            155.042
58-226            155.055
58-227            155.056
58-228            155.057
58-229            155.058
58-230            155.059
58-251            155.070
58-252            155.071
58-253            155.072
58-311            155.110
58-346            156.65
58-347            156.66
58-348            156.67
58-349            156.68
58-350            156.69
62-31             154.001
62-32             154.002
62-33             154.003
62-34             154.004
62-35             154.005
62-36             154.006
62-37             154.999
62-61             154.020
62-62             154.021
62-63             154.022
62-64             154.023
62-65             154.024
62-86             154.040
62-87             154.041
62-88             154.042
62-89             154.043
62-106            154.055
62-107            154.056
62-108            154.057
62-109            154.058
62-110            154.059
62-111            154.060
62-112            154.061
62-113            154.062
62-114            154.063
62-115            154.064
62-116            154.065
66-1              157.001
66-2              157.002
66-3              157.003
66-4              157.004
66-5              157.005
66-6              157.006
66-7              157.007
66-8              157.008
66-9              157.009
66-10             157.010
66-11             157.011
66-12             157.012
66-46             157.025
66-47             157.026
66-48             157.027
66-71             157.040
66-72             157.041
66-73             157.042
66-74             157.043
66-91             157.055
66-92             157.056
66-93             157.057
66-94             157.058
66-117            157.070
66-118            157.071
66-119            157.072
66-120            157.073
66-121            157.074
66-141            157.090
66-142            157.091
66-143            157.092
66-144            157.093
66-145            157.094
66-146            157.095
66-147            157.096
66-148            157.097
66-149            157.098
66-150            157.099
66-151            157.100
66-170            157.115
66-171            157.116
66-172            157.117
66-173            157.118
66-174            157.119
66-175            157.120
66-246            157.165
66-247            157.166
66-248            157.167
66-271            157.180
66-291            157.195
66-331            157.225
66-351            157.240
66-391            157.270
66-411            157.285
66-431            157.300
66-451            157.315
66-471            157.330
66-511            157.360
66-512            157.361
66-513            157.362
66-514            157.363
66-516            157.365
66-517            157.366
66-518            157.367
66-519            157.368
66-520            157.369
66-541            157.380
66-542            157.381
66-543            157.382
66-544            157.383
66-545            157.384
66-546            157.385
66-547            157.386
66-548            157.387
66-549            157.388
66-550            157.389
66-601            157.420
66-621            157.421
66-866            157.490
66-867            157.491
66-868            157.493
66-869            157.494
66-870            157.495
66-871            157.496
66-873            157.498
66-874            157.499
66-875            157.500
66-876            157.501
66-877            157.502
66-878            157.503
66-879            157.504
66-941            157.515
66-942            157.516
66-943            157.517
66-944            157.518
66-945            157.519
66-1011           157.530
66-1029           157.545
66-1030           157.546
66-1031           157.547
66-1032           157.548
66-1033           157.549
66-1034           157.550
66-1035           157.551
66-1036           157.552
66-1037           157.553
66-1038           157.554
66-1039           157.555
66-1040           157.556
66-1041           157.557
66-1042           157.558
66-1043           157.559
66-1044           157.560
66-1045           157.561
66-1046           157.562
                  
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
2007-06  6-26-2007   110.37
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.        Date Passed Code Section
61-01           - -         32.01,
                            32.02
63-03           9-26-1963   130.01
69-01           7-22-1969   111.15
74-21           10-22-1974  T.S.O. I
                            154.002,
                            154.056,
                            154.064,
                            154.065,
                            157.001 -
                            157.012,
                            157.025 -
                            157.027,
                            157.040,
                            157.055 -
                            157.058,
                            157.070 -
                            157.074,
                            157.090 -
                            157.099,
                            157.116 -
                            157.120,
                            157.165 -
                            157.167,
                            157.180,
75-01           7-14-1975   157.195,
                            157.225,
                            157.240,
                            157.270,
                            157.285,
                            157.300,
                            157.315,
                            157.330,
                            157.360 -
                            157.363,
                            157.365 -
                            157.369,
                            157.420,
                            157.421,
                            157.490  -
                            157.496,
                            157.498 -
                            157.504,
                            157.515 -
                            157.519,
                            157.530
81-1            2-24-1981   152.01
81-4            6-9-1981    110.15,
                            110.99
81-5            6-9-1981    157.007
                            34.99,
81-10           8-11-1981   110.30 -
                            110.38
83-1            4-26-1983   90.01,
                            90.02
                            153.031,
83-3            8-9-1983    153.045,
                            153.046
84-01           2-28-1984   153.106
84-03           11-27-1984  157.007,
                            157.008
85-01           3-26-1985   157.330
                            154.001 -
                            154.006,
                            154.020 -
                            154.024,
86-04           4-22-1986   154.040 -
                            154.043,
                            154.055 -
                            154.063,
                            154.999
                            91.001,
87-01           4-28-1987   91.002,
                            91.060,
                            91.061
                            111.30 -
87-06           1-26-1988   111.33,
                            111.99
                            155.001 -
                            155.007,
                            155.020 -
                            155.025,
                            155.040 -
                            155.042,
                            155.055 -
                            155.059,
                            155.070 -
                            155.072,
88-01           5-24-1988   155.110,
                            156.01 -
                            156.03,
                            156.15 -
                            156.18,
                            156.30 -
                            156.35,
                            156.50 -
                            156.53,
                            156.65 -
                            156.69
88-05           8-30-1988   152.15 -
                            152.17
88-07           8-30-1988   T.S.O. I
90-01           1-16-1989   T.S.O. I
89-04           4-25-1989   92.01
91-16           11-19-1991  T.S.O. I
95-01           3-28-1995   T.S.O. I
95-03           10-24-1995  131.17
                            157.003,
96-01           1-29-1996   157.006,
                            157.100,
                            157.315
96-02           1-29-1996   110.01
96-08           10-22-1996  157.515
96-09           1-28-1997   112.01
                            157.003,
97-01           3-11-1997   157.380 -
                            157.389
97-05           6-27-1997   157.007
97-08           4-20-1998   91.075 -
                            91.090
99-01           3-23-1999   157.545 -
                            157.562
                            157.040 -
                            157.043,
                            157.057,
                            157.115,
                            157.180,
                            157.195,
99-02           3-23-1999   157.225,
                            157.240,
                            157.270,
                            157.285,
                            157.300,
                            157.315,
                            157.420,
                            157.421
99-03           7-27-1999   157.285
2000-02         5-23-2000   112.15 -
                            112.18
                            154.002,
2000-03         5-23-2000   154.056,
                            154.064,
                            154.065
                            31.30 -
2000-07         6-27-2000   31.32,
                            31.99
                            34.01 -
2001-03         8-26-2001   34.08,
                            34.99
2001-08         11-27-2001  34.25 -
                            34.31
2001-09         1-22-2002   152.30 -
                            152.32
2002-01         4-23-2002   T.S.O. I
2002-02         6-25-2002   157.121
                            157.075,
2002-03         6-25-2002   157.135 -
                            157.151,
                            157.999
2002-17         1-9-2003    110.37
2003-11         8-26-2003   33.01
                            156.17,
2004-07         5-25-2004   156.52,
                            157.003,
                            157.240
2004-19         10-5-2004   157.285
2005-03         7-26-2005   153.017
2005-04         7-26-2005   153.016
                            132.01 -
                            132.03,
                            132.15,
2006-04         3-21-2006   132.16,
                            132.30 -
                            132.34,
                            132.99
2006-09         5-23-2006   157.492
2006-11, Att. A 8-22-2006   10.99
                            31.33 -
2006-11         8-22-2006   31.38,
                            31.99
                            157.003,
2006-15         1-23-2007   157.270,
                            157.285,
                            157.300
2006-16         - -         157.400 -
                            157.405
                            153.001 -
                            153.012,
2007-01         1-23-2007   153.014,
                            153.015,
                            153.999
2007-02         1-23-2007   157.400 -
                            157.405
2007-03         1-23-2007   157.285,
                            157.300
                            112.30 -
2007-04         2-27-2007   112.32,
                            112.99
2007-05         3-20-2007   T.S.O. I
                            131.01 -
                            131.04,
2007-10         6-26-2007   131.15,
                            131.16,
                            131.18,
                            131.99
                            113.001 -
                            113.007,
                            113.020 -
                            113.039,
                            113.050 -
                            113.055,
2007-11         6-26-2007   113.070,
                            113.071,
                            113.085 -
                            113.087,
                            113.100 -
                            113.106,
                            113.999
2007-12         7-24-2007   34.45 -
                            34.51
2008-01         1-22-2008   157.516
2008-04         2-26-2008   32.03
2009-02         7-28-2009   91.015 -
                            91.020
                            114.01 -
                            114.04,
                            114.15 -
                            114.23,
                            114.35 -
2009-03         7-28-2009   114.37,
                            114.50 -
                            114.52,
                            115.01 -
                            115.08,
                            115.99
                            91.035 -
2009-04         7-28-2009   91.047,
                            91.999
                            157.003,
2009-05         7-28-2009   157.270,
                            157.285,
                            157.300
2009-07         11-24-2009  150.01 -
                            150.14
2010-01         1-26-2010   93.01 -
                            93.19
2010-02         1-26-2010   153.009,
                            153.011
                            155.022,
                            155.070 -
                            155.072,
2010-05         4-27-2010   155.085 -
                            155.088,
                            155.110 -
                            155.113
2010-06         8-25-2010   110.50,
                            110.51
                            157.270,
2011-01         1-25-2011   157.285,
                            157.300,
                            157.315
                            157.003,
                            157.270,
2011-06         8-23-2011   157.285,
                            157.300,
                            157.315,
                            157.505
                            157.003,
                            157.225,
                            157.240,
2011-12         11-1-2011   157.270,
                            157.285,
                            157.300,
                            157.315,
                            157.506
                            94.01  -
2011-15         11-1-2011   94.11 ,
                            94.99
2012-03         4-24-2012   153.011
2012-10         8-28-2012   150.02
2012-11         8-28-2012   95.01,
                            95.99
                            157.003,
                            157.057,
                            157.180,
                            157.240,
2012-12         11-27-2012  157.285,
                            157.300,
                            157.330,
                            157.365,
                            157.404, 157.449, Repealing 157.497
2012-13         9-25-2012   157.003,
                            157.092
2013-01         2-26-2013   157.003 ,
                            157.330
2013-02         3-26-2013   157.003 ,
                            157.507
2013-03         3-26-2013   157.285 ,
                            157.300
2013-05         3-26-2013   157.115 ,
                            157.116
                            30.02 ,
                            30.03 ,
2013-07         9-24-2013   30.05 ,
                            31.30  -
                            31.38 ,
                            31.99
2013-08         9-24-2013   111.32
2013-09         9-24-2013   110.30 ,
                            110.99
                            116.01 ,
2013-13         11-26-2013  116.02 ,
                            116.99
2013-14         11-26-2013  150.15
2014-01         2-25-2014   157.003
                            150.02 ,
                            151.001  -
                            151.014 ,
                            151.030  -
                            151.038 ,
                            151.050  -
                            151.057 ,
                            151.070  -
2014-02         2-25-2014   151.073 ,
                            151.090  -
                            151.095 ,
                            151.110  -
                            151.117 ,
                            151.130  -
                            151.136 ,
                            151.150  -
                            151.152
2014-03         2-25-2014   154.066
                            150.01 ,
                            151.004 ,
2014-04         3-25-2014   153.001 ,
                            154.002 ,
                            156.01 ,
                            157.003
                            94.02 ,
2014-05         5-27-2014   94.04  -
                            94.06 ,
                            94.09
2015-03         2-24-2015   157.315
                            157.270,
                            157.285,
2015-04         6-30-2015   157.300,
                            157.315,
                            157.502,
                            157.509
2016-01         3-22-2016   157.494
                            153.001 -
                            153.012,
                            153.014 -
                            153.017,
2016-02         4-26-2016   153.031,
                            153.045,
                            153.046,
                            153.999, Repealing 153.013, 153.030, 153.060 -
                            153.065, 153.080 - 153.085, 153.100 - 153.106,
                            153.120, 153.121
                            155.025,
2016-03         3-22-2016   157.330,
                            157.360, Repealing 157.345, 157.364
2016-04         4-26-2016   90.03
2016-05         6-29-2016   157.240
                            157.003,
2017-01         2-28-2017   157.270,
                            157.285,
                            157.300
2017-07         11-8-2017   157.315,
                            157.510
2017-08         8-22-2017   32.01
2018-01         2-28-2018   91.019
2018-02         6-26-2018   157.003,
                            157.285
2018-03         6-26-2018   157.240
                            157.270,
2018-04         6-26-2018   157.285,
                            157.300,
                            157.502
2018-05         9-25-2018   156.54,
                            157.504
2018-06         8-29-2018   93.30 -
                            93.40
2018-08         9-25-2018   34.03
2018-10         1-29-2019   150.16
                            158.001 -
                            158.006,
                            158.020 -
2019-07         11-19-2019  158.030,
                            158.040 -
                            158.045,
                            158.060,
                            158.061, Repealing 157.508
                            151.001 -
                            151.014,
                            151.030 -
                            151.038,
                            151.050 -
                            151.057,
                            151.070 -
2020-01         3-24-2020   151.073,
                            151.090 -
                            151.095,
                            151.110 -
                            151.117,
                            151.130 -
                            151.136,
                            151.150 -
                            151.152
2020-02         3-24-2020   157.285
2020-04         3-24-2020   32.03
                            154.064,
                            157.003,
                            157.225,
2021-03         - -2021     157.285,
                            157.300,
                            157.330,
                            157.515
2021-05         - -2021     157.530, Repealing 157.531
2022-01         - -2022     157.530
2022-04         11-25-2022  111.15
                            157.003,
                            157.143,
                            157.167,
2022-05         11-22-2022  157.240,
                            157.285,
                            157.507,
                            157.516, Repealing 157.210, 157.255
2023-02         4-25-2023   31.15,
                            31.50
                            157.003,
2023-03         9-26-2023   157.270,
                            157.300
2024-01         9-25-2024   157.285
2024-03         9-25-2024   96.01
2025-02         3-25-2025   32.03
                           
 
